I have completed this book, my very dear son, which is the end of the knowledge of medicine together with its content, and I have ended it by its explanations and its declarations. And it has come to me in a vision that I shall complete this book with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
And because the work of hands is forbidden in our region and is considered foreign in every way, science and knowledge are perishing and being lost, and nothing remains beyond small descriptions in books written by the ancients that have been changed by hands. And from this comes error and vanity; intentions are closed off and knowledge is removed.
It seems to me that I should bring it to life together with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation. And I will come together with the forms of the fire irons for cautery, and other tools of the work with the arrangement of the explanation and preparation of them, as it is necessary.
And because no good masters of hands have been found in our time, the art of medicine has become distant. And he who undertakes it should be versed in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, to such an extent that he knows the judgment of limbs, their forms and joints and separations, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and sinews and the number of bones, and the movement and rest of veins and arteries, and the location of their outlets.
And for this reason Hippocrates says that a name without work is nothing. And especially in the art of surgery.
We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned before, should take care not to err and not to cut men.
As I have often seen more than those who engage in this science abandon science and sense through experimentation.
I saw a foolish man who cut an abscess from a woman's neck, and cut the arteries of her neck. because so much blood came out that the woman fell dead in his hands.
And I saw another fool who removed an arrow from an old man, and the arrow was large. he took with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
And I had been called before to treat him, and saw the state of the patient and the size of the stone, and knew well that if it were cut he would die.
And I saw another fool who took care of our land's duke who had a broken leg, and with the break there was a wound.
and the foolish man, filled with ignorance, set the break above the wound with strong bindings, and did not leave any slack to the wound, and left it in this state.
And he commands that he does not dislocate [it] at all;
And let it remain in such a way that the leg is completely swollen and the feet come to destruction.
I am called to come to him, and I hurry to come and dislocate his leg; And when I dislocated it, he was at peace and felt no pain.
But all ways of corruption are already determined in the member, and cannot be healed.
And the corruption does not cease to pass through the member until the member is entirely destroyed.
And another mirror which collapses and thickens an abscess, and then burns it with the wickedness of its power.
For when an abscess is pure of melancholic humor, it should not be touched with iron unless it is in a place where one can remove all that has been corrupted.
And therefore, dear son, it is necessary that you know that work with hands is divided into two divisions: namely, surgery where there is danger in many situations.
And I will show in every part of this book where there is fear and danger.
Therefore it is necessary that you protect yourselves so that foolish people cannot speak ill of you.
Take your weapons in a pouch, and attack your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best method so that by the grace of God you may come to salvation and be praised.
And leave the incurable diseases to a grave condition.
And remove your weapons from that which causes you doubt, and have faith in yourselves so that you can come from this world to the other of glory.
Galen said in some of his admonitions: "Do not take care of evil disease, lest you be called foolish fool.
"I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
"The first chapters are about fire cauterizations and against medicine agues, and these chapters are arranged from the head down to the feet;
"and of the forms of instruments, and of iron for cauterization, and of everything that is necessary in the work.
"The second chapters are about cutting and piercing, and of boils and wounds, and of the extraction of arrows, and similar things;
"and these chapters are arranged and of the forms of instruments.
"The third chapters are about fixing dislocations and twists, and similar things;
And it is ordered from the head down to the feet, and the shapes of the instruments.
Furthermore, as we remember the work, it is necessary that I say the quality of the aid and the harm of each complexion.
I say that the quality of help, and the harm, is the longest and most subtle speech and the secret answers.
And many wise men spoke about it and agreed with this.
And they were satisfied with my words, because I am repeating myself.
I say that the cautery helps universally in every constitution or matter, whether it is about constitutions: meaning hot constitution with matter, and dry constitution with matter.
In a hot and dry constitution together with matter, some said and declared that the cautery is of great help; And others say the opposite: that fire cautery is not good for disease caused by heat and dryness. For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be used to treat a hot disease with heat or dryness;
and he who said the opposite claimed that fire provides great help for hot and dry diseases that come in men's chests. When you perceive the body of the man and his constitution is with heat, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this saying. For I have found it once by experience.
And in every way, do not interfere unless the one who has tested it and who knows through long experience the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of men's complexions, and their dispositions and causes of illnesses, and their symptoms and the time span.
as for other complexions, we have no fear, especially in cold and moist diseases. And all the observers assembled and agreed on the cautery.
Know, my son, that cautery combined with fire is one of the secrets of healing, and more powerful than cautery from burning medicine.
For fire is simple and does not affect any other member unless named.
Burning medications come from one member to another by moving away, and they bring diseases of severe healing to the affected member. and occasionally kill the patient.
The fire for its high temperature and the goodness of its substance does not cause this, if there is no excess.
And I have found this through experiment and by the length of service and study I have put into the art, and it is above the truth in things.
And because of this, I excuse the length of my speech, for I do not wish to deprive you of the secret that is revealed about fire, and the quality of the work, how it eliminates diseases from the body, as the philosopher says in demonstration. Receive it in your thoughts.
And know, my son, that they agreed on when cauteries should be performed, and chose companions.
And I say that the cautery is useful in all times, because the harm occurring is beneath hidden by the help of the cautery. And similarly, when the cauterization is necessary for pain that cannot be delayed until a later time when greater harm may come to the limb.
Do not think about it ever, dear child, as foolish people do. for the disease that is cured by cauterization has no return. and they say it this way;
and they say it this way; but it is not as they think, because cauterization is not only a medicine that changes the complexion, dries the humors causing pain, and is more effective than medicine due to the speed of its action and the power of its work and its lordship.
And sometimes, the disease comes according to the constitution of the patient and the location of the disease and its properties;
The superfluidities are accumulated in him through the consumption of foods and similar things, unless cauteries are administered at the site where there is little superfluity and moisture, as with cauteries for pain, and similar things, and that pain does not return. but it happens rarely.
And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the end of medicine, and that is so;
But they do not believe that cauteries are effective after medicine, but their intentions are false, and cauteries are called the end of medicine because when we administer methods of treatment for a disease and they are ineffective, then we apply the cautery, and it works.
Therefore, it is clear that cauteries are the rear of medicine, not according to the intentions of foolish men.
The ancients said that cauteries made of gold are softened more than those of iron, and they did not say this except for the quality of gold and the rarity of its substance.
and said that the heat of the cautery does not cause pustulation, but this is not always true, for I have proven it, and found it to be true in some men.
and cauteries made of gold are softer than those of iron, as they said. And yet, when you heat instruments of gold, you do not know if it is heated by the color of the gold and may suddenly cool.
and if it is overheated; it burns up. And thus there is sufficient obstruction.
I order you this chapter on the head down to the feet, so that the way is easier to find.
This cautery is beneficial for coldness and moisture on the brain, and it is used in the case of a disease called "soda," and for various humors that descend from the eyes and ears, and for many dreams and pain in the teeth and throat, and indeed for all diseases caused by coldness such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purged by a medicine dissolving the head three or four times according to the virtues, the age, and the accustomed capacity of the sick person. and then place the head of the patient on the bed.
Then make him sit crosswise between your hands, and place his hands on a cushion;
Afterwards put the root of your palm over the root of his nose between his two eyes; and where your middle fingers come, if it bleeds then warm the cautery called "olivare", of which this is the shape: And place it on its right position marking it with ink, and make in drawing and pulling your hand little by little turning it. Then lower your hand immediately, and bring the joint back if you see the bone is a bit out. and if you don't see it, continue the cautery until you see the bone as I told you.
Afterwards take a piece of silk, put it wet and soft cotton inside, place it on the joint, and leave it for three days.
Afterwards put soft cotton in butter. And leave it until the burn is removed. Afterwards treat the wound with an ointment called "tetrafarmaçon", until it is healed.
And the ancients said, when an overwound stays open longer, it drains more. and for that reason, it helps to move.
And they said to one of these that the fire cautery should be allowed to rest so much that a part of the bone is burnt, and then reset the burnt bone part and heal it.
And others say that the cautery should be made less frequently on top, and pushed as hard as a weaver's shuttle so that the humors are forced out from the bone, for this reason because the humors flow out when moved.
and the wound should be left open for a long time. afterwards it should be healed and soothed.
These two ways of cauterization seem not to be good in every case, except for some men who have fear.
and it seems to me that I should let it move.
For the shoulder is dislocated by continuous solutions of nature, as we have observed in other limbs;
And likewise, when the shoulder of the patient is weak by nature, and the first indication of the cautery is safer and more effective for me, and from this method I operate together with salvation.
When chronic pain comes in the head and lasts for a long time, the patient should use ear drops and pills called "cochie", and cleansing of the head with oil and ointments. And if the cautery is performed on him as we have said before, it does not work. Be careful that the shoulder of the patient is strong in nature and not too cold; Then cauterize beneath that cautery a little as we have said above. Then cauterize the corn at each corner of the head up to the bone, as we have said before, and do the cautery that is called "vasselz". and it is the place where blisters are put. And align your hand so that you cannot see down to the bone. The patients feel much greater pain in this cauterization than with others, and I will speak more about it later.
And the cauterizations of the corners must be more subtle than those used to cauterize the midline of the head, and this is their form:
Fire cautery for the head When pain suddenly comes in one part of the head and the disease extends to the eye, and the head is purged by various medicines, and the other treatments that I have said in the section on diseases have been done, but none of it helps. Then make cauteries according to two ways, namely with hot medicine and with fire.
The cautery with hot medicine is to take a pot of hot water, peel off the bark and pour it over the affected area in such a way that you can place the pot under the skin;
And when it [the dislocation] is reset, let it be held tightly and left thus for twelve hours; Then loosen the bandage and apply garlic oil to the wound, and leave it as it is for two or three days. Then place cotton soaked in butter on it until it heals completely.
After treating the wound with a remedy until it is healed.
And if you wish, do this with some burning medicines that I have written about or use a tenth part of those burning medicines.
Instruct the patient as follows regarding the iron cautery. Heat the cautery in the shape as follows:
It is called "clo" because the head resembles the shape of a cloak or has a small hump in the middle.
Place it [the remedy] on the painful area and hold your hand still while gently shaking it a little until the middle part of the bladder is burnt.
And lift your hand so that the arteries do not burn, which are outside, and let a profuse flow of blood follow.
Place cotton on it for three days, and put it on top of it. Then place dampened cotton in butter, and then treat the wound with ointment until it is healed;
And if you wish to burn out this abscess with the cautery called "cultellare," all at the tip, be careful not to burn the artery in this abscess that is not ancient.
of the migraine
When treating an abscess as previously stated in the divisions of diseases, and it does not improve, and you see that the cauteries before mentioned do not fit with the medicine or iron, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it turns white.
And so, on the joint, draw a line half a finger's length long, and withdraw your hand once, hold it so as not to cut the artery nor reach the bone.
And guard the jaw that is paralyzed when one eats, and let the nerves have no sight but the paralysis, and prevent spasms from coming to the patient, and beware of bleeding from the artery when it is cut, or if you are cutting with great fear, especially for him who does not know, and who is not experienced and proven. leave the operation in mid-course.
But I will tell you how to stop blood when an artery is cut, and I will show you where it should be in this book.
And if you see that this cautery does not help the disease and the patient is suffering, cauterize it near the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it heals.
and if you wish to administer the cautery as we have said or the chapter on artery extraction, use a cautery with two blades. And this cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
of the cold pain in the ears from frostbite
When the ear is painful from frostbite and it has been treated with dissolving medicines and other cures as we have said in the division, but the pain does not subside, then heat this cautery called "poins", which is shaped like this:
After marking the affected ear all around, or both sides where the pain is present, move a little away from the root of the ear after you have marked the spot. and have ten points around each ear.
After healing the joint until it is sound.
of the torture of the mouth
The wound that must be cured by fire is not outside those that move from inflammation, as we have said in the classification of diseases;
And do not perform cautery on similar cases coming from scabs and from nerves.
When treating this kind of torture which mutes the flow of blood from eyes and purges of the head and gargarism, and it is not worth it; therefore, you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries. One in the root of the ear, and the other a little distance from the temple, and the third at the juncture of the two lips.
and place the cautery in the part that opens healthy, and make it cauterize towards the head of the ear slightly below the horn of the head, and another in the temple as long as a thumb. and leave the cautery so that half the hair is burned;
And this is the form of the cautery:
And it is the shape of the knife: (The knife mentioned here seems to be slightly more delicate and the blade should be a bit thicker.)
after treating the wound as I have said before, until it heals.
When the apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, but it does not improve, and the patient does not have a fever, then perform four cauteries: Two on the two horns of the head, one in the head, and one at the elbow joint, which is called "wrist" as we have said before, and the last cautery on the stomach mouth:
and treat them as we have said before.
of litharge
For this disease, give the patient great years and round pills for the brain.
Lay the patient on his back completely, and place the mustard plaster (sinapi) on the occuput.
and this is the method of the cautery: If you do as I have said.
If it is healthy thus, it is good. And if it isn't healthy, you should perform three fire cauteries on the head from neck to collarbone, with a space of one finger between each cautery.
and treat it as others, and if you see that it is growing worse, and the patient is enduring it, perform a fire cautery in the middle. and if necessary, perform another one on the two horns (temples), and treat it until it is healthy.
And let the cautery called "olive" be as I have previously said.
The head should be cleaned for years and according to what has been said beforehand.
After the head of the sick person, then make a fire cautery on the head and on each horn, and also behind and 3 times on the spine of the neck.
and if you need more, and the body is wet and the patient is suffering, and the disease is far away, make 4 cauterizations on the spine of the back. and leave it until the most burning part is burned, and wash your hand. After healing until the sick person is healthy, and when the cauterization that is called "olive" has healed as we have previously mentioned.
Of epilepsy
Epilentics should not use the cautery forcefully except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is first necessary to modify the skull with other treatments as we have said in the division when the patient is grown and endures to take medicine.
And if it is an infant who cannot suffer it, make a gargle and chew soft foods frequently with good meats.
After the king's head is in a middle position, and it is treated according to what was said before, and the fire cautery is applied on the head, and on each horn. And if the patient is out and suffering, apply cauteries as I have said to those with paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and the neck, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to the manner that I have said.
If the patient is an infant, perform one subtle cautery as follows:
When due to melancholy are the superfluidities or corrupt and swollen fluids, then the cautery of such cauteries should be performed on him who has paralysis.
And if due to melancholy the superfluidities are declining towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give him something to drink to purify the brain, as it was before in the division.
After the king's head of the sick person. Then make a bandage of linen well made, in the shape of a circle, and place it around the head.
And tie the patient crosswise, and hold them firmly on all sides;
After this (line), it is worth the use of old goat's milk. And the heating with fire should be moderated, so that one can place it on it without causing harm. After hollowing out the circle inside the head (skull), let it cool down.
Do this to the patient once a week with good management, as long as he is healthy.
If you wish to perform cauterization, make multiple pricks throughout the entire cautery.
This method of cautery greatly strengthens the brain.
Then place damp cotton wool in goat's milk and lard on top.
of the eyes When the eyes come first with the signs that I have said in the division, then you begin and give the patient something purifying the head, keep it away from all moisture, and make him sweat or take a bath several times while fasting.
After that, instruct him to lean his head backwards, and perform the cautery in the head (skull) and two more cauterizations on each temple where the disease is present or not present in one.
And apply the fire cautery to all the veins and arteries that are beneath the chest, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple;
And protect against bleeding, and if you see too much blood flowing out, stop it with your power as you can.
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in making the incision with caution how to make it.
And sometimes, a cautery or instrument is made under the two bones behind [the chest].
and it is seen that it is cold phlegmatic fluid, then make the cautery that I have said at the beginning of this work descending into the eyes. I apply a fire cautery to the head, and I apply two fire cauteries on each temple, and I apply one fire cautery where the hair meets the bones. And if necessary, cauterize cautiously above the eyebrow at every small cautery spot.
When you treat according to what we have said in the previous section, but it does not help, then give the patient three cooked eggs to drink. Afterwards, you roast the head and apply an olive oil-based cautery. And make two cauteries called "clavilis" on each eyebrow, a little under the hair.
And beware of the artery so you do not cover it.
And this is the form of the cautery which is called "clavilis":
When the paper of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, then perform cauterization using this cautery that is called "olivare". Here is its shape:
And if you wish to perform the fire cautery on two sorcerers as long as they are like sorcerers themselves,
and do not let the hand go unless the third part of the paper is burned, as I have said.
of the hair which points the oil Sometimes, the hairs of an egg are converted to feathers and prick oil; and they make fire cautery according to these methods: This is fire or burning medicine.
The fire cautery instructs the patient to let their hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they are born and become even, then put the patient in bed. Place a figure of the fernleaf on parchment that is as it is the stalk of the myrtle and the beginning of the sign shaved off from the hairs.
then put softened cotton bathed in egg white and musk of parsley on the oil, then heat the fire cautery as shown in this form:
After cauterizing on the figure you have marked many times, so that the corners are burned there.
And the signs of the health of the work are that you see the parchment recede and the hairs lift to the end of the oil.
Then lay your hand there, and leave it for three days, then put soft cotton in butter until the burn is healed. After the ointment treatment until it is healed.
And if hairs come afterwards and the paper is softened, then repeat the fire cautery on that same spot, just as you did earlier.
And if the hairs fall out, then cauterize it until the paper returns to its natural position and becomes even, and do not let the hairs grow oil.
The medical fire-cautery is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make a parchment in the shape of the myrtle leaf.
Then take French soap and live coal, one of each. Grind them together well; and make it quickly so that it does not cool down, then spread it on the form in the shape of a mimosa leaf, and place it over the eyes. and if the patient only holds onto one eye, you must work on both of them. and place a cotton swab moistened with oil underneath an eggshell.
and the patient's shoulder should be in your hand, and place your thumb showing above the medicine, and press the edge and move all around whenever the patient feels burning from the medicine, as it burns like fire.
When you have done so for a long time, give the medicine at your shoulder. And when the bone is broken, lift the limb upward, and look to see if the piece of bone has been raised as it was raised by the action of fire or by incision; If it is like that, then it is good.
If it is not like that, then put more medicine on the limb or the medicine has not worked, as long as your efforts are even and your hands placed correctly;
Then place cotton soaked in butter on the wound until the burn is healed, then clean the limb with an ointment called "diaphensis" and others until it is healthy;
And if it is necessary for you to be careful about your work, keep far away from the eyes with great care so that no medicine reaches them.
And if the bone becomes soft afterwards and the hairs prick in the oil, then start the medicine on that limb which has been made soft by the bone itself, just as you did before; After the cure when it is healthy;
and this is the form of the thorny plant, the nettle.
And know that human eyes are diverse in size and shape, according to your constraints;
And the right path should not be deviated from one who studies this art.
On treating a fistula with cautery.
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatment does not help, then it is necessary that you perform cautery according to this manner.
Instruct the patient to put his head on your holy object; and the ministers should grasp the patient's head between their hands in such a manner that it does not move or tilt its head.
After placing cotton wool soaked in egg white or onion juice on top of the oil;
After heating the fire-tong which is this:
and positioned at the base of the head in a manner similar to the shape of a quill from a feather, along with the cautery;
If it appears, it should be pointed from one head to the other, and if it appears, it should also look like a tent.
But nevertheless, this which is placed on top serves for your work.
After pressing the fistula when it has opened, take out the pus and dry it. And if it is closed, you open it, and draw out the worms.
Then put hot iron cautery on it, and hold your hand on the cautery on the part of the nail below the oil, so that your hand does not move. Put the cautery in the oil fat, and corrupt it.
If you come at the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, that would be good. If that does not work, repeat the cauterization again if necessary, and leave it for three days.
After placing cotton wool in butter, apply the drying ointment until it is dry, and if after 40 days it is not dry, apply a corrosive medicine while the bone is exposed. And the king according to what he writes in his chapter.
And there is a way of making a fire cautery which no ancient person spoke of. For a fistula (an abnormal passage or cavity between two organs), make an incision and open it up. After putting camphor of the fine form given below in the incision: and they put as much as a half-pint (approx. 946 milliliters) of liquid. Hold your hand with the camphor firmly, and let the patient not move at all, so that the liquid does not spill over.
And it is necessary to apply oil to the patient, cotton soaked with egg yolk or walnut oil.
The plug is drawn from the fistula, and health comes marvelously through it.
And if the fistula is healed by the fire cautery as we have said, it is good. If not, then administer oil of roses or bring the fistula to the body heat as is appropriate in its own place.
cavities in lips Often there are cavities in lips called "hairs" and also in children's lips.
When you treat the cavities as we have described in previous sections and the treatment does not help, then heat a small cautery scalpel of this shape:
And it should be put immediately into those cavities until it reaches the source.
After curing the wound with lime until it is healed.
When an abscess comes at the root of the throat or in the eye, or in the teeth roots, after it has turned into pus and becomes inflamed and turns into a fistula. and you treat it as we have said in the previous section, but it does not help at all. Then it is necessary to use the cautery according to the size of the fistula; After the bottle or perforation of the fistula, hold your hand until the iron comes to its end, and where it exits.
and do this once or twice, after treating what we have said in the treatment, until it is healed;
if it heals like this, it is good; and if not, it is necessary to discover the location and remove the rotten bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you cure it with medicine but it does not help, then put the head of the patient on your lap; After heating the cautery in this way, take a cane and place it on the tooth;
And put hot fire cautery inside promptly, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat approaching the root of the tooth.
After moving your hand, continue with the cautery as you wish;
Then fill the patient's mouth with saltwater, and keep it there for an hour and rinse far inside.
And in this manner the moving tooth is made stationary, the softened gums are restrained, and the corrupting moisture dries up.
From the pain of the teeth
When tooth pain comes from coldness or there is coldness and pus, and the medicinal cures are of no value, then it will be necessary to use cautery in two ways: And cautery made with butter and cautery with fire.
The cautery of butter is such that you take butter from a cow, and the tip in an iron or copper spoon. After taking cotton and wrapping it on the tip of a lance, and boiling it in butter, place it quickly on the painful tooth and hold it until it is cooled.
and perform this often until its properties reach the root of the tooth, and if you see cotton and wool soaked in cold butter, place it on the tooth, and hold the hot iron to it until the heat reaches the tooth's nerve.
The fire cautery is such that you take a rod of iron or copper, and it should be thick enough so that the heat does not reach the patient's mouth.
After heating the cautery, when its shape comes later, place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled.
Make it often, for the pain will be stopped on that same day or the next.
And it is necessary that the patient fill his mouth with good butter in haste for this cautery, and then hold his breath.
and this is the form of the cautery:
And make the cautery on the head that you wish, and according to what you are able;
and this is the form of the cane:
of scrofulas When scrofula is from cold and damp conditions, and is not obedient to digestion by medications, then heat the cautery as described below, and have it two openings for the smoke to escape to the other side of the cautery.
And place the hot cautery on the abscess once, wherever it is needed, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess.
And if the abscess is small, place the cautery according to its size, and leave it so for three days. And place dampened cotton on it until the arrow is removed;
After healing the wound with ointments and plasters, let it become clean.
When moisture prevails over the channel of the intestine, and especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then the patient should first be purged with soluble medicines.
After performing cautery at the root of the throat, be careful not to approach the throat itself, and do not go too deep but only a little bit.
Afterwards, perform the other fire cautery at the joint of the neck with the spine, and it is the cautery called "clavicle," as we have known its form.
And heal the limb as we have previously said until it becomes healthy.
When all and scrofula are due to cold moisture, and the patient does not have fever or itch, and the disease is old, perform two cauteries on the scrotum in visible limbs. And perform another cautery between the testicles.
And let it be the cautery called "clavicle" according to the form that has previously been described.
And if you see, perform a cautery by pricking all over the cautery called "points" as its form is described above in the ear disease.
And let the points [of the instruments] be up to thirty, or thereabouts.
After treating the limb as previously stated, let the cautery be at three intervals according to this form:
And because the cauterization is lighter, because you make them in pairs of two.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Make sure the patient is lying on his back and on his side [alternately]. then grasp the key that is within the tooth of your left hand [i.e., forceps or extractor].
if the jointure is dislocated, then heat the cautery with two nerves [tongs] of this kind [hot iron].
cauterize the key until it pierces the chest and produces a figure with four cauteries.
this is done using the cautery with three nerves, which is why the figures of cauterization are [made up of] several cauteries.
and the nerves are according to the subtlety of a tendon, this is the shape of the cautery with three nerves:
Sometimes it is sewn up on this one nerve, which is why there are eight cauteries.
After place on the fire cautery, grind with ashes. after the patient has rested, and his limbs are not moved for a long time until he is well comforted.
If it is dislocated above [the joint], which happens little, then do cautery on the thick part of the cautery rod, or many cauteries while pricking.
For the joint is reset, and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
When in the stomach there are coldness and much moisture that increase its complexion, and the catarrh multiplies in him, and in the usual methods of treatment he does not benefit; therefore, the patient should be supine on his back, and extend his legs and hands. Then do three cauteries in the area under the spoonful of pus, on all the cautery sticks, and two cauteries outside the two costal areas so that the figure of the cauteries is at three angles, and with such space between one and another that they are not joined together when they emit pus.
and the cautery points should be deep enough to prick the two parts of the body cavity, and the figure of the cauteries according to this form without deviation.
And if you wish to cauterize with a large cautery in the stomach according to this form;
And he who fears this cautery, cauterize by pricking and applying on the stomach at a point according to the quantity that you see fit; Then cauterize the entire cautery which is called "point".
After the healing of the wound is complete, when it is healed.
When the liver experiences pain due to cold, moisture and great windiness, as it is forced out of its natural composition by excesses; And the patient is cured of what has been said in previous sections, but it does not help him, so the patient must be kept on his bedclothes; Sign the third cautery according to this form, shape and quantity on the liver, below the hypochondriac region, where the ribs of the chest come together;
And let there be space between each fire cautery, the thickness of two fingers. And let the cauteries be as long as the body, and do not press too hard with your hand on all the cautery.
Burn only the middle part of the curd, and make the patient straight on his feet.
If he cannot stand, let him be lying down, and extend his legs and raise his arms.
If you so desire, you may cauterize these cauteries with a surgeon's knife, if you are skillful and knowledgeable in the art, but be careful not to burn too much because you will scorch the whole body. And it should not go down to the boil, because the area is very subtle there, and only the knowledgeable can see.
When he has an abscess in the liver, and you wish to know if it is in the fat of the liver or in the membrane: if it is in the fat, the patient feels pain not very strong;
and if it is in the membrane, he feels intense pain.
And when this treatment ceases, it is necessary that the patient rest on his head;
and then press firmly on the side or place where the abscess is, and then heat the iron similar to a coin, which is the shape of the following form: Heat the iron until it glows red, and bring it up to the wound until it is completely open;
after treatment according to the treatment for boils until it heals.
It is not advisable to use this fire cautery method by anyone who has not thoroughly studied the art of medicine, for many times these diseases have been caused by such practices.
Afterwards it can be boldly operated, and yet I think it is better to wait.
The pleurisy cautery
They said that for cauterization at pleurisy, one should use the roots of Aristolochia, and in this manner: Take a long root of Aristolochia, the largest one you can find, and it should be dry and as thick and long as your fingers. and wet it in oil, heat it up, and cauterize the cautery between the ribs and the collar, and make small cauteries a little below the beard.
and the cauteries between the fifth and sixth ribs, in a slightly descending direction. And the cautery enters into the worst place, and the other on the stomach, and between the shoulders, and the two at the sides beyond the cautery which is between the shoulders.
And do not press your hand, instead make it open as when smelling.
And an old man said that no one uses the fire cautery similar to a razor, and they heat it up and place it between the ribs until it reaches the abscess. And jumps out of the pain, as we have said in the abscess of the liver.
But in this work, there is fear or death of the patient now, or a fistula comes that cannot be healed.
For the mouse cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have said in the divisions of treatment, and it does not help, then they suggested four methods of cautery that are all good.
Of which the one manner is that you make three or four cauteries in a line according to the length of the abscess, according to the shape of the liver cautery that we have said before.
And do not hurry your hand to all the cautery, let the patient remain conscious on his back.
And another way of cauterizing is that you heat the cautery with two nerves, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder.
and lift the incision where the worm is, or the patient's wound comes towards the left side; and you shall raise the edges of the incision according to the incision, according to the length of the body, and the cauterizer should be according to the width of the body.
Afterward insert the two inflamed nerves until the incision is pierced from the other side, and then pull out the cauterizer, and in this way there will be four.
And if you see, cauterize with all the cautery at three veins.
After the treatment when pus has come out for a long time, it is necessary to use the other treatments mentioned before.
Cautery does not work on dropsy, except in the manner called "asclytes".
When the cure is carried out according to the ways we have said in the sections, and your treatment does not benefit, then it is necessary that you make four cauteries around the abscess, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the spleen, two behind the back near the spine, and one at the worst place. And let the cautery be close to the thick part of the sore.
After opening the cautery to pour the purgative for a long time, do not leave the care of the patient after the cautery. And healing would hasten, and the two intentions would be united with God's help.
The shape of the cautery for the belly is the clavel that we have shown before; and the one for the back should be olive-shaped, as previously described.
When the feet are swollen in a person who is dropsical and filled with water, you must cauterize on top of the foot between the auricular and anular bones. hold your hand with the cautery without turning it.
And do not enter too deeply, so as not to burn the yellow fluid excessively; and let the cautery be in this shape:
After making two cauterizations on both legs, one at the tip of each shinbone (cautery instrument). And let the cauteries be long, one under the thigh and the other outside the leg.
Leave the cauteries over a long period of time to heal, that is if it is necessary (to leave them there).
After healing from the other treatments that we have said.
When abdominal distention comes from cold and moisture, as long as the restorative and digestive qualities that are in the stomach and intestines are weakened and cannot be cured by means of treatments. And if you see the patient suffering greatly and with strong vitality, make a large cauterization on the stomach as mentioned earlier or stomach cautery, around the stomach. And three subtle cauteries around the buttock, every subtle cautery for nail, and two cauteries on the thighs.
And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the shoulder, and one cautery on each joint, and two small cauterizations on the stomach beneath it, for the cure is beneficial when there is good aid.
Of the treatment of hemorrhoids
When piles are deep-seated, one or more, and are old and have thick cold and moist corrupted humors, and are treated as mentioned in the divisions, it does not help if you perform cauterization. Three on the spine of the back, which is completely displaced below the coccyx and protruding gradually in a triangle shape, and one cautery under the buttock.
And if you think that his stomach is cold and the meat does not cook, and one sees swelling in the face, then the face should receive a large cautery on the stomach as mentioned before, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen with all the subtle cautery. Leave the cautery open for a long time. After healing the shoulder when it is healed.
When you cut with a hot iron, if the cautery appears to be shaved, then put it all on fire over the place where you are cutting. and keep your hand so that the cautery comes to the opening of the vein, in this way it will not tear.
Do this once or twice, and if there is much blood, then cauterize each one as we have said. After the cure of ointments is profitable until they are healed.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery over a burn, it will have more help.
When the patient cannot bear incision or opening, we will speak about it in its place; this disease can only be cured by cautery.
If a fistula comes, and it is swollen and filled with pus and decayed matter, you should test the whole tent in every way, and be sure that you know the entire tent how much it heals.
After shaving the cautery that appears to be like a razor, put it in the fistula according to the amount that it entered there, and continue the cauterization until the flesh burns and is burned, once or twice or three times, according to the quantity of skin needed.
And take care of the nerves which are narrow, and of the great veins.
If the fistula goes to the body of the bladder or intestines, beware of these places, and do not make incisions except in charnu, and think that it is not permanent.
After curing the place until it is healed, if the places are festered and the matter has been removed for a long time, then know that the place is completely healed.
And if the matter has not been removed, know that the place is rotten and the bone is corrupted. And thus in one of these cases.
When cold pain comes in the kidneys, and of great windiness, and does not take a woman's form, then you must give it fire cautery on both sides of the kidneys using the cautery iron that we have previously mentioned.
And if we cauterize it in milk, there will be three cauteries in a row, and they will make more significant help.
Of the bladder When the bladder is weak and cold or moist, so that the patient retains urine, then make a cautery in the area outside the bladder, where the hair of the testicle starts, both on the right and left side, and each cautery should be as long as the thumb.
and make the cautery behind the back, where you have need of it;
and let the cauteries be like a nail in shape, as was said before.
When the matrix is cold and moist, it does not allow conception, and the flowers are corrupted and their terms are delayed; And when they come, there is great pain: Then you must apply three fire cauteries around the boil, as we have said the fire cautery of the bladder, and two fire cauteries outside the back.
let the cautery be heated like a nail, as we have said.
When the viscous humors descend to the bone of the thigh, and for this reason it moves from its place, the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together.
and the joints are found to depart from their place in the thigh region, then you must cauterize the patient over the bone of the thigh with a cautery similar to a circle, and the sign should be before the joint around the bone as it turns, so that the bone is within the circle;
And if [the cautery] is similar to those with which one cauterizes the stomach.
And if this cautery is not present, make three large olive-oil cauteries, and make the cautery as deep as all other wounds.
heal it until it becomes healthy.
of the pain from the hernia When pain comes in the box of the back, it is from coldness and moisture, and the patient is treated with what we have said in the division, but the treatment does not help, and the disease is old. Therefore, you must purge the patient of the large humors with foul pills or other good-seeming pills. After [doing] that, perform a cautery;
And the method of the cautery is according to two ways: This means "namely, together with burning medicines and fire cauterization.
Fire cautery is according to many ways, among which one is as follows:
you cauterize on the boil of the haunch with three triangular cauteries according to this shape, and make a good depth and width, and have space between each cautery of the size of a thumb, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped.
sometimes it is done with cautionery in the middle on the top of the haunch, for which there are four according to this shape:
And if you see, if you cauterize at the circular cautery that we have mentioned in the dislocation of the haunch;
But make it so that the circles contain the entire hunchback, and all the humps should be burned.
And this is the method for treating sciatica when the pain remains in the loin and does not reach as far as the thigh nor the leg.
And if it comes up to the thigh and leg, make II cauterizations there where the patient says the pain is, and the fourth finger width above the ankle on the left side.
And let the cautery be a surgical instrument, and let the thickness of the coal be sharp.
If the patient feels that the pain extends to the thigh or near it, cauterize the place where they feel the pain with three or four points of the cautery which is called "points". And if necessary, do more.
And if the pain is under the knee towards the thigh, perform a cautery with the surgical instrument or circular cautery, but be careful in all your cauterizations not to allow the cautery to burn nerves and large arteries, nor to do greater harm and constriction to the patient.
And I myself have seen many who made fire cautery on the heel of the foot, and they let it grow so much that the leg was swollen all over, and the toes as well, and all the toes were pierced and corrupted. After a belly solution where he died.
And if the pain is in two places at once, do cautery on one and the other, according to this method.
The wise men say about the cautery of the inguinal region, as follows: make a nail-like iron and its head should be as big as a thumbnail or slightly smaller, and it should have perforations or be one-perforated with a distance of the size of a nut.
And let the joints above the two parts be over-sized, and also like nuts, and have a hinge made of iron there.
and this is its form:
And let it be heated until it becomes all red and emits sparks, then place it on the sick person's chest, turning it to the healthy side.
And apply the fire cautery once, and leave it for three days. Then make a plaster of butter and leave the wound open for a long time; After the healing of the ointment until it is healed.
Al-Bukassim says that we should use this cautery with caution due to fear of its sight, and it is not widely used.
And this is one of the good cauterizations, which can be endured, and there where it hurts him.
The cautery of medicine heat is to make the instrument between the joints in such a way as to cut through the edge of the opening, and it should be of iron or steel with a long shaft, and at each end have two noses, and between each nose the thickness of a thumb. and be opened outward and upward, and join together according to this shape:
After place the box of the iron heated in the patient lying on his side, and after put your hand much above the box of the iron. After pour between the two circles of hot iron which is heated in the firepot and leave it for an hour and let the patient endure the heat and the burning from it.
It bites like a bite from fire;
And when the bites have passed, lay your hand with the instrument and lift the swelling gently, and leave it for three days, and put butter over it so that the blackness from the burn is removed. and let it remain for three days so that pus drains out.
And this would be the final aid after treatment with ointments until it is healed.
And if the pain extends to the thigh or leg, make the instrument that burns accordingly, as you have done in the swelling.
And this is the method of hot burn, and I have written or treated it concerning the correction of medicine. Take alkali and hot live coal, equal amounts of each, grind them together, and put them in a new pot. If there is a small opening closed, ensure that the tip of a razor can enter it.
If there is a small opening closed, ensure that the tip of a razor can enter it. Then place one pot upon another well weighed pot, and put on top of it alkali and salt and warm water until there is the right amount of powder above it when you have well pressed it with your hand.
And leave it like that until it descends warm and thick or the pot becomes weighed; then take all of that water, and pour it over salt and over alkali as before.
And then it will become very thick and be used for the workings of various medicines and for other cauterizations of members.
For it has the same effect as fire, and if other medicines are cauterized in this way, such as figs and honey, aniseed and salt with soap; all these things mixed together.
And Galen tells us of a cure in which a nobleman was healed from the pain of the hernia and sciatica, and he praised it much, and said that no other treatment was used, and that he became healthy once when this cure was performed, and he bathed himself as he instructs hereafter.
And in this manner, you take the green ground-ivy root, dry and powdered, and grind it with a little fat, then place it on the back, thigh, and leg where there is pain, and hold it.
And leave it for three hours until the patient no longer feels the burning sensation.
And then make him enter the bath until his body is slightly warmed, and make him lie down, and the pain will leave completely and he will be cured.
And know that no one should use fire cautery of such medications unless after the evacuation of the body.
And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is burned with goat's-beard (greater burnet), it helps very much.
The cautery should be done in this manner. Take linen and beat it with old oil, and place it over the furrow which is between the big toe of the foot and the other one which is called the "fossicle".
After taking dry goat's-beard and heating it until it is charcoal, place it on wool and leave it until it cools.
And set it again thus, and do not stop doing so until you think by reason that it will come to the hinge, and that the pain is ceased.
And this manner of cautery is called "cautery of goat".
of the pain in the back
When pain comes to the back, either by falling or from impact or excessive evacuation, or from similar causes of cold matter spreading, none of these cases are worth cauterization, unless it is due to the influx of cold matter.
Afterwards, the patient must be purged with foul pills or similar things, which are made on the back where the pain is, three lines marked with a cross, and in each line V cauteries or more according to the potency and quantity that the patient can bear.
And the cautery should be made according to the cautery which is called "points".
If you wish, make three or four cauteries or five in the middle cautery according to this form:
This disease often comes to small children, and the signs of its onset are that they have narrow throats when they cry and fear. and you will find it in the lower spine at the back and in its appearance which comes on other spines.
When you see this thing and intend to cure it, cauterize it with the fire cautery according to this form. The fire cautery increases every part of the spine.
And if you see, cauterize around the spine with the cautery pointing to two or three lines, and let the tips be close to each other.
After curing the joint until it is healed as we have said, make sure you do not administer the cautery in the hollow of a nerve.
of the pain of the joints
When joint pains are caused by moisture spreading to every member of the body, and when pain comes in the feet, which people call "gout" properly, and when it is due to coldness and medicines cannot heal it, then it is cured with cauteries in this way:
make the mortar of cautery around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive oil shaped as follows:
And if it is necessary to prick on the pelvis, make the cauterization with the whole cautery, as they claim "point". And if the pains come up to the knee and other joints, which happens frequently, make fire cautery on each knee 3 or 4 times on each part, with every cautery olive oil.
and if you need more, do more, but not too much that the charcoal from the fire is burnt out.
And if the pains descend to the knees and the back, administer the fire cautery as we have said in its chapter.
And if the pains are in the hands, make points around the wrist two fingers' width.
and if there remains a point of pain at the elbow, make points on each joint and on the hair of the arm.
And if the pains come up to the hips or shoulders, cauterize each part and take good care of the patient and consider remedies.
For if you take good care of him and cleanse him with purgation, he will be healed with God's help.
When rottenness comes in the throat and the bowels descend into the chest, and this is new, if you wish to cure it, it should not eat anything that day. and use things that relieve the stomach, so that the phlegm descends from the stomach;
after doing so, make him lie on his back between your hands, and command him to press his lower abdomen until the bowels are repaired, and pull them to your sides, and sign below the rottenness on the bone of the thumb, and at a single sign that is similar to half of a circle above the chest;
then heat the fire cautery in the shape as follows:
until it becomes white and exudes blood. Then reattach the bones to their place. and the minister anoints his hand so that they do not return back.
and work the thighs on the patient, place the cushion and the servant under his thighs, and another one holding his hands.
then place the fire cautery on the spot with your whole hand, hold it straight and hold until you reach the bone; if you don't reach it the first time, try again until you reach the bone. and be careful that the bone does not split when making the cautery. do not burn it. so that the patient does not die or suffer harm.
And know that if you do not reach the bone during the cautery, your efforts are worth nothing.
And the cauteries for children should be subtle according to their measurement, and for grown-ups, they should be as large as theirs.
After three days of care, treat the shoulder with butter until the burn is healed;
After treating with other remedies until it is healthy, let the patient lie down for 40 days on his back so that the wound heals well.
And it is necessary to restrict his movements for a long time so that the boils do not emerge when he gets up to go to the chamber.
And after 40 days, when he wants to get up, a bed is prepared for him and he rests for another 40 days.
And let him have good rest, that he should work little and beware of excessive drinking and eating, and of too much laughter.
And when he follows this instruction, he will become entirely well.
And I shall say after the treatment of amputation in its chapter.
When roundworms come into other bellies and are known, and you see that they no longer grow, then perform the cautery of the cautery according to its quantity, and let it be burned the third degree. After the cure according to what we have said;
and no one of the ancients has said that it should be cauterized at the cautery with three angles in this form:
but first mark the location and make a line above the roundworm, and another below, and then place your hand on the entire sharp-pointed cautery.
But the first cauteries are lighter and more mobile.
of old pain in any member When pain comes in any member, either from falling or being injured, and that pain lasts a long time, and medicine does not heal it, then you should cauterize with the cautery called "poins," and the cauterizing should be according to the length of the limb, its smallness, weakness, its virtue, its location for twisting, and its pain.
if it is healed by the first cautery, that is good.
If that limb has a recurrence of the disease, then perform another cautery on it, because it is customary that it should be changed to the nearest member; therefore, you must perform the cauteries as long as the patient is not healed.
The cautery is sometimes helpful to a great extent, and equally so the patient who comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Can you see the patient to be cauterized, take care if the patient is at the beginning of the disease, and if it has been cured according to what we have said in the division, neither draw nor remain, and if you doubt that corruption will affect the entire patient, then perform V cauteries on the head: Bring the head to you and the other towards the forehead at the end of the hairline. And place it on top of both horns, and the other behind the occiput (the back of the head).
And leave your hand so that the cautery reaches the bone, and so that the scabs come out through it, allowing the vapors of the large humors to escape.
And cauterize on the mouse (a swelling) according to what is before.
And if the mixture is scattered everywhere; If the mixture is clearly dispersed, then you must apply the cauterization using the cauteries as we have said above, and the cautery on the neck, and six cauteries on the spine of the back, and one large one and another small one on the crotch, and two more on the shoulders; and two more on the sides, and two on the tendons of the thighs, and one above each joint of the hands and feet, and over the hollows of the hands.
And beware of the nerves that are located above the last bone of the foot, do not burn them.
Sometimes make a cautery on the bone of the knuckle, and one on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And know that when you perform more cautery, you provide more help, and it benefits them more.
And know that the sick do not feel pain from the cautery as much as the healthy do, because the body is already completely corrupted.
And it should be great and small according to the members and the joints, as you will find in the ways of iron smithing.
After curing the shoulder with flour several times with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
When swelling occurs in any member and is treated with medicine, oil, plasters and it is not cured, then apply cautery on the affected member according to the size and smallness of the member.
and let the cautery be a small incision in the thickness of the skin. Then, if it is cured with liniments until it becomes healthy.
Sometimes, cautery is done on the hand, foot and back, at the root of the nerve that paralyzes the member, and in such cases the swelling is removed.
And no one else shall interfere unless he is knowledgeable about the members and the nerves moving the body.
When the disease called "albaras" arises, and the remedy of medicine is of no value, then cauterize it with a cautery of moderate depth according to the size of the wound until the white becomes exposed and its color changes.
then cure it with flour and lentils with rose oil and banana leaves, cow's blood and swan's blood, each one in part. Mix all together, tie it up with a cloth, and apply to the wound until it is healed.
Cure syphilis by cauterization
When a boil begins and you wish to stop it, if you cauterize, do so with the circular fire cautery all around the circumference of the boil.
And wise people would also say that a cautery is made in the middle of the boil;
and this does not seem good to me, for I think that it should not be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have experienced it happening once before;
and a more proper thing is that it should be cauterized around, using the cautery called "circule", as we have said in our discussion on cauteries.
When someone has a disease called "adubelati", and it does not want to heal or because of the excess fluid it produces or because the patient is weakened (meaning too old) and has little blood, or because of the cold; And you see it hasten to grow: Then cauterize it with many small cauteries, pricking around: After that, let it be as such. Then it will hasten to heal.
And if you see that the wound is pierced completely with all the cautery, heat the cautery in this manner:
And put your hand in the middle of that disease called "adubelati" as long as the cauteries have pierced through, and let the cauteries be such that the patient feels no pain from them in this manner so that the course of the pustule is clear.
After the patient has recovered completely.
Another kind of disease called "corroding", and it is nothing but an eating away of a limb because it consumes them as fire consumes dry wood.
If you see this disease in a place where it can bear the cautery along with fire, then heat the small and large cauteries very hot, according to what is necessary for the place or the disease.
After that, cauterize everywhere until you eradicate all the corruption, and nothing remains of it, so that everything corrupted is removed.
And then leave it for three days and put on the affected areas softened cauteries made with oil until the burns caused by fire are removed, and all the corruption.
After the cure of ointments generating heat.
And if after three days you see healthy flesh not growing, that is good;
and if that's not the case, then begin to cauterize again on the remaining corrupted parts.
And this dislocation has sometimes been cured with medicine instead of fire cautery;
However, fire cautery is of greater aid, and I have already said the cure for medicine ague in the section on division: Take it when you need it.
The growing hairs should be allowed to remain long and equal on the feet; Often happens that in the foot through an opening comes a disease called "close" according to our intention, and it is a large thing swollen which breaks the foot.
And the cauteries of this disease are according to two ways. This is to know fire cautery, and hot water cautery.
Heat the fire cautery as you would heat a pen of hot iron, and make it from good iron to the size that can penetrate through all parts, and that it has fine edges;
Afterwards place the heated cautery on top of the nail, and turn your hand all around the nail until it reaches the point of the nail; and leave it like this for three days until it begins to emit pus. Then make a poultice of bad wild herbs ground with oil, and leave the poultice on it all night, and the nails will grow out and be uprooted from their roots.
Then heal the wound with healing salve until it is healed.
And if it is converted through the body and often occurs in hands and feet, then you must bring hot cautery. and this is done thus: Take a cane of iron or wood, or a feather from a bird's quill, and place it on the nail and the blister, which means for treating warts. and place the cane on it so that it presses all around, then put some hot oil on it, and hold your hand firmly, and press your hand while turning so that the edge of the cane comes to the root of the nail, and let the hot oil penetrate deeply until it reaches the root.
and let the patient suffer a little bit from the bite of the hot oil for an hour. then leave it like that, and it will rot away completely at its roots.
As another does afterwards, while you cauterize all those on the body, then treat with ointments that soothe pain.
For those who shiver from cold or quartan fever, or any other ailment, it is necessary that you perform four or five cauteries on the spine of the back, one between each vertebra. And the cautery or flesh, and on top of the stomach the olive oil cautery.
Allow it to tremble, and hasten the health from the cold disease.
Sometimes, from the body's outside appear baths of pus or boils that come from large, corrupted matter.
It is necessary at first when they appear that you perform cautery on each head of the pustule: a subtle cautery of myrtle staff, from which the tip is held in fire, or of long root of aristolochia, or to the cautery lenticular.
And sometimes you cauterize at the beginning when they appear in this way, and they cannot grow further, but the superfluidities that come from them are resolved, and they heal.
but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
Often there are great outflows of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound which goes to the outside, or in the incision of an abscess, or in the cauterization of a limb, and similar things. and it is a very harmful thing to let it pus out.
Furthermore, when this happens to anyone, hasten to place your finger on the wound of the vein, and press it very hard so that the blood is stopped below your finger, and no more pus comes out.
Then put the olive oil cauterization of various sizes, both small and large, until they are all red.
Then take [the tool], whether large or small, according to the wound and the location in which the artery is located, and place the cauterization on that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cauterization in place until the blood is stopped.
And if it jumps fiercely when you hold your thumb on the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, take hastily another one of the cauteries that are by the fire.
And continue to do this one after another until the wound is cauterized;
and be careful not to burn the nerve that has been exposed, and that no other harm comes to the patient.
and know that when an artery is not cut through completely, it cannot be well stopped when the artery is large, unless by one of the four ways that we have mentioned: or by cauterization, or by extraction if it has not been treated, or by tightly tying with thread, or by medicine placed on it that can stop the bleeding. and it should be tied and compressed immediately.
Whoever administers constriction tightly with fabrics or placing hot things on it, or similar things, does not benefit from it unless otherwise.
And if this happens and there is no eye or medicine present, it should place its index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and press firmly until the bleeding stops above the wound and above the vein. And it must not move, but the cold moisture should often be applied, very cold until the flesh is frozen and swollen and hardened;
Make inquiries ahead about the kind of cauteries and medicines that are needed.
We have told you in the first chapter about every disease in which there is need for a fire cautery, or a hot medicine, and the signs, causes, instruments, forms, and methods of cauteries.
I have put that chapter on the head and I will go in this chapter along the same path for those things which are more easily found.
Furthermore, as I begin this, it is necessary for you, dear child, to learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and because of this greater caution is required.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; There is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you not to undertake foolishness. For many ways of people come in treatments. Those who suffer in such a way that they die quickly due to the perversity and severity of their disease. And of these one should have fear.
And there are some who give you their sense, and say: "Wait, I am ready. "and the patient is obstinate.
"You should not easily consent to those who come to you who have this manner, but put greater consideration in your honor than in your desire, and do not rashly but wisely from what you are certain, and from what you can take and learn.
"and use prognostication and indication in the treatment of your patients so that health is turned.
"and this will help you to acquire good reputation, glory, and memory of praise.
Dear child, our Lord grants you good understanding and righteousness; if you wish to inspire from the holy inspiration of His hand, come.
I have divided this chapter for your convenience, speaking one topic at a time, as the cauteries were previously described from head to feet because you will find it easier to understand what you need in this manner.
"Know that this disease often comes to children when the head of the child is strangled too strongly.
And sometimes comes this from an unknown cause that one may not know.
And I have never seen this illness in adults, and all those I have seen hastened death. And because of that, it seems to me that I should abandon the work in some treatments.
And I see an infant whose shoulders are swollen with water, and the head grows larger every day until it cannot be sustained.
The moisture grew so much that he died, and this moisture is collected under the bone above the shoulder joint, between the cartilage and the bone.
The work is such that if the moisture is between the cartilage and bone, and the abscess is small, you cut a wide incision in the head.
And let it be as long as he (the patient) does, while the moisture moves.
Here comes the shape of the spatula:
If the moisture is more swollen and the abscess is larger, make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
If the moisture is under the bone, and you see the signs that I show you, the openings of the skull on each part, and it does not respond when you press it from inside with your hand, then: If you must make three cuts into the skull in this manner:
And after incision, remove all moisture from it. After closing the cuts with linen and powder, put wine and oil in them, and leave it until the fifth day.
Then undo the cuts, and cure the wound with bandages and ointments, let the skull grow stronger, and give the patient dry meat of moisture until the limb is comforted and healed.
And another way of incising is that you look for the size of the abscess and gather its pus.
Sometimes it is before; sometimes it is behind; sometimes on the right side; and sometimes on the left side.
Therefore, cut there where the abscess opens, empty the pus, and do it according to what you are able.
and ensure that you do not cover the artery. And if there comes blood, let the patient die a natural death from bleeding and evacuation of moisture.
When a disease called "cataract" occurs in the eyes or at its worst, and the disease is old, and the medicine's cure does not help at all, then the last cure is the cautery with which they will cut the two arteries.
Therefore, when you see them covered, let the patient lie on his back. After rubbing the joint with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then grasp the patient's neck with the cloth. Then look where the veins are biting, and the joints of one and the other are next to the ears, and they are set in place.
Then mark the joints with a sharp awl of two parts, then pierce one and the other with it to the bone, and let it be through the wide part of the head.
And if you see it (the artery), push the spatula under the artery and cut it above, cutting through as two fingers apart.
And when the vein is cut, it jumps up continuously without stopping.
And if the arteries do not open to the touch, it is necessary that you measure the distance of three fingers, then mark the joint and pierce to the bone.
And it is necessary to force the blood out by 6 cubits [a unit of measurement], and perhaps a little more or less according to what the patient can endure, and the filling of the artery.
Then look at the wound: If it remains on the bone without shifting, if the abscess does not open, then hold down the wound and tie it, and apply ointment until it is healed.
of migration When the old migraine comes and the acute catarrh, because of moisture from tears and heat in temples and aged senility, accompanied by similar things, and it is treated with methods of medicine, but none of it helps him; then we must open the arteries of the temples and cauterize them as we have said.
And the manner of extracting them is that the patient should bend his head backward towards his temples, and listen to the artery that opens in the temple, as it opens well with its beating, and is easily found except in some men who are very cold.
and if it is found, the patient should pull his neck with some cloths, then rub the place with a sharp cloth, and wash the place with warm water until the artery appears clearly. Then take the sponge that is of this form: Then peel the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then pull it up towards the prongs, and carefully remove the cloths that are underneath each part.
And if the artery is thin, turn it at the point of the uncinus, then cut off that part according to the size of the two shoulders. If it is not cut, it will not heal completely in all places.
Draw blood from the six veins, up to three.
And if the artery is large, you must tie it with a strong double silk thread so that pus does not come before the wound's stitching, and there is a flow of blood.
Then remove the excess that is between the two ligatures at that same hour itself, and if you see, cauterize the wound with a hot iron until it reaches the bone, so that the shoulder is cut off.
And it is the grinding work, if the patient does not have fever and he is of a warm constitution. For the cautery is aid to finish off the tumors (or abscesses): because it is of greater aid for tumors (or abscesses).
For the extraction of arteries, one should fill the area with old cotton and place strong tents (bandages) above.
And when they are dislodged (or dissected), they should be cured with dry medicines that cause a burn and bandages until they heal.
And if you do not stop the flow from an artery as much as you can when dissecting (or operating), hurry to cover it with cautery or fill the area with vitriol and hold your hand so that it does not bleed. And if you do not have it present (the dislocated joint), place the hand on the joint until the bone is frozen, and irrigate the joint with cold water continually, and hold it in place as necessary.
And there should be between the two blades of the instrument a thick space, and when you have positioned them on the two joints, and you press the iron hot upon it until it reaches the bone, and cut through the vein in two parts. And they should be separated between the two shoulders, because this cautery is not entirely soldered from one shoulder to the other.
and this is the shape of the cautery:
And the one that is more swollen and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein with this sharp cautery for two parts, but they should be well thickened to keep their heat longer. For when the straw is too thin, it holds less heat.
tears When the tears of the eyes flow out from veins that are above the head, and there is no benefit in treating with medicine as one does, you see the patient become agitated, and he feels his forehead tremble like a shudder. And if they are thin and moist, so that the hairs of the paper fall off, and the paper is scalded and scorched by the heat of the tears, this treatment is necessary. And it was called by the ancients "contused cure", and you make incisions at the back of the patient who has this disease in his forehead, then make three cuts on the forehead equally according to its length.
And it was called by the ancients "contused cure", and you make incisions at the back of the patient who has this disease in his forehead, then make three cuts on the forehead equally according to its length. And one of the openings should be similar to how the entire front is pushed down swallowing towards the neck, and the others are the two chests through the paper, and keep away from cutting the arteries that are near the two chests through the paper.
and distance your hand from the connection of the two jaws, and let each wound be the amount of three joined fingers.
and prepare a piece of sponge and a lot of linen for washing the blood, then insert the sharp spatula of two parts as shown here.
from the first incision at the temple to the second incision. and scrape all the flesh that is between the two openings to the full extent of the siphac on the bone, then do something from the middle incision to the other second one, and then extract this spatula. Insert into the first cut the instrument called "culter," which is very sharp on one side and soft, not sharp, on the other, and its shape is:
And make the cutting blade pointed towards the chest cavity, and the cut should be soft towards the bone, and push it until it comes to the midline incision.
And cut all the eyelashes that descend from the head with the incision continuing up to where it opens the cavity, and then do another cut in the middle incision up to the other cavity.
And draw out equal amounts of blood, and press the place for blood taken.
then put a tent of old cotton in each incision, and put on damp cloths soaked in wine and oil and alum, and ensure that pus does not come into them.
On the third day untie the stitch, and apply a large plant of cooled mustard, then the healing of basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other remedies for wounds, until it is healed.
When any person comes with an acute catarrh, you see the eyes swollen and small, blurred vision, and burned-out paper. and the hair is falling out, and the head hurts with sharp pain, and the patient coughs. Then understand by these signs that those matters and this catarrh do not come from any other place except from many veins, and the humors that cause it are those.
And you must tell the patient to recline their head, then make a large incision behind the head and another wide one at the back of the neck. And begin from the hollow of the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision go up to the bone; and remove your hand from the nerves of the temples that move when eating;
and when the bone is exposed, suck all the blood with a sponge, then open between the two lips of the incision and put old cotton in there, and sew it with linen. Then lay it on top of dampened cloths soaked in wine and oil, and beware of getting cold.
When it is removed, you must rub the bone until flesh begins to grow around it, then treat with things that promote healing and encourage growth of flesh.
In this manner: Take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony, and make a plaster with them. And administer it on these wounds to heal thoroughly.
Make a tube of silver or lead, narrow at one small opening and with a lid for distillation; use an instrument of lead well made for this purpose; if you wish to apply it, wrap a small rafer around the tip with cotton; pour your oil or juice, and any medicine of yours into the tube; place the tube in the ear; push the rafer into the cotton completely; press gently until the oil distills or overflows from the ear; heat the distillation with fire as one would distill it in the ear; ensure that it is not too cold, for the medicine will not be good.
Everything that falls into ears is one of the four things: or grain, or animal, or stone from a mine, or similar objects like iron. or seed, such as beans, peas, lentils; For fluid flowing like water and syrups and similar things.
When it falls into the ear bone (or any other way that does not align with the ear), does not fit in the ear, or does not grow within the ear, put the ear on a hot surface.
If you see the stone, if it releases a little drop of purple oil or castor oil, then apply extraction. and make him vomit with powdered gum myrrh, and stop the nostrils when vomiting comes, and put around the ear pieces of cloth or wool. raise the ear upward.
Many times flatulence occurs with this treatment;
And if it does not occur, apply extraction with fine tweezers in the following way:
If it jumps out with tweezers, that is good;
if not, apply extraction with the narrow and curved onion of small size.
If it doesn't jump by itself, make a canal of beeswax and push the head of the canal or ear trumpet deeply into the ear, and stop up the area around the canal with soft wax so that the vein cannot enter with the canal. Then draw it out carefully, as often it comes out forcefully as we have said.
If it does not come out in that manner, take some kind of implement sharp at the tip and put a piece of cotton around it. Then press the instrument on the stone or whatever it is, and draw it out forcefully.
If it does not come out from all the things we have said, then quickly cut the ear in such a way that an abscess pus comes out and twitches.
And the manner of the incision is that you first let the patient drain his head, and draw blood according to the measure of its potency, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn his ear upward, and make a small incision in the root of the ear at the fat or the place it depends on; And let the incision be as a moon, until you reach the bone, then extract it according to your power, and suck it quickly with your mouth.
and the treatment until it is drained.
And if it is a grain that fills and swells, administer extraction;
and if it cannot be extracted, then administer the thin subtle sponge according to this form: And make an incision of that grain (of the bone).
But do not do this when you think that the grain is moist due to ear moisture, as long as you have made many pieces.
Then remove it with subtle tweezers and warm water, as we have said, so that the extraction is aligned.
In the ear, therefore, when water falls, it is necessary for the patient to use eardrops first and then stuff the ear with a large cotton ball. And let it lie on that same ear where the water is. If it jumps out because of this, it's good.
if it does not do this, take many small and light stones according to the thickness of your finger, and heat them a little in the fire. and place the patient with an earache or abscess in it, and press on one side of it with your fingers from the other side, and push another stone on top of the stone that is in the ear. and do not stop doing this with one stone against another until it has completely drained out, and then it will burst out all at once.
And if you see it, take the cord, and push one of the heads into the ear, and hold the other head in fire until the more tender part is burnt;
then tie other cords for the rest of the burn as we have said before.
In the extraction of the beast, if it is small-bodied like a flea and similar things, treat it as we have said before in the classification.
but if it has a large body that can be felt, bring instruments for extraction of tweezers; and it is the easier thing to remove that which is in the ear.
In the removal of worms from the ears, when you treat it as we have said before and in the section on distillation, and the treatment does not help, then you must look at the ear in the sunlight. If there are any open wounds, take subtle forceps to them, and if they do not open, then take the cable from where this form is.
And it should be narrow below and wide above. And push the more subtle head into the ear according to the amount of pain the patient has, then pull on the entire cable. Do this often until all the worms come out.
And if they do not obey and come out, stop up the cable with cotton as I said in the previous section.
And if they do not come out as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have proven to be effective in expelling worms, and you will find where to prepare distillations.
And if you pour oil and medicine into the ear with this instrument, it takes this form as you see: Silver or bronze is hollowed out beneath the small holes, and covered with a lid for pouring.
and to press from inside the distillation with an iron instrument well made for this purpose, and if you wish, take a scraper and wrap it around the tip with cotton; Then pour your oil or juice, and whatever medicine you wish into the tube, and place the tube in the ear.
Then push the scraper with all the cotton into it and press your hand gently until the oil is distilled or the ear canal becomes clear. And the patient feels pain inside, and if it is an abscess, heat it with fire in the same way as one distills it in the ear; And keep that it is not too cold, for the medicine will not be good.
Make a tube of silver or lead, narrow at one small opening and with a lid for distillation; use an instrument of lead well made for this purpose; if you wish to apply it, wrap a small rafer around the tip with cotton; pour your oil or juice, and any medicine of yours into the tube; place the tube in the ear; push the rafer into the cotton completely; press gently until the oil distills or overflows from the ear; heat the distillation with fire as one would distill it in the ear; ensure that it is not too cold, for the medicine will not be good.
No child is born without some deformity in ears;
And the same thing happens in men by discharge from a wound or pus born inside the ear, and this discharge sometimes goes all the way into the ear, if one cannot see it;
And sometimes the deformity disappears by itself, and one sees it well.
Therefore, if it goes all the way in and one cannot see it, it is a difficult cure in many situations, and in this case you must put the sick person's ear in the sun; And look within: If you see the eruption (abscess) apparent, then use this spatula of this form:
And be sharp and pointed at both ends, so that it does not puncture the ear;
If the eruption is of flesh or bone from the ear, then take fine tweezers and gently remove it until all the char (pus) is gone.
And if the opilation (a foreign body) is completely in the ear, take a fine razor and heat it slightly with fire, then put it in the ear canal.
If you feel the eruption that causes pain in the ear, make a small incision gently, but be careful not to injure the nerves of the ear;
Then place a wick (tampon) in the ear according to the size of the opening and moisten it with Egyptian ointment. Make a poultice every day until the wound heals, and take a cloth and soak it in sharp vinegar, and powdered vitriol ground upon it.
And if you see an abscess on the ear, then you must draw out the pus and apply another cloth moistened with a salve made of rose oil and beeswax until the abscess is removed. then let it heal.
If there comes discharge of blood, dip a sponge and cloth in cold water, and place it on the ear, and use other treatments that stop the blood discharge which are either distillations or cauterization.
This is an aphorism that comes in papers about eyes when they are moist and dry; you must stretch them with tongs and tweezers and cut the roots with a spatula. then apply powdered vitriol to it.
And if, without cutting, they burn with the slow cautery called lenticular, then they should be burned after incision is worthwhile.
and repeatedly repair themselves, no matter what is rooted there; and when they are burned by fire, those roots are consumed and do not return.
from the hailstone Many times come out of the eyes something that resembles hail in shape and hardness, and because of this, this disease is called "hail," and it is a collection of thick moisture on the paper above and below. The remedies are as follows:
The remedies are as follows: Take care if hail mutes from both sides, it is an easy thing to know.
Then pull it open widely, then scrape each side lightly with a knife, then take hold of it with the pliers and crush it.
if you cannot crush it without piercing the paper slightly, do not worry the patient at all.
and if the wound is large, gather it together with stitches, and heal it until it is healed.
and if it is small, do not apply force, because the ointment will heal it soon enough and prevent scarring.
If the hail is descending inside the ear towards the upper part, turn the paper, take hold of it with pliers, and crush and press it from both sides.
If the paper is dislocated by incision, it causes no harm.
And when hail is hit, apply oil of salty water, and heal the wound of those who suffer from frostbite until the patient is healed.
of the fat of the hails Exinach is a grease that adheres to the papers above, and it happens more often in children than in adults, and causes much discomfort to their eyes, and they come down with catarrh at dawn, and cannot endure the light of the sun because tears hasten towards their eyes.
And because of this, they lie on their faces immediately and sleep above it, and their papers are damp under their eyelids that the exinach penetrates through the oil. And when you press the joint with your fingers and feel the exit between them.
And the manner of the work is that the patient places their head on your hand;
Then take a linen cloth and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the size that can contain scorching from each part, then place it on top of it; and press your hands together from both sides, so that the scorching is assembled within the circle;
then make a hole in the middle of the moisture using the spatula with a cut through wide, but not larger than the wound made in opening a vein;
and cut the skin all the way to where you see the scorching; And in various positions, scorching comes out of the hole, in the form of a piece of white fat.
Pull then a small piece of sharp cloth between your hands at the fold, and turn your hand left and right until it is dispersed;
and make sure not to miss in the crack, that you do not come too close to the spurtulum until the oil, that you do not pierce it.
And if the incision does not open at the beginning of the crack, raise the crack slightly so it appears.
then draw as we have said, then wet cloths in oil and vinegar, and place it on the area, and press with bandages.
And for such men who break whey and place it on top to corrupt the moisture that remains.
Then heal him until he is healthy.
If the joint becomes an abscess that is hot, then heal it with poultices soothing until it is healthy.
hairs of paper When paper growths hair artificially (other than nature), and is nurtured, it harms the eyes, and brings on maladies such as watery eyes, and softening of the paper, and cloudiness, all of which causes the destruction of the eyes.
And the care is according to four ways: or by cautery with fire, or by medicinal poultice as described in the previous chapter on cautery, and it is done either by incision and stitching or by cantharides, as I shall say.
You must place the head of the patient in your lap, then turn the paper of the oil in your left hand;
if it is turned over, that is good; if not, push a needle through all the way on top of it; and pull out the thread from the edge of the paper where the hairs grow under these hairs, and draw the thread up to the top of the paper, and turn it over with the razor;
Then they make an incision in the area below the paper, below the hairs, spreading all over with a spatula, from the large tear until the small one.
Then draw the thread, and put a small tent of cotton and linen under the paper, then make a mark on the paper in the shape of an anchor, just as the mirte thorn, and it is necessary that the figure should be according to the amount you intend to raise the paper, which is designated for all.
And if it is necessary to cut a large amount of paper according to the softness of the paper.
Then spread all over with the spatula on both lines that you have marked, and start from the large tear until the small one. And let one of the openings near the natural hairs be by the root, then push the onion into one of the two angles of the wound, then peel off all the skin.
Then bring the two lips together with a stitch of a needle and all the woolen thread, squeeze out the blood, and remove any superfluous threads on the two scissors to anything sticking, if you wish to do so.
And if this is not done, then leave the stitch and the threads for three or four days;
then heal the wound without stitching with dry and binding things because paper revives at the edge of the wound and the assembly of it, but the stitch is spoiled (as they say of the ancients), and this is a work without fear. And another way:
And another way: and you make the paper of a figure that is like the fennel stalk, as we have said, three times perforate according to the form that is here:
then make it even on top of the small powers according to the following form:
and if you are unable to hold the pliers and the thing is not even, take a needle with thread, and push it through the figure: and push the other thread out of the large hole, and the second thread out of the small one, and equally assemble the threads between your fingers:
then straighten your hand equally, and lift all the skin as you have signed, as we have said, then sew together the two lips of the wound with stitching, and heal it until it is healthy:
And if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with wax and similar calming ointments.
Sometimes the hair of the head is converted:
it is necessary that you use what we have said about incising.
but stitching in one or the other is more artificial.
The cure for dogs is as follows: and you convert the head and make it inside as I have said, then make two dogs from craft, and two thin threads of the same length as the head and the width of a feather. and tie up the heads of the two parts where you hold the threads.
then assemble one and the other skillfully above that which covers the head of oil, and hold the two dogs formed by the parts. And leave it so for some days; the skin that is being stretched will die and rot, as long as it festers through it.
If it lasts too long or if it becomes inflamed again, heal it until it is healed.
And when the wound is stitched up and the paper is raised, the hairs will no longer grow.
This is the form of the two canes that you will make according to this figure and according to this length and width:
The work is as follows: take a fine needle and insert the silk thread into it. Then connect the heads together delicately and each other finely, and let the length of the threads be a palm in length.
Then order a fine thread of silk, short, and knot its ends.
Then place the patient's head on your lap.
And let the patient's head be exposed to the sun so that the work may be clear, for this is a subtle and delicate work. Then place the needle at the entire length of the thread next to the hair root, and make it pierce the skin quickly through the natural hair as much as you can pull it over.
Then pull out the hair up to the thread, and insert the thread into the hair, if there is one or two or three or more.
Then pull your hand until the hairs come out through the thread with the natural hair to the skin.
And if the shoulder is dislocated and the hairs do not come out with it, you will draw the dislocation under all the thread that you have ordered, as long as the dislocation comes out of the hole above and you see it through the oil's vision.
then you will draw the dislocation and the thread, close the oil and leave it closed for two or three days, until the hairs grow in their place and a blister grows over them.
and if the hairs are small, let them grow with long hair from nature, and boil it with what you leave, until it is stretched out and then strain it.
of the corruption of oil When this disease called "alecrat" or "porriture" comes in the oil, it happens in two ways:
One natural, and the other unnatural.
And it happens suddenly due to a wound, or by cutting, or by similar things.
And the method of work is that you cut through the joint, separate the sides of it, put threads of linen inside it, and tie it until it heals.
And you must not use in the treatment of it things that dry and restrict. For if you do this, the disease returns worse than the first.
But work with things softening, such as fenugreek; and the arsenic of water or salt, and linseed cooked, and dittany root boiled in any oil, and wrap it in a linen cloth, and treat it with these.
And the treasures of your care are such that you must be cautious not to suture it as it was before;
And this task that we have said is not useful unless adjustment of this disease, so that it does not recur as it was before.
This disease which is truly called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental.
The accidents come from wounds and cuts and cauterizations and similar things;
and the procedure in this task is that you take a needle with double thread, and pierce it through the flesh, from the left eyebrow to the right, so that the threads come out into two eyes of the flesh;
then pull the flesh up to the needle and hold with a broad spatula. And if the shoulder figure returns as it should, it is good;
If not, take the rasp and put it in the gap, and turn the shoulder, and make two holes on the inside of the shoulder.
and the heads of the two holes from the two corners of the incision that you made, should be made at an angle so that when they are assembled, the shoulder figure will be like the figure of a letter which has the name "Greek".
then remove that cartilage, according to the thickness of its sides, from what was previously the shoulder, then join the two separated parts with a thread of linen.
then let it heal according to what we have said about softening medicines and bandages until it is healed.
And if the patient comes from a cut or stitch or cautery, then you must make a deep incision beneath the hairs of the affected area, as described before. Then sew together the two sides of an opening, as I have said.
Then sew together the two sides of an opening, as I have said. and the work should be done according to the shape of the disease, for it is very varied in shape, and wise masters prepare tools with all their power to restore the figure to its natural form.
and the patients themselves, according to what work and instruments are needed in various positions.
When the suturing occurs in such a way that the paper above is sewn with the white of the oil and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then you must insert the tip of a knife beneath the paper and lift it up.
And the extension is with forceps, as long as you grip what is at the end of the subtle spoon, which should not be too sharp nor too pointed, so that the patient does not suffer from the sharp spoon and harm the eye.
And your incision, from where you peel off that assembly, should be light so that the skin returns according to its natural form.
And the entire assembly is healed, and once in acute oil it becomes infected, and from acute sweet milk and pus.
Then put a flax tent between the skin and oil, and place above the oil wool soaked in abundance of egg. And on the third day use pus and things that harden until it is healed.
Know that the nail has two kinds: it is nerve-like and resembles hard soap, and another which is not nerve-like but resembles white moisture that has frozen, which when touched with iron and cooked in the tongs cannot be hammered.
and both grow towards the large ulcer, and gradually increase until it covers the entire eye and all light and oil movement.
And the method of incision is that the patient places his head on a clean surface, then opens the eyes. and lift the paper with your hand, then hold the nail in the tongs of small jaws, and place it above. Then take a needle, and put horse hair or ox hair, or strong thread on it. and bend the tip of the needle slightly and push it into the nail, and pierce through with the whole needle, tie the nail with thread and stretch it above, and shave all the skin surrounding the nail, from the root to the nail bed, down to the cuticle and silk, then grind the rest at the root of the armpit with a fine spatula and small forceps, leaving the natural flesh or skin, so that through the incision no sweat comes out normally.
and sometimes the nail grows into the curve only, and with thread, as we have said. Then scrape off all the soft putty-like substance that is in this shape: [the original shape was not given, so the translation assumes that the context makes it clear what is meant by "this shape"]
And ensure that the soft putty-like substance does not touch the soft flesh and break it, and that the skin is not pierced.
And after the incision pour oil a little bit of boiled egg white is poured, and let the lidarge solution remain until the next day. Then treat that which is necessary until it heals.
And if the nail is not nerve-filled and you cannot push the needle, and the unguent cannot enter, this type of nail is often treated with medicine.
And if they grow as I have mentioned in the section on this topic, and you see it covered, then open the oil from the patient, and take a small amount of soft putty-like substance according to this shape. And scrape the nail above gently, and if you see that it does not soften at all and the reason is pursued, distill from your mouth into the collyrium oil made of litargyre and red collyrium powder and apply the oil until the next day.
If nothing contradicts in the oil, as in an abscess, then milk it, and first treat the abscess with heat until it is healthy, then continue the work as before, until it is healed.
Then proceed with the other work according to this same method, until it is completely dislodged.
And if the appearance of the skin around the nail harms the oil greatly, suspend it at the onion, and cut a small part of it and not too much, so that no tears come.
Then distill into the red collyrium oil made of litargyre.
In some men, a red spot sometimes arises, cover the prunelle (anterior chamber of the eye) and hold it with paper and turn it towards the duct, and it looks like a boxwood rose.
And the operation is that the patient places his head on your lap, then he works the eyes, and therefore all that skin around the area should be shaved suitable for this purpose, and hold it with strength.
Then take the first piece (of skin) and go all the way shaving to the end, and be careful not to cut the eye during the operation.
and make the incision with a spathamel (a type of blade) as we have said in the incision of the nail and the small forces of which one separates the skin, as the form after this chapter demonstrates.
and when the incision is completed and all the skin is removed, apply the oil of oil (liniment) ground or you distill red collyrium and similar corrosive medicines, and put it on top of cotton with egg white, so that it is secure from infection.
And if there remains something and the wound is deep, and you doubt about the abscess being hot, then leave the oil and treat the abscess with cooling substances.
Then return to your work when it is healed, and thus do as charms are anointed with oil in this manner.
But it is necessary that you make the treatment of each oil weak through natural ways. and by accidental means, in work with iron.
And do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that this member is soft for this work.
Red veins that are covered by oil become visible and they make their work (the task/affliction) evident and weaken the oil every day.
Therefore it is necessary to first check if the oil, in which the sebaceous gland is located, is open and has no other disease except the sebaceous gland. Then, hold the neck in this manner:
instruct the patient to place his head in your hand, then support the chin all around according to your wisdom, and let the hands be subtle and double in this way:
And may there be two openings in one body according to this form:
then the hands support the chin gently and carefully, squeezing the blood slowly after that, until you see the veins moving away from the oil.
and be careful not to pierce the oil with the tips of the spatulas, and perform this work at noon before the sun, and be very eager in your work so that you do not injure anything except the veins.
and when you have done this, if it condenses green and red oil to cure what remains infected.
And if you cannot catch it in that hour, apply a soothing ointment over the oil of calming things on the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pain is alleviated and assured that the abscess has healed, then continue as before until it is healed;
And this is the form of the cautery:
The instrument is called "arissati" (orificator):
When you treat it by cautery and burning medicine as I have said before, and it is not healed, there is a tool in it where you make an incision over the abscess, where it should die, and drain all the moisture that is there until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed, you will see the corruption and blackness; if the knife is ready with all the instruments as described here;
and it is called "sharp head", and it should be made with iron as the handle of the knife, pointed like a chisel in the shape as presented here:
And put it on the rotten bone, then turn it between your hands and press your hand a little so that you feel that the corruption is pierced.
and do this once, then restore the joint with medicinal extracts.
if the joints are swollen and pus forms, and the body of the bone is also swollen, and remains thus for 40 days without moving or becoming abscessed, and no serious accident occurs, it is known to be healthy.
If there is no other remedy, the only device for returning the fistula to its place is according to this form: and it is that you open the bone for the second time with iron, and with hot medicines, and when it is opened, take the iron fork according to this form, and let the iron prongs be at three angles, and the shaft be narrowed up to the head as you can see here:
then place it on the bone by the rim, and move your hand away from the oil hole, then turn the iron fork completely until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it through the vein if he holds his hand on his neck:
and then restore the joint with dry medicines as I have taught you, and when the flesh grows hard and stiffens the joint, the matter goes to the neck: It is a lighter thing for the patient.
When all the eyes are open wide in every way, and it does not cause disturbance to the ship or any reduction, then you must bind the patient.
Then heal the healthy parts, then apply ointments or oil with iron for help, then put oil made of asafoetida and aloe and incense and saracolle on it, then strain the oil, and smear the oil over bandages and cloths.
and the manner of cloths is that you take soft cloths, fold each one in four, and then place one on top of the other according to the quantity that the eyes need.
Then strain it from above with a hard bandage and begin to compress wounds without cutting with iron.
Then release the wound oil and allow it to be strained for a day and night, and if it softens, you must strain it strongly.
Then remove the bandage after the day and night, and if you see the oil healing, that is good.
If not; Then begin the poultice and cloths and bandage and dressings until it is healed.
The breaking of a rotten cloth When ruptures occur in the inflamed cloth, open it up and bring forth paper as if with the grain of resin, and it is easily visible.
Then if you see it covered, the treatments are such that you insert an awl into the root of the affected area from below up to above, then insert another awl or double thread from the side of the wound. And make it pierce through, leave the first needle according to its position;
then take the thread of double yarn and tie a part of the eye around it, tighten it well, then remove the needle and put moistened flaxseed oil on top of it;
and leave it until the thread heals with the eye, then heal the oil with comforting things until the wound is healed;
and sometimes the wound is bound by the eye on each side of a circle of cloth until it is healed.
And if the eyes appear large, pierce it with a fine spatula that comes from full oil, correct the moisture abscess and drain the eyes, and put it in immediately.
Then straighten it until it is sound.
This disease called "alcunnati" is not far from the eye which is assembled in oil, resembling an ulcer draining, but it is not an ulcer.
and the manner of its appearance is that you make the patient sit on a prepared seat upright, then take hold of his head with both hands from behind, and move him so that you see the bone come up to your eyes. then it should be pressed in, without draining and open the light, and the patient should see things as he is accustomed.
if it does not drain below, know that it is an ulcer, and the draining of the bone is not as we have said.
Make the patient sit between your hands, then take the thin spatula and press it against the horny layer of the eyelid at the conjunction with the cornea and the eyeball, until it bulges.
And when it has protruded, let it be distilled in sharp hot oil mixed with honey or aged oil and fenugreek, or hot oil and honey, then let it be cured with another remedy until it is healed.
waters of oil (literally: "of the oil") We have similarities of the eyes in their division, and that which must be pierced; if it works according to health.
You must make the patient sit between your hands crossed, away from light because of the sun, and let him hold the oil and squeeze it very tightly;
Then put the paper of oil on your left hand if the eyes are on the left, or on your right hand if they are on the right.
Then take in your right hand, if the eyes are on the left, the instrument called 'almagda', or in your left hand, if they are on the right.
Then put the point of the instrument through the crown by the thickness of a thumb in that hollow part of oil to the smaller tear duct, then push the instrument called 'almagda' firmly, and hold your hand until it pierces through the hollow of oil, and feel that almagda enters into the empty space.
And it is necessary that the measure of the way almagda should be at the end of the measurement of the space which is from the pupil up to the end of the nose. And it is the crown of the ear.
If you look at the bone in this paper by the brightness of the perforated parchment, then place the instrument up to it or the sharp point, and press down along another way after that.
The patient should now press down on it (the shoulder), so he sees the instrument before him in its oil.
After a little rest, and if the sharp point rises along the second way, apply the force with the instrument, and when it is pushed in and it does not rise anymore, gently draw it out by rotating your hand slowly.
Then replace the sharp point a little with beeswax, and cut off that oil inside. Then put on it (the shoulder) a cloth or wool soaked in rose oil and egg oil, and bind it with the healthy oil.
We, and those of our time, place on top a mixture made with plenty of eggs.
If the oil cannot enter due to its hardness, as there are some men who have too hard eyes, then you must take the instrument called "alberit", which is shaped like this:
Therefore, pierce only the conjunction and do not go too deep, but make it subtle, then push it in as we have said.
And in the completion of the work, the patient, the sleeper, lies down facing his back in a dark place;
And he should be kept from all movement, and take light food, and not move his head to the right or left, and tie him according to his position for three days;
Then untie him in the same dark house, test his sight, and make him see some things, and then tie him again for seven days;
And it is not necessary that you do this during the time of treatment or after incision now, but it is necessary that you lighten it, because the pain increases quickly.
If an abscess comes up, you should untie the oil before the seventh day, and direct it to that which soothes the abscess;
And when it has been calmed [the dislocated joint], separate the eyelids and place on its face an ointment to cover for any duration of time, and remain there in that dark room evermore.
And then gradually leave the house, one step at a time, and return to his quarters.
And understand that no disciple should intervene in this case. And one came to us who was from the Yrach [Iran], who told us that in their country they practice the amalgam process, by which the [mercury] juice is drawn, but I have never seen anyone do it in our land, nor have I read about it in the books of the ancients; And perhaps it is a new thing.
And these are the appearances of the forms of almadga, because those who do not know them see them.
and are properly speaking: And the head of oxen of this same subtlety shall have four corners pointing.
Sometimes there are born or are born worms that are dissimilar, from which some seem like scorpions with many feet.
and if there are any like this or if the worm is swollen with such color, and if the worm is soft of bone color. Therefore, for those worms that are soft and not swollen, you must make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun.
Therefore, for those worms that are soft and not swollen, you must make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun. and open its nostrils, and pour vinegar on these worms, and pull them out forcefully. Therefore hold what you can sustain on the pointed spur of a needle-like instrument from one side, as long as you know that the body is completely ossified.
And if there remains any substance that cannot be held, open it all to the finest and lightest instruments carefully, so that nothing remains. and if no abscess is formed or pus has collected, use the help as necessary.
and if it is malicious abscesses, hasten and burn them with the cautery until the pus is drained and all the flesh is charred and burned, then pour in oil or alcohol and vinegar. If the urine works, and moisture reaches the palace (brain), know that it is healthy;
And if moisture does not pierce as it should, know that there is new flesh in the bone above, which prevents the instrument from cutting.
Then you must insert a small piece of flax thread, and it should be soaked in the hands, with space between each stitch no less. and place the patient's head in the thread through his nose as far as possible, and pull it out smelling until it comes from the nose.
and many times children in schools do this, and it is easy for anyone who wants to do it.
Then hold the head that comes through the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes from the mouth with the other hand; know which is which among us who are the thread.
Make it so that you know that the flesh has been corrupted, then draw out the cord, squeeze the blood, and moisten the cord in Egyptian ointment, and put it back in place as before.
keep it for three days or more, until the ointment corrodes everything that remains of flesh;
and then put a piece of flax in its place for some days until it is healed, and if there is need for drying medicines, use them.
and this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, where oil and medicines are distilled.
And it should be made of silver or copper, resembling an open lantern, similar to a piece of flax, and lead it thus.
And if you see, make a narrow channel, let the instrument be full for cleansing the head.
and hold the receptacle at the head when heating the oil or any liquid.
On the flesh over the neck
Often in the head, a disease named "telul" arises, which grows and becomes large over time, until it can be seen with the eye.
And because of this, you must cut it at the beginning and completely remove it, then place the fire cautery or burning medicine on it.
And if you delay cutting it until it becomes large, beware if it is hard, of such a color, and poor sensation.
Do not touch it with iron because it is an abscess hardened, for when you cut it once, much harm comes to the patient.
If the abscess is touched with softness, not of a fire color, and you see that it can be completely covered, empty the patient and soothe him with fear, and treat the area with drying and constricting things.
Know that when swelling comes in one of these cartilage joints, it is of little use for most men.
Therefore, it should be noted that if this happens, observe whether the wound is fresh with all its blood; then press the two lips together in a stitch, and treat it until it heals.
If the lips are already separated from both sides, you must excise all the affected parts until they heal, then press the two lips together in a stitch, bind it and apply powder of dragon's blood, and incense crushed. And put on top of the powder a piece of plaster of strong or another adhesive plaster, and leave it until it hardens by itself, then cure it with ointment until it is healed.
The method of stitching is that you gather the solution: or with needles, as we have said in the belly stitching; or with thread, as I have told you.
of abscesses of the lips
In men there often occurs an abscess hard within the lips, resembling grains of various sizes, both small and large.
Then you must turn the lips, cut above each one, take them with forceps and crush them in each part;
Then apply the mortar of vitriol after the incision, while the wound is still bleeding.
And then soothe the wound with dry remedies until it heals.
Often, a bladder-like growth appears on the gums, which the ancients called "albulus".
You must hold it with forceps and cut off its root, leaving the bone or blood vessels exposed.
Then apply powdered vitriol or other constricting and drying agents to the wound.
If the growth returns after the incision, which often happens, you should cut it a second time and cauterize it. if it does not return after cauterization.
Sometimes, pieces are assembled on the jaw bones, within the mouth between the gums, which are ugly and harsh. And sometimes teeth turn black, yellow, and decay as corruption comes to the gums, and the teeth rot.
You must make the patient sit between your hands and hold his head in your lap, and pull out or scrape the teeth where they appear until there is nothing left. And do the same with blackness and greenness, yellowness and other stains, until they are cleaned.
If you remove those that are at the root, it is good. If not, start again on the second or third day and continue until everything has been pulled out.
Know that teeth require different shapes of instruments for pulling out, according to what the work shows, because the puller who removes teeth has different shapes than those who remove between the teeth. And these forms and others are ready for you.
It is necessary when curing the tooth of its pain that you delay drawing it out as much as you can, for this must not be done at all. because it is a very high substance up to which there is no excuse for cutting.
Therefore, when the patient is forced to draw teeth, you must be certain about the pulling tooth. Many times the patient feels pain and believes it is a holy tooth, and draws the good tooth. nevertheless, the pain does not go away even then, until the bad one is removed, for we have seen it happen with holy people.
and when you are certain that the tooth is rotten, it is necessary that you scrape around the tooth in all places. Spathulum strongly to protect the gums from all sides;
Then move it at your elbows or subtle tweezers at the first poke and poke, until they are well dislocated, then firmly hold the tweezers. And have the patient's head between your knees, and hold it steady so that it does not move.
After straightening the tooth correctly to break it, if it does not come out, take any of these instruments and gently push it in from each side, and move it as you have done before.
If the teeth are pierced and eaten, you must fill it with cloths where the wounds are. And if you hold it gently with tweezers so that it does not break while being pulled out.
You must cautiously work around the gum to loosen the tooth.
And be careful not to break it, and leave a part behind, and the pain for the patient will return from the root even greater.
And beware that you do not act like the ignorant men who, through their haste and recklessness, break the cart [shoulder] sometimes, and do not bring what we have mentioned.
But sometimes, due to the root cause of this great disease, it comes through the urine or because the cartilage breaks, as we have often seen;
and when the tooth is pulled out, wash the place with wine or vinegar and salt;
and if bleeding continues from the wound, which often happens, use the place with ground vitriol;
and if that does not work, cauterize it.
The shapes of instruments that initially quieten the tooth should have long points and thick handles, so that they do not double back as you pull out the tooth;
these are their shapes: And be large enough that they do not bend when drawing the tooth and made of good iron, and be pointed to hold the tooth in place.
of the roots of the teeth When the root remains after pulling out the tooth, it is necessary to put cotton moistened in butter for a day or two on the place until the place is softened, then insert the pliers called "algefri", which give the appearance of a beak;
And within it (should) be made similarly as a chisel, this is its shape:
And if the roots do not wish to come out with all these tongs, you must peel back the skin entirely around the root, and place the instrument called "althali," which is known as a palindrome, in its place.
And it should be long and thick so that it does not break easily, and if the root jumps through it, that's good;
If that is not the case, help yourself with all tools, from which these shapes will follow afterwards:
And if one uses the instrument with two prongs, its form is as follows: And other instruments that are in front of the teeth, for this tool appears to be large pincers. Here is its shape:
Let this tool be long so that it cannot break, and know that many dense tools are required; and also other tools, which are not counted.
and the wise masters will find their own tool by themselves, according to what their work and the illness indicates, because there are some diseases where ancient teachings did not mention any tool due to diversity among them; and if it breaks the cart or other bones, where it could be, he should search for the tools that are needed, which I have told you, and help himself with gestures, from which this shape follows:
And let them be large and firm to hold the bone, so it does not slip away, but rather can be held and removed.
And then restore the joint with the appropriate medicine, and if there is putrefaction in the bone, and it is small, remove everything.
When the teeth appear not according to natural shape and the form is ugly, especially in girls, it is necessary that you know if the teeth are misplaced after the tooth has come out, and it is not in the correct position, and they cannot be straightened or filed.
Then remove the tooth. If it is in front of the tooth, take this tool whose shape is like a small beak, and made of sharp steel at the end.
And the handle of the forceps should be used gently for many days due to the hardness of the tooth and because you do not move the others, and if it is possible, file it down with a small file in the shape as shown here:
And it is similar to the limb from which they make needles;
and in the limb, let the tooth grow slowly day by day gently, so that it does not move until it falls out;
then the plane at the end with any grinder, and if the tooth is too sharp and it bites the tongue, you must file down the sharpness until it is even, so that it does not bite the tongue or corrupt the speech;
When the tooth falls out in front due to percussion or falling, and the patient cannot chew food without it falling out, and you have treated them with constricting medicines, that is of no use;
therefore they should be held together with a gold wire, for the silver threads become green and rot, but gold does not change.
And let the size of the thread be neither too thick nor too thin, according to the space between the teeth.
And if you wish to align the teeth, take the thread and double it between two sound teeth, then place the cheeks between the front teeth, if there is one or more of them, as far as you see soundly up to the tooth on the other side. then resume the covering until the part where you began, and hold your hand gently and carefully, so it does not move.
and tie the thread to the root of the tooth so it cannot escape.
Then hold the cheeks with the thread using tweezers and assemble them, and insert them between the sound tooth and place it so it does not pierce the tongue.
And then leave it as tight as it can stay for a while, and if it dislocates, or the tendons run, hold it with another thread.
If it lasts and serves thus for all its time, and this is the form of the teeth and the alignment of the two healthy teeth and the two roots, as you can see.
And when a tooth falls out, put it back in its place freshly, as we have said.
And do not interfere with it if one is not wise and patient; sometimes the form of a tooth made from ox bone is done and put in the place where it lacks, and it is held as we have said, and it lasts and serves for a long time.
Sometimes this link comes from beneath the tongue or naturally. by accident of a welded wound.
and the procedure is such that you open the patient's mouth, hold their head still, and pull the tongue.
then catch the nervous link firmly with a wide instrument, as long as the tongue is dislocated from its position, and if it is hard or notched, which is a deep wound, press the forceps and tightly grasp the linked part.
and make sure the cut is not too deep, as there is an artery beneath it.
and when you have finished, lift the red and warm or cold piece upwards, then put a tent of linen under the tongue.
And the worms the patient every night, so that the limbs cannot heal.
If there is a discharge of blood, put on the wound Vitriol powder. And if the wound opens up, cauterize it with the cautery known as lentiginout, which is good for this purpose. Then heal it with another remedy until it is healed,
And if you see a spot of pale, black or hard color, which the patient does not feel, do not touch it because it is a cancer.
And if it is swelling with pus and there is moisture, throw in onion juice, and with a thin spatula, loosen it from both sides. And if the bone protrudes in your work, place boiled vitriol on it until it is burned, then return to your work when you have drawn all fire.
Then raise the limb and cover with linen and let it heal with other treatments until it is healed.
Abscesses of the throat Sometimes boils come inside the throat which are called "godath," and they are properly called almonds; when you treat them as we said in the division, and they are not healed, take care.
If it is a hard abscess of small size and dark color, do not touch it with iron.
And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron, also for the flow of blood. But let it (the dislocated joint) remain until it dies, and then you will separate it, or it will break by itself;
And if it (the abscess) is of white color again and the root is subtle, prepare the instrument to cover (it), but first check whether the abscess pus has subsided and been pacified.
Then make the patient sit in the sun and his hands should be in your clean ones, open his mouth and take him by the jaw with the tongs between his hands, press his tongue under the entire instrument, as shown here.
and made of silver or fine brass like a knife:
Do you press the tongue with the entire instrument and see the abscess? If so, take the awl and push it into the anus and pull it out above as much as possible;
And pull no thing with the thread, then tie it on the instrument, as shown in this form, which seems like a loop. And if the head is curved and twisted to one side or another, and they are very sharp, and it is made of iron or steel.
And if you do not have this instrument present, hold it with pliers of this shape: And on one side it shall be called "pull", and on the other side "push".
And when you have bound one of the nuts (knuckle bones), bind the other in the same manner, and after making the incision, gargle the patient with strong hot, sharp, and warm water, and if bleeding occurs, continue gargling the patient with strong hot water, or cooked apple cores or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the wound is stopped. Then let the treatment continue until it heals.
And sometimes other abscesses are born in the throat besides the two tonsils, so treat them accordingly.
And I treat a woman with an abscess that was born within the throat, to be specific, the small abscess.
And I had tightly closed the throat so that the woman could not exhale due to the blocked passage, and she could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she had stayed like that for a day or two.
And the abscess had risen so much that it had burst through both openings of the nose.
I therefore hastened and pierced one of the tonsils, then pulled it out forcefully, taking out a large piece of pus.
Then, you should reset the other side of the dislocated neck, and open the mouth and press the tongue.
Then, you should cauterize this abscess, cut a piece of it out, and let only a little blood come out. And thus the conduit from the woman's throat was cut open, and she began to drink cold water and then wine, and continued to cut away at this abscess for a long time.
The abscess grew again and filled the place where I had made the incision, becoming very large.
Then I trapped it and burned it inside her throat. It grew slowly with pain.
And I separate these parts, let God heal them after me.
of the eye
When the vein retracts to the anus and is swollen and long, it is called "perpendicular".
And if it is beneath large and round, it is called "vein".
When it is treated as we said in the previous section and the treatment does not help, and you see that the deep abscesses are calmed, and it is subtle, then you must lance it.
And the round one which is not long is called "cyst". If it is bloody or of yellowish color or black, then you must make an incision on it. For there is great danger for the patient.
Therefore, when you see it, according to the manner I have said about its color and length, make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press the tongue with the instrument we described earlier. Then insert the needle into the eye and pull it through, and cut it at the level of the two anvils that I have mentioned in the incision of the two almonds.
And you must not cover anything beyond the natural boundary.
for if you cover more than that, it harms both the voice and speech;
After the incision, use what was said in the incision of the two almonds, and heal it until it is healed.
And if the patient fears to be covered, then you should use an instrument for the cauterization of the senses to alleviate fear.
And the method of cautery is sharp fire. The patient must put his head in your hand, and then press the tongue against the instrument we have said in the chapter of the fire cautery, and bind it with hot boiling pitch, so that it is not too thick or too clear. And using the lever of this tool, as follows:
Place one end of the lever on the hair or the medicine and set the tool on top of all the medicine in the eye.
And the patient should lie on his side, so that the saliva and mucus flow from his mouth into the medicine, but not to the throat or the nose.
Then hold the entire medicine with your hand and press it on the eye for half an hour until you see it become swollen and the biting of the medicine is relieved.
And if you see, take cotton and wrap it around some instrument, wet the cotton in the medicine, and press the instrument on top of the cotton in the canal above, until the cotton adheres to the eye.
And often do this as long as the cautery is perfect, then let it dry, and lie afterwards for 4 or 5 days.
If you need to repeat the cautery of this medicine, do it again, and after the cautery let the blood flow out around the eye with a swab made of cotton in butter, and clean what is around the medicine.
And it should be anointed with cold water, and cured with gargles until it heals.
This cure is better than incision, not the cautery.
If it is cured by fumigation in this manner, take camomile, yarrow, rue, and chamomile, and assembled them all or some of them in one pot, add ashes, and make it boil.
And let the head be well glued with strong earth, and within it have a hair-shaped instrument according to this manner: And let it be of silver or iron, and push one of the heads into the patient's mouth until the steam rises to the eye through the canal, until the eye is putrefied:
After the beginning often occurs, as long as the eye dries up, and ensure that you do not perform this at the onset of the abscess's eruption, for many things may occur. and do not perform it before the decline of the hot abscess.
And if this is not present, take a cane and put inside the head of an eggshell, so that the mouth of the patient does not become too hot. for the eggshell does not let the vapor burden the mouth, and it is good care along with health.
Many times it happens in the throat that a bone or fish spine, or any other thing;
therefore you must draw out what you can see, and press the tongue against the sun with all instruments, so that you may see movement of the thing;
And if it does not open by itself and is replaced in the throat, you must make the patient vomit as soon as the food is cooked in the stomach; possibly if the matter arises through vomiting;
or if the patient swallows a piece of sponge, a piece of naval, a radish root, or a dry crust of bread; and tie thread to the sponge, then swallow it; and when it reaches the place, it will be drawn out, and then you will pull it out;
and if it does not come out as we have said, take the instrument of yew wood in this shape:
And let the instrument be arched at the top so that it can enter the throat more easily, and let the handle be raised; And beware not to touch the epiglottis, let it remain intact, nor push any bone inside.
It is beneficial for the patient to move the instrument, because it must be moved or the thing will be damaged. if you push it downward, or pull it out fully so that the instrument is equal on both sides, until it comes out.
from the throat vein
Sometimes the juice is used as a medicine, as I said in the division, through the use of medicines. And when it does not help at all, then look in the throat of the patient towards the sun, then press the tongue against the instrument I told you about.
And if you see the blood, draw it out very slowly with a small lancet, or fine tweezers suitable for this purpose.
And if that does not work, take a thick cane and push it into the patient's throat, then push or pull on the end of the cane with hot iron and do this frequently. And let the patient be treated with water throughout the day.
Then take a full glass of cold water, open the mouth, and pour it in without swallowing, and move it around with your hand frequently. And as soon as the wound feels cold, it collapses (or falls).
And if it does not collapse as we have said, you should suffocate the patient with certain means, using the instrument that I mentioned in the fumigation of the eye.
Do this often, for it will heal quickly.
And the method of fumigation is that you take the pot in which there are hot coals, and it should be covered with a cloth pierced in the middle, and in that place put the head of the instrument.
Then throw your fumigation, and the patient places the head of the cane in his mouth, and closes the mouth so that the smoke does not come out at all, but comes to the nostrils.
And the nasal cavity should now be filled, and if it does not drip, the fumigation should be repeated many times.
The patient should suffer thirst, eat salty and sour things, and not drink water.
And then it will be necessary for the dripping to cease by this means.
And the shape of the instrument with which the nasal cavity is treated is as follows: when it can be seen, resembling curved tweezers to enter the throat. And let it resemble a beak of a saw, and it shall have abrasiveness of lime, so that what it takes, it cannot release.
Many forms of abscesses are similar to those recalled from this and the other book that follows, and they vary in piercing and cutting.
And it is in two ways, one of which resembles the same, and from what holds moisture.
And the second way is for the cavities that are in the body.
For abscesses in the head are different from those in the cavities, and abscesses in hollow bones are different from those that come at joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
And if abscesses are not to be pierced, until the bubble is ripe according to its completion;
And if of such kind that they must be pierced when they are ripe and do not die according to their completion, like abscesses near joints.
When an abscess comes near to a joint, and it is left until it bursts around it, in case the ligament and the nerve of the joint are corrupted, this is the cause of contraction in that limb.
For when an abscess is cut open in the main member (body part), and you delay the perforation until it is dead, it will harm the main member.
If the bottom (base) is cut open, then one should pierce it while it is still alive.
and it is not good that you pierce an abscess without digestion being completed, except for one that is at the bottom (base), which should not perish entirely but should be opened up, lengthened inside, and a fistula should come forth. and cannot heal in a long time.
And it is necessary that you know the time of perforation of the abscess that is dead according to its completion, and this is when the pain is relieved, the disappearance of the fever, the decrease in pain and redness, the subsiding and reduction of swelling and hardness of the abscess head, and the other signs.
And you must make it sit (the patient) where the perforation is or more closely to the abscess, and where it has opened up (the wound).
And the perforation should be along the length of the body, and if the abscess is at the hand or foot, or in joints and nerves and veins, and in equal places where there is no swelling. In those that break, according to the same member. (direct translation)
And when an abscess is in the charnel (or putrid) place, it is beneficial to let the perforation remain until confirmation through complete digestion, as we have said.
For if you pierce ahead of this (the abscess), it should be aligned with the body along the path of the pus, and filled with much filth. And by chance, harden the lips and plunge deeply into it (the abscess).
And if any abscess that is pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the limb requires.
You must bring small abscesses, small pustules (or boils). And in large abscesses, large wounds, and many splits according to the likeness of the size of the abscess.
and if such abscesses require incision and covering. when it becomes as a rotten cloth, and is spoiled, you must treat it as one treats babies:
and if such have been cut into three angles or are treated like the thorny plantain, such as swollen abscesses from the armpit;
and if such have been cut in round shape, or other shapes and seem to be covered.
Those without a head, like a superficial abscess, must be pierced completely;
And when the abscess is large and it has collected much pus, and you pierce it, do not draw out all the pus in that hour, but draw out a part of it; Then stop the abscess until the next day, then draw out nothing wrongly; do this several times in large amounts, until all the pus comes out;
always for a person of weak vitality, or a woman, or small children, or old men in decline. The pus may sometimes spasm with the discharge of it, which may happen that the patient dies, and you need not worry.
Therefore, beware of this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, clean the wound, and look if the wound from the abscess is small; And if it is a deep wound, bring in linen or old cotton bandages. And if it is a large abscess with much corruption, then you must pack in each one a bandage so that they come against each other.
And if you have cut into the abscess a part of the skin and shaved it around, then you must fill it with old cotton or flax reeds without moisture, and tie it until the third day.
Then open (it) and treat the wound with ointment until it heals.
And if bleeding occurs during your work, bring cold water and apply it to the cloth, wetting it repeatedly.
If the bleeding persists, bring government and care, and the powders that I have mentioned in this book, and if it is winter, and the limbs or abscess are very nervous, then you must put hot wet bandages and linens soaked in wine and oil on top.
And if it is a dislocation and the joint is fleshy, then you must put it on linen soaked in cold water and oil, or vinegar and cold oil, until the third day, as we have said.
Then drain the abscess, clean it, and treat it, as necessary, until it is healed.
And one should know universally about treatments of abscesses:
Or I have told you how to go before the treatment of abscesses, and here is the chapter.
For small abscesses coming from the head, there are ways that are in bandages, similar to the bag of a linen sack, and there are many similarities.
There are some that are fat and others that have moisture like boils.
And there are those that are hard and stony at the base, and there is no doubt if the artery does not contradict it.
And the work of cutting is that you explore with all instruments called "intermissor", from which the form comes afterwards, what it contains.
For if it contains moisture, they make a long incision.
And when moisture is emptied, scrape without leaving any skin that contains the moisture, for it will return again if left something;
then immerse cotton in Egyptian balm if available. if not, use water and salt, and apply to the wound, leaving until the next day. and cure those who remain alive.
Then repeat the cotton, as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know for sure that it does not remain alive.
then heal the wound with appropriate ointment until it is healed.
If the abscess remains fatty, press according to this form, long. And you throw out your intestines, and strip all parts, and put all your care into drawing force from outside where it lies;
If the arteries make you constricted, do as I have told you afterward.
And likewise treat the abscess if it is hard, and of cutting and caring for it as I have told you.
And cut above the hard abscess and moist it, it will be easier because there is little blood. And if any of these abscesses or boils has no moisture, and these are the abscesses that I treated or boil of an old woman;
And found the abscess like a hard stone, harsh and white, and could not burst. If they had struck it with anything, they would have made the same kind of wound as from a stone.
In other abscesses or boils coming from the head or ears roots, they should be opened every day depending on location, to stimulate drainage.
And heal as required.
Often this abscess appears at the neck, beneath the chin, in armpits, and sometimes it appears elsewhere on the body, they are swollen and connected with each other.
Each scrofula is properly within its side, just like the knot and the abscess of the head, as we have said. And the appearances of these scrofulas are many.
And the appearances of these scrofulas are many. Some contain moisture, and there are some malicious ones that do not want to obey health.
In the one that you see with good position on the body, and resembling the color of the body, silent from all parts and not hard at the neck or the artery or the vein, and not swollen.
If you see it in this condition, you should cut through the top and peel off each part, and spread the two lips of the incision, if necessary, just as we have said about abscesses of the head.
And pull slowly and surely, make sure you don't cover the nerve or the vein, and let it not be the spatula-shaped instrument nor a scalpel that escapes the hand, and look not too far ahead, so as to not cover what should not be covered.
And if you cover the vein or artery and it doesn't heal over, place vitriol powder or some stopping powders into the wound, and close the wound. And let it be until the abscess is calmed down, and the wound softened, and let it start to rot.
And when the blood has stopped, return to your work until you complete it.
Then, examine if there are any small scrofulas present on your indication, and wash them.
And if the root of the scrofula opens widely, do not cut that scrofula at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread and let it hang through it, without harm.
Then apply the wound with old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, then heal it.
If you excise the entire scrofula, it is necessary that you bring together the two lips of the wound and sew them now, for there will be no excess remaining due to the size of the scrofula. It is necessary that you understand to cover the root and pull out the pus, and sew it as we have said.
It is necessary that you understand to cover the root and pull out the pus, and sew it as we have said. Those scrofulas that are superfluous, pierce them where they have closed shut.
and pierce them in the same way as the one mentioned above, depending on it, then apply tents with ointment and similar things so that what remains of the corruption is corrupted. And when the wound is well cleaned, anoint it with soothing ointment until it heals.
The ancients discussed the shape of the throat; But I never saw anyone in our land who did it, and this is the writing of their speech.
To those with swallowing difficulty (squinance), it is necessary that the choke (epiglottis) be removed. And this should not be attempted by anyone, since all the veins and the mouth of the patient are near those who have an abscess in the mouth or throat or both.
When the sickness is in the channel of the passageway, it is necessary to cover the epiglotte to avoid the danger that comes from strangulation.
Therefore, when we want to cut the epiglottis, it is necessary that we cut it below three circles or four, a small transverse slit between two circles or by the amount of the incision according to the size of the hyoid bone (syfac), not in the cartilage;
And if the loins are contracted at the section of the epiglottis where there is no cartilage, the veins are long in that area.
And if the master is afraid, then it must extend the skin of the throat in full length, then cut the vein until it reaches the trachea. and remove the blood vessels if you see anything, then tie off the vein as we have said.
and it is demonstrated by the section of the trachea that gushes out through the broken place, and by the lack of voice.
Leave the wound open for a while.
And when the hour has passed where there is doubt about strangulation, gather the two lips of the wound around the vein, and sew everything closed except for the cartilage.
Then administer medicines that cause pus formation, while it is healthy.
Al-Zahrawi says not to do this until the throat is completely stopped up, and the patient is judged dead, and the wings are cut off. Then perform a tracheotomy because the patient cannot swallow, and they breathe through the wound, and thus are kept from death;
and for this reason the ancients would leave the wound open until the evil of the disease has passed, which it will pass within 3 or 4 days. Then they would command to sew up the wound and heal it, until it is healed;
And I will tell you what I have seen. I saw a maiden take a knife and stick it in her throat, cutting part of the windpipe;
And I was called to heal her, but found her already dead.
I found the wound and saw that blood was coming out of it, and I knew that it had neither opened nor conducted air except through the throat, and the veins were flowing through the wound.
I hurried up, stitched the wound, and cured it until it healed.
And it happened to the lady that her voice was hoarse, but she returned to her normal condition afterward.
For this reason, I say that in the case of the epiglottis one should not be afraid.
This abscess is called "throat hernia," and it is a large one with a yellowish color, and it is often in women.
and there are two types of it: Nature and accidents;
and accidental has no trickery.
And the accidents are according to two ways, one is like a fatty tissue and the other way is like an abscess that comes from us through an artery. and there is fear, and it should not be done forcefully except in the small one, and prove and examine carefully at every incision. if you find it as fatty tissue, and it does not have any way out, hit it like one strikes the nose, and draw it out completely, if there is any. and examine carefully in every direction, and cure as necessary, until it is perfectly healed.
Many ways there are of us, which I will tell all their likenesses;
and it is necessary that I tell the difference between knot and dislocation.
I say that dislocation is heat and fever lasting, until the boil is passed, and the pustule is completed. Then the fever and heat subside.
With the knot there is no heat, nor fever, nor pain, and it contains pus, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the body, and begins as an abscess and becomes large.
And they are like this, either fat or moist, and very much of their color are as I said in the classification.
It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of the newt, that you test and examine first everything in the instrument called "entromissoire", according to what its shape comes or the chapter which follows.
And the method of incision for abscesses is to take or more moist place that you find within the abscess, and turn your fingers little by little, until you feel the instrument has pierced through, then according to the size of the abscess.
Then extract the contents, and be careful that it does not spurt out.
If moisture runs out, let it coagulate, as I have said for other abscesses.
If after extracting the contents no moisture comes out and it appears to be fat, then make a cross-shaped incision and take hold of it with tweezers, carefully peel it off gently from both sides and draw out the sac containing it.
And if you cannot draw it out healthy, draw it out piece by piece so that there remains nothing.
For if there remains something, it returns many times;
And if a little remains and does not distress you, use the wound with some corrosive powder, hold the wound tight, place something hot to ease the abscess and heal it with other treatments until it is healthy.
And if the abscess is large, make two holes in the wound, and treat it with lard or other appropriate ointment.
And if the vein beats against you or another, hasten and use broken vitriol on the place, leave it for two or three days until the wound purges, and let the boiling of the blood subside. Then return to the original state of what has been dislocated.
Here are the forms of the cautery instruments, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small;
And there are three squares that are called 'albaret', and one that is called 'breb', and there are three ways of them: large, medium, and small, to surround the abscesses with fistulas;
and they are like the needles with which you sew sacks, and they are of citron wood, or iron, or silver, and those that are yellow are more effective, and they are sharper for surrounding the swellings of a fistula with a black plug;
they are of three types: large, medium, and small, according to the width of the wounds.
The shapes of the onions are very similar, as you see here:
and if they have one hump with three forms alike;
and if they have three humps, and are the same in three ways;
and if they have two humps, and one hump only, and are of three kinds.
and all these are necessary in their place.
The head of these things is sharp, and those who do not cut at all from one side, which we scrape the nails with, because one does not strike the vein or the nerve;
And from these incisions the ulcers are tied up in bands, so that the patient does not harm himself at the opening of abscesses.
They are of three kinds: large, small, and medium, as you see.
Only use it in the flesh of a man, such as the limbs, arms, breasts, and in similar places.
And sometimes another instrument is made small, resembling fists of plasters, in this form to drain blood. and it is placed at the site that heals quickly, at the veins, and sometimes returns according to this large form.
Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to rot, until they resemble breasts of a woman.
They remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wishes to cure them, it must be done according to this form of the line b.j to g. Then scrape off the fat, apply medicine to the wound with soothing balm, then bring together the two edges of the wound for stitching, and heal it until it is healed.
and if the limbs bend downwards due to their size, like it often happens in women (when they become wide), then divide them into two pieces above, with two similar cuts. in this way one piece will be holding the other at the end of both pieces, so that the larger piece encloses the smaller one according to this shape, from this line "b" up to the line "g". then scrape the skin between the two pieces, remove the fat, and apply what was said about stitching and powders, and whatever is necessary for healing, until it is healed.
If the patient is not healthy or if the incision is not fully made because the patient does not want to rest, or due to bleeding, you must fill the wound with cotton wadded in a corrosive ointment. And let it heal as it consumes the remaining meat and fat, then treat it until it is healed.
These abscesses that come under the saddle are types of hard scrofulas with ridges, and if they contain moisture within them.
Therefore, those containing moisture should be cut according to this form, from the line b up to the line g: And when the whole boil which is in the abscess is emptied, place old cotton on the wound, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and apply an ointment to it until it heals.
And if the abscess resembles scrofula, make incisions in it as we have said for scrofula, and if pus forms in the wound, apply fire cautery as we have said before.
When an artery is cut and the skin above it becomes sutured, there often occur abscesses, and the same happens with a vein that swells and forms an abscess.
And if it is recognized in this way when it concerns an artery, the abscess will be long and deep. And when you feel it with your hands, you should squeeze it tightly.
And when it is due to the vein, it appears clearly apparent.
It is foolish to cover this abscess and especially when it is under the armpits and near the angles or neck and in many other places, and they are very large. Therefore the iron cure should be removed, and the one on the head should also be removed, and in the case of an inflamed artery, make an incision above the skin with a long blade.
then open the abdomen in one piece and carefully separate the artery from the ligaments, until it is exposed.
then insert an awl beneath it and make it penetrate until the other side, and tie the artery with a doubled thread in two places as I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples.
Then leave the joint between the two ligaments of an intromissoire until the pus within it breaks open, and the abscess should be broken.
then apply the treatment that causes a swelling, as long as the ligament is breaking. then treat this with liniment until it heals completely.
and if the abscess is for the sake of opening a vein, then you must paint your hand with whatever can be obtained from the abscess all over the skin, then insert the needle under the place that you hold in your hand, and make it pierce through, and there should be double thread, so that you pull it from the other side. then tie the abscess, as I have told you, or a ligament of one part to another between the two shoulders with thread.
And if you doubt that the thread does not go through, push another needle under the abscess at the incision of the first needle and hold the thread in four places;
then press the abscess until the excess goes out, then press the pus and leave what is connected.
then put a damp cloth soaked in wine and oil on it, then give it treatments of tents (bandages) and liniments until it heals.
As in arteries and veins, abscesses come to the nerves when they are struck or due to excessive labor, and similar things.
This happens more often in the shoulder and thumb and in all places where there are joints, and it is the serious abscess, and its color resembles that of the body, and it occurs in many different positions with pain.
And when it is strained, the patient feels pain, and it does not go completely through the body but under the flesh.
It should be completely silent from all sides and does not go forward or backward, neither underneath nor above, and the one in the joints should not be covered with iron. In case it contracts. And if it is on the head or forehead, scrape the skin with the spatula.
And if it is on the head or forehead, scrape the skin with the spatula. If the abscess is small, take tweezers and hit it at its root.
If it is large, suspend it to the incision and peel it off, then open it and stitch up the wound until it heals.
Sometimes happens in bellies and nowhere else, and it is a disease that is called "fungus" because of its resemblance to birds, and it has subtle roots and large heads.
and it has small and very large ones;
and I saw a man who had two bellies that resembled fungi more than anything else, and there was no difference between them, and they were white, and had a small root, and were split open, and ran moisture continuously.
I weighed them and found one to weigh eighteen ounces, and the other six, and the work in the incision is such that you can see if the patient is moist, and the color of the arrowhead is white and wet and has a subtle root; If the head of the spatula is large and the fire cautery is present with you.
If the head of the spatula is large and the fire cautery is present with you. For at the cutting often comes too great evacuations of blood, and if it escapes from you, hasten then to cauterize.
and if you see the patient afraid and fearful of the iron incision, take well-made thread, tie it as we have said, and leave it for two days.
then you hold it tight and do not stop holding the thread of yarn until the head of the arrow feels working.
and if the roots are thick, you should fear to treat it yourself by the belly, but you can cover half of it well, then cauterize it so that it does not return.
Then heal the wound, and ensure you do not cover the yellowish substance which is of foul smell and poor sensation with milk-like discharge.
For it is an abscess swollen, and I will come to the treatment for gonorrhea afterwards.
When the boil bursts out If the boil appears due to cautery of a wound or a fissure in the belly and some of the boils are on it, as happens in other routes, or from blood that leaks from veins or arteries as mentioned before, or from wind;
And if it is by the fracture of the sinew and by the exit of the bowel, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body, and it causes little pain, and has an open wound with various outlets. And if it is from the intestine, then it is more diverse. When you press it with your fingers, it retracts and then comes back, and in some cases, it becomes hard, and greatly swells at the entrance of the wound, and due to much labor.
And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when you press it with your hand, do not constrain it.
And if it is due to blood, the abscess becomes large and hard, and is filled according to a certain quantity. And if it is due to windiness, it is soft to touch, and the work is such that you look to see if its appearance is due to blood from an artery or vein, or windiness.
And if it is due to windiness, it is soft to touch, and the work is such that you look to see if its appearance is due to blood from an artery or vein, or windiness. It is necessary that you let the treatment continue. For it has doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter of abscesses, concerning the artery and the vein.
And if the appearance is due to the intestines or the belly, you should instruct the patient to lean their back, and be extended straight, then hold all around the belly. then command him to press gently between your hands, then go around the place you have signed with all the spatula, then spread half of the abscess above with a large spoon. then tie it around with a strong thread or a cord of strong silk firmly, and let the patient be in a relaxed state.
then open half of the extended abscess with the thread, and insert your index finger, and try to find the intestine. if you find the intestine tied with the thread, untie it, and push the intestine out of the abdomen.
And if you find the boil, take it to the onion, and grind off the excess.
And if the artery causes you problems or the vein, go there gently, then return to your work and take two needles, insert two thin wires through them, and insert the needles around what you have made in a cross shape so that you make it pierced.
Then hold the abscess to three leagues above the needles, and if you see it, remove the needles, and leave the skin as much as possible, and separate the dead flesh from itself. or you grind it when it is soft and can be pierced, then treat it as necessary, and cover the abscess as we have said.
or you grind it when it is soft and can be pierced, then treat it as necessary, and cover the abscess as we have said. Draw out the blood or the moisture that you find, then treat the place as needed, and bind the place.
of the abscess We have described in the section the likeness of a scab, and how one should treat it with medicines, and how to remove the iron cure.
And let us speak about scabies in the armpit, and great caution in its treatment, and they say that when scabies is in a place where it can be shaved like a scab that is on breasts or thighs, or similar places, it should all be removed at the beginning.
No one has ever healed (it) before me.
And the operations, when they are in place and can be removed as we have said, are that you cleanse the patient once of black bile.
then make him purge if there is apparent overfilling, then set the patient in good position to perform the operation.
Then wash your hands and scabs or boils, and the head of everything from all sides, leaving nothing behind.
Allow the blood to flow freely, and anoint the place well with your hand or something else, and if the bleeding opposes the incision of the artery or vein, cauterize until the wound is coagulated. Then, cure with another treatment until it heals (or becomes healthy).
And from the dropsy We have said in the division the similarities of edema, and in what manner the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each similarity, and the treatment that is done with medicine, and the one that is cured by iron.
and iron should not be touched in these two similarities: that is to say, tympanites and ophisarcos, because it is a deadly thing.
Therefore, when treating this similarity of edema called "ruptured," if the treatment does not help, then check whether the patient is weak or has another disease besides edema, such as distension of the stomach and similar things. Do not touch with iron, for there is doubt.
If you see the patient with strong strength, and he has no other disease except scrofula only, and he is neither too young nor too old, then you should treat it thus: Lay the patient on his back on your hands, and the assistants press the belly leading the water to the lowest part of the bladder, then take the curved spoon according to this shape: And let it be cut through in two parts. at the tip, and it should not be so deep as to reach the intestine when inserted, and it should not pierce.
then look if the dropsy is herniated towards the intestines: If you need to make an incision, you must cut below the belly button three fingers' width right under the navel. and if the dropsy is due to liver disease, your incision should be on the left side of the navel.
and if it is due to obstruction, it should be on the right, and the patient should not lie on the incision so that excess fluid does not run to that weak place;
Then pierce the entire skin with the instrument, push it and slide your hand all along the spatula between the skin and the flesh as when peeling an apple to the thickness of a nail or thereabouts.
Then pierce the flesh down to the water level (which is the bottom), then pull it out and insert this tool here shown with its shape: And it resembles a thin silver chain, made of tin or light iron, and has a small opening at the lower part. and on one side there are three openings. and one on the other side, and one on each of the opposite sides.
and the head is cut in a feather shape, and this is the form of the incision that scribes make when cutting a quill pen.
At the top of it (the head) is the alemel, so that when the instrument comes to the water, you should now raise it on the instrument.
Then empty the vessel (or the third part of it), because if you look at more than necessary in that hour, accidentally, the patient may die from the resolution of his spirit by the weapon, or he will faint, or approach death.
but empty according to its strength and according to the indications of the patient's condition and pulse.
then pull the instrument and hold the water, it is now held for the caution that stops the perforation which is on the cyst, as I have spoken about, you pierce in this manner.
Then begin the instrument again on the other day if you see the patient suffering and draw a little amount of water.
Do it every day, but do not let it heal too much, just a little bit of water.
If you doubt about the patient and let too much water, then cure it with burial or hot sand, and by sweating or bathing and in the sun, and anoint it with wine. and heal it with drying medicines until it is healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and liver and spleen after removing water, as I said before.
Sometimes children are born who do not have foreskins at the penis, or the foreskin is small, or it is not in its place.
If it is necessary to pierce through all the spittle very thinly according to this form:
then put or pierce the small hole in the bladder and bind it for three or four days until it wants to urinate, then remove the holes, make it urinate, and then return.
And by chance it should not [be so], because the urine that comes out does not keep it closed.
For the person whose ulcer is small, it is treated with a poultice of cloth, as we have said, and it will open up.
Those who have no opening in their place are bladdered, because none are born with the opening at the tip of the penis, therefore they cannot urinate unless they lift up their penis. And they cannot ejaculate because the matter cannot come to the marriage bed, and it is a bad disease.
The way of the work is that the patient lies with his back on the ground, and places the head of the penis and the base in the same position as a feather's tail, so that the opening is open, as required.
And beware of the flowing out of blood that happens often, and if it happens, stop the bleeding from those who are bleeding, and treat the wound until it is healed.
of the genital sores Many times, this ulcer appears on the penis, it is an appearance of ugly sores.
and some are malignant and some are not malignant.
You should gently take them one by one with a fine linen cloth, then strike and clean them all, and put cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment on top. Then cure it with diafinicon ointment until it is healed.
And if the ulcer is malignant, with pus-like color and swelling, then you should apply a fire cautery.
When you have struck it, and the ulcer is in the foreskin of the penis with part inside the skin and part outside, then you should remove the ulcer that is inside first. And when it is healed on the outside, heal the inside.
For when you heal it together, the genitals of the penis are not guaranteed to not be pierced, and blackness and decay come into the penis and testicles.
It is necessary to burn everything that is black and corrupted, then lay it on a plaster of honey and flour which is made from the peel of pomeranate seeds and vine leaves, and then heal it with other remedies until it becomes healthy.
And if there is discharge of blood, bring the lunar cautery according to this form:
The cautery aids in these conditions together: this means the evacuation of blood and corruption.
if the head of the penis is corrupted and withdrawn, it is necessary to insert or have the patient urinate through a reed cane.
if the foreskin is torn on the head of the penis, which happens to those who have not been circumcised, or it happens due to injury or abscess, then you must shave it with an instrument, removing the skin until the ligaments are released and the penis is delivered from all sides.
And if it is painful to speak of this, you must cut off a small piece from the tip of the rod and skin.
Then squeeze them well together, and place a thin linen cloth dampened with cold water between them so that they do not stick.
Circumcision is not simply the removal of skin as in other wounds; However, when we perform this work of our own will, and specifically for infants, it is necessary to make the best work, and the easiest one for salvation.
I say that the ancients would not circumcise their children, for they did not practice it in their law, and we only have what we have acquired through experience.
For I have observed that most of the masters and surgeons who performed circumcision around that time, used force and cut off too much.
If the hairs are fleeing because there are two layers, and by chance if one above is struck and the other below remains. Or cover it up again, and the pain is doubled, and at the amputation that is deep cutting of the member is not assured.
And at the amputation of the nail by chance escapes the iron, and spoils the work, and many times it grows so that there is no need for amputation, and I have seen this.
I have found the advantage of using ligatures in amputations, because the force cuts equally well above and below.
For when you hold your hand, you cut equally at all times. but that the thread be well tightened around the skin.
And the method of the first operation is that you make the child think, if he can understand, that you do not make him pull on the thread around the rod except just so, and then let him play in all ways as he can.
Then make it be between your hands straight, and press the forces between your hands or under your feet so that the infants cannot see, nor any of the tools.
Then place your hand at the shaft and blow or spit, and pull it up until the head of the shaft is out. Then clean it well of the filth that has gathered, then tie the end point with a double thread, then tie it under the buttock to another thread.
Then clean it well of the filth that has gathered, then tie the end point with a double thread, then tie it under the buttock to another thread. and hold it according to the second tie at the pocket and the index finger, and press between the two threads, then pull the buttock quickly and draw the head of the shaft. Then let the blood flow freely, for it is the medicine. And place powder on top and on the powder apply a glue made from cooked egg white steeped in rose water, mixed with good and fresh rose oil, leave it on until the next day, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
The form of forces for healing is as follows:
The two shoulders are tender and sharp, and they are as big as the fist equally.
The error of mundification is when the kidneys within are incised.
Therefore, it must be spread with your nail so that the flesh becomes an abscess.
And press equally, and if you cannot hold it with your nail, then hold it with pliers, and then press.
If they pass more than three days, and what is below the waist is swollen, then leave it until the abscess subsides, and gently scrape it.
Press as much as you can move, and keep away from the part of the waist, it will not harm him.
Therefore, treat the joint of things solidly closed wounds with powder, as we have said or treated powders, and if you apply too much heat, it will not help;
therefore, heal it, as we have said, when it is healed.
The retention of urine
The retention of urine is by obstruction of stone, or congealed blood, or pus, or snow, or similar things, as we have said in the division.
and if the urine is not relieved, and you see that the retention is due to a stone in the bladder or neck of the bladder, then it is necessary that the patient be bent over his knees. and let him place his feet on the back, extend his abdomen from above the lower back, and restrain the patient as much as he can. And then, the flanks of the bladder are compressed towards the piercing of the stone above, so that the urine is expelled.
If it does not come as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, you must provide extraction with all the instruments called "syringe", of which this is its shape:
And it should be of fine silver, thin and light as a bird's feather; And the cane should be one and a half palms long and fine at the tip.
And the manner of urine expulsion is to take a double thread, tie one end of it to a piece of wool or cotton, and insert the other end into the syringe;
and remove the surplus of the thread and insert it up to the tip of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, and make the patient sit on a chair, and rub the bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and cold water;
Then gently insert the syringe into the rod, until it reaches the root of the rod, then double the rod upward towards the buttock.
Then insert the syringe up to the bladder and make the patient feel it reach the empty place. This is not done according to this order, unless the person guiding where it goes is twisted.
Then thread the string through the wool strands one by one, and let the patient urinate while doing so, then pull out the string and straighten the urine.
And repeat the syringe until the bladder is empty and the patient is relieved.
When scorchures or blood comes into the bladder, or pus is collected there, and you see it distill liquids and medicines, do everything with the instrument called "clepsydre," and its form is:
It is closed (or blocked), and if it has been pierced three times: It from one side, and it from the other, as you see;
and the joints closed by this way so that the medicine rod can stop the worm well without addition, if it can draw out the moisture, and push when necessary;
and when you see to throw your medicine into the bladder, place the head of the cuestor in the moisture, and draw out the one that is there;
if you draw out the moisture with the cuestor, and then press forcefully on the wound; if the worms enter into it (the cuestor), they will go to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it.
and this is the form of the subtle suppository with which one treats the bladder:
And it is of silver or lead, and the head is higher.
and beneath to the breast or the ligament falls down.
Then take a sheep's bladder and fill it with the moisture you use to treat the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts with a good thread double, and heat the bladder full of that moisture over the fire.
Then push the head of the bladder into the penis, then hold your hand on the bladder full of that moisture, until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
and if you do not have the bladder, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle, pierce it roundly. Then insert the strong thread into these wounds, then form a circle like one forms a needle, and put inside it what you see of oil and moisture and water, and bind it in the instrument.
and do as you have done with the bladder, press it with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
from cutting into stones
We have said in the division of stones, and their extraction together with medicines.
and I have said the difference between the stone embedded in meat and all the signs, and in which stone one should work by cutting. and in the bladder, and in the penis;
I will tell you openly and briefly.
I say that the stone embedded in the bladder happens more often with children, and this is a sign that the water jumps from the bladder like water in its subtlety.
And he opens the hernia, greatly irritates the patient's penis, and pierces it multiple times before bandaging. And from such foundations, the treatment arises.
And children's healing is light until they are four years old, and it is very serious in the elderly, and moderate in those who are between youth and old age.
And the healing of those with large stones is lighter than that of those with small ones.
And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient with an enema, in order to draw out all the filth that is in the intestines. For it sometimes blocks the stone (arrow or bullet).
Then take the patient by the feet, turn him upside down, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and shake it one or two times upward.
Then make him sit between your prepared hands, and his hands should be beneath his thighs, so that the bladder is entirely descending downward.
Then press and touch inside [the dislocated joint].
If you feel the stone in the space, hasten now to cut above the stone.
And if it does not fall with the touch, wet your left thumb with oil, if the patient is an infant, or moist your finger, if the patient is a young man [or adult]. And push it into its foundation, press the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, pull it out of the bladder.
Then press upwards with your finger, and push it to the place where you intend to cut.
Instruct the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and instruct him to stretch out his right hand towards the opening of the incision, and with his left hand remove the skin that is beneath the openings in the place where the cutting will be done.
Then insert the large spatula of this shape: And place it between what is between the cheeks (of the buttocks) and the base, not in the middle but along the left side of the naval.
And it should be straight above the stone (pierced by the arrow), and your hands should be at the base or the ground, and the end of the spatula along the width of the wound so that it is wide outside and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large.
By chance the pressure of your hands that are at the base may cause it to leap due to effort.
And know that there is this stone or one with edges and margins: It is tightly closed.
And if it has this shape, round like a plum and hollow, with the exit being light (or easy).
For him then where there are angles and edges, make the cut larger.
and if it does not jump out, then you must use pliers similar to a chisel at the top, in order to press down on the stone so that it does not slip. or you push underneath the instrument curved slightly towards the top.
and if you cannot manipulate it in this way, then enlarge the hole slightly with a drill bit, and if it does not break open, stretch it with glass.
and if there are more than one stone, push the largest towards the bladder neck first, then strike it, pull it out, and pull out the smaller ones afterwards if there are more of them.
And if it is very large, it must be made larger by making a bigger incision. For two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or urine comes immediately through where the loins cannot be joined.
but nevertheless make an effort to drain it, or break it with pliers, until you draw it out in pieces;
and when you have completed your work, apply the wound with incense, aloe, and dragon's blood, and bandage it, then lay on top a damp cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in olive oil and cold water or rosewater, to cool the inflamed abscess. then lay the patient on his neck, and do not unbind the ligature until the third day.
And when you loosen [the bandage], moisten the wound well with oil and water, then apply the ointment defyndicon and basilicon until it is healed.
If an abscess or corruption comes in the wound and freezing of blood in the bladder occurs, causing urine to be retained, which is known in this way without jump with urine: Therefore, push your finger into the wound and draw out the blood, for if it remains there, it will cause the bladder to swell and burst.
Then clean the wound of pus, dirt, and linen, and aid it in all ways that you know, until it is healed.
And it is necessary to tie both thighs when you treat him, and apply the remedies on the appropriate place.
If the stone is small, it should be guided by the sperm and inserted with a probe, and if the urine cannot exit. If you treat as I have said, cut it many times; he will be excused from the punishment due to this treatment. I have already proven this.
Take one iron fork according to this shape and sharpened at four angles on one thong:
Then take the thread and tie it around the shaft of the arrow under the stone, so that it cannot return into the bladder;
Then gently push the awl into the shaft, until it reaches the stone; and turn the awl in the stone slowly, bit by bit, until you can pierce the other side of the stone;
Soon the urine will come, then press your hand on what remains inside the shaft that is within the stone; It will soon break and jump out with the urine, and the patient will be cured.
If you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then tie the thread under the stone and the other above, then insert the shaft towards the stone between the two threads, pull it out, and untie the thread, and clean the congealed blood in the wound. And heal it until it is sound.
of the woman's stone (meaning: uterine stones or ovarian cysts)
If a stone should be introduced into a woman, and if such a thing happens once, it is a grave harm, and it is forbidden for three reasons:
the first reason is that perhaps the woman is a virgin;
And the second is that it cannot be found a woman who knows well how to uncover herself in front of mirrors, especially when she is chaste.
And the third manner is that unfortunately one cannot find a woman who knows well in this art of hands.
And the fourth manner is that the woman's stone (womb) is deeper than the man's, so it requires a more profound incision, causing great fear. If it is necessary to do this, you must take a skilled midwife, but if one cannot be found, even an experienced chaste maiden can be used.
and presents a wise bailiff in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and commands her to do what you command concerning the incision of the stone. And look very well if the woman is a virgin:
And look very well if the woman is a virgin: Then one must put his hand or foundation and feel for the stone.
If it is found, one should hold it under his hand and advise her to put her hand or press on the sick spot with her left hand on the bladder area.
If it is found, she should move it gently in and out from the bladder entrance to the root of the thigh.
Then strike the stone against the root of the thigh towards the middle of the bone, where it is moved and feels the stone in that part. And don't move your hand above or below the stone, and it should be cut in the first small piece.
And don't move your hand above or below the stone, and it should be cut in the first small piece. Then push the shoulder towards the waist, if you feel the arrow is close to the wound so that the arrow can come out easily, and know that there are many types of arrows.
This means, small and large, sharp and blunt, long and round, and those with barbs.
Recognize the symptoms to know the outcome.
And if the arrow escapes, put broken vitriol at its place and hold it for an hour until the wound is cauterized.
Then return to your work until the arrow is out, and have tools that I told you for extracting the arrow in men's help for you.
And if the arrow escapes and it is the artery that is cut, put powder on its place and hold it with straps and bandages, do not try again, leave the arrow and do not pull it out, otherwise the patient may die. Then heal the wound.
When the heat of the blood is relieved and the wounds have healed, return to your work until the stone is expelled.
Gravel is nothing but an accumulation of moisture or white chalk that is under the eyelid, which contains the egg.
and is called "white chalk", and sometimes it is properly within the egg's membrane, if one believes it to be another egg. and it is the eyelid's skin between the white chalk that we have said;
and this does not happen often. And the generation of this aquose is due to weakness that comes from the kidneys, and this matter is spread.
And sometimes it comes from a blow on the eyelids, and this moisture can have many colors: or it is yellowish discoloration, or without redness, or black, or white watery, and this happens more often.
And these are the signs to recognize this assembly; for if it is as white as we have said, then it is an abscess, long like the shape of an egg, and does not open its eyes, because it has moisture all around.
And if there is moisture in the very cloth, then it is an abscess like part of an egg, and for this reason one thinks it is another egg.
And if the moisture is between the skin of the eyes and the white as described, then it can be easily felt.
Therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, prove it with all the intrusive pressure, so that its form is as described before. According to this which follows the intrusion, judge of what is within.
And when we cure it with iron, the patient should be purified to the extent of our power and the fullness of his body.
Then place it on its back, on a small raised object, and put many cloths under it.
Then lay it on its left side, and instruct the attendant to sit on its right, and extend the rod along one of the two ribs of the neck.
Then take the spatula of lard, and cut the hide of the neck along its length until you reach the base, making your incision straight through the skin up to whitish fat, and peel it off gently according to your ability.
Then make a large hole in the whitish fat with water, drain all the liquid, and then put your fingers in, and lift the whitish fat.
And do not touch the heart of the kidneys, but only the bladder. Cut or in pieces delicately the ribs of it, because if you do not cut it skillfully, the water will return.
And if the egg jumps in your work, reset it in its place when you have completed the work with the bladder.
Then assemble the two kidneys at one stitch, then heal it as with other wounds, until it heals.
And if you find the egg corrupt from another disease, it is necessary that you tie the vessels that are suspended, suspecting the discharge of blood.
Then cut the kidney with all the suspension, and draw out the egg, and heal it as we have said.
And if an ulcer is assembled in two parts together, know that these are two branches. If the other part is joined as you have done with the first, equally, then suck out the blood, and put in the wound moistened linen in rose oil.
If the other part is joined as you have done with the first, equally, then suck out the blood, and put in the wound moistened linen in rose oil. and place another moistened linen in wine and oil on the two openings, and put over them coverings, and tie it above all the thread that is according to this shape:
Then take two coverings, use them of woven linen according to this appearance and assemble them by sewing in the girdle of the braies, and one of the heads take up on the foundation until the back, and the other at the part of the handle.
And the other bone of the two upper chiefs, and all is gathered together in the loop of the collarbone;
Sometimes this remedy of fire cautery is in place for an iron-sized wound, and it is that you take the subtle cautery scalpel and press on the skin, and let it be heated as we have said, so that the white pus containing water becomes exposed.
if you take the cautery in this form, and pierce that pus-filled cyst with it, and scrape it off with this heated scalpel.
And press in all ways as you can, until it is thoroughly burnt.
and ensure that the fire does not touch the egg.
And know that this work is more healing; And move cautiously to avoid bleeding, and moisten the surgical procedures.
And if anything prevents you or an abscess swells or bleeding or anything else occurs, treat what is preventing you, according to what has been said before.
And if the patient is afraid and does not wish to endure this procedure due to its terrible nature, perform perforation as I have told you, and it is that when you are completely certain through the signs we have mentioned that the anus is the place, place the patient on a raised seat. Then pierce the abscess in the part below with a spatula wide enough, and make the perforation along the length of the body.
And let the wounds be wide, so that all the sharp corruption may flow out.
Then place cotton on the wound, tie it and let the rest of the corruption flow out, then heal it until the wound is healed.
And if the white cloth does not allow the corruption to flow out through the mouth of the wound, then you must insert a feather or the instrument used to treat the corruption of dropsy (as described before).
Widen the wound and check that the corruption returns, and collect it for six months or thereabouts, and when it is collected as described before, the patient will pass his days.
Check that in the section of this remedy there are many variations in its preparation, which makes it seem that it is more effective to leave it as it is.
And I will tell you the work and the similarities of an abscess.
Many abscesses come in the body, and particularly in the bones; And it happens often.
It is due to excessive sour and acute fluid spreading in the joints or from impact.
The color of the abscess follows the color of the body. There is no pain, but it is a serious abscess.
And sometimes an abscess becomes hard and stony, of such color, and once in a while comes from the artery or swelling of the vein.
When it is due to an artery, it is known by the hot composition of abscess when you press with your fingers. And you should not touch it.
An abscess caused by swelling of the vein is known by its composition upon touching with fingers, and can be safely cut into on this appearance, and on other similar cases. And it is that you squeeze the core of the neck, then raise the egg above, and pull out the yolk through the white part, and release the suspending ligament from all parts of the egg.
If the egg is already softened with these new characters, then you must therefore draw out the egg and crush it.
And if it is outside the white part or in the vessels within, you must release all that softness and crush it thoroughly.
If the birth of the placenta is on the back side, then you must crush the whole thing and draw out the egg, as we have said.
And when your work is done, apply the wound with dampened wool soaked in rose oil and wine, then heal it with other treatments until it is healed.
This is an abscess wrapped in an envelope resembling a boil, with the softening of the necks, and the patient becomes very quiet when he goes.
And the cure for this disease is as precarious and dangerous as previously mentioned, and yet we will tell you its work, according to what the ancients did.
You must make the patient sit on an elevated seat, then push the suspension of the balls (testicles) downwards towards your hands, to all the surrounding parts near the penis, and mark them with the master's hand, and stretch them out fully.
Then, using a sharp spatula, cut deeply across the testicles towards each other until they are exposed, and then flay from both sides as we have said in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples.
then insert a needle with doubled thread, and tie it to the first place where the vein appears, and tie it directly to the other end. then cut them in half straightway, according to the length of the body, and draw out the corrupt humors.
Then treat the wound as one does with other wounds where the flesh is not eaten by one of the eyes (maggot);
because in this way there is no harm, and if all the maggots come to life, it is necessary to draw out the maggots from all of them; so that the eye does not lose its nourishment due to the incision of maggots, and dries up and cannot help itself.
The outcome of this incision is by the opening where pus comes out, or the extension on the belly in the area of the inguinal region, because the intestines descend through that incision to one of the eyes (opening);
and this opening is either the pus-producing area, or the extension of it, and these two ways of death come from multiple causes:
or of percussion, or of a jump, or of a fall, or of lifting heavy weight, and similar things;
and the signs when it is of dislocation of the spinal column, are that it happens little by little, over a long time, and does not happen suddenly. and the abscesses are equal up to the fullness, because the spinal column is following the intestines.
And the symptoms are when it is of the section where the intestines are cut open, which brings on sudden pain at the beginning, and the abscesses appear variously beneath the skin near, and this is due to the exit of the intestines and the body expelling them through the opening of the incision.
And sometimes the intestines burst out from the anus and are retained within, causing great pain to suffer for the patient, especially when pressed.
And in these iron treatments, there is fear, for which it is necessary to escape.
And the method of the work is that you instruct the patient to massage the intestines inside with their hand in the wound, if they can reach it. then press on his neck between your hands, and raise the thighs.
then stretch out the abdomen above, and beat all the hide of the swellings with a long stick. Then insert a thin reed into the groin area according to what is necessary for opening the wound, and let it be such that the testicles can come out.
Then scrape the scrotum that is underneath the skin of the scrotum, until the white scrotum becomes exposed all around.
Then insert your index finger into the scrotum, where the scrotum is between the white scrotum that is underneath the skin of the scrotum and the second scrotum, and separate it from what is behind the egg (testicle) and the second scrotum.
And move the hand to the scrotum with the white scrotum raised up towards your left hand, and lift the testicle away from the entire scrotum towards the groin. Command the minister to stretch out the neck upward, and release what is behind the ligament.
If your fingers feel intestines entwined or hard lumps, and if you find anything, push it into the belly.
Then take a needle with a thick thread made of 10 strands and push it into the back part of the lump which is behind the skin. After the neck, catch the tendons that appear to have four threads. Then assemble them one on top of the other in a cross shape, and tie the lump that we mentioned was behind the skin of the joints with a strong knot of two parts. Then wrap the heads of the children, and tie them with two strips, so that no vassals who nurse them can enter into it, except an abscess cloth comes. and put the linen directly over the first one in the same direction, for two strips of that length, then leave a gap of about an inch at the end where the kidneys are. and after all the other one according to the roundness that the egg carries;
then sew in the part that is under the skin of the kidneys, so much as there is without correction and curvature, as we have said before.
Then bring wet linen in oil and apply it to wounds, and there bring the linen that we have said. And sometimes the white ones are cauterized as we have said, after incision, due to fear of bleeding out. For this often happens, and leave the ligament until it chooses to move itself;
And if it delays in falling off, then immerse it in hot water and put on what has been said until it chooses to move itself;
Then heal the wound with another treatment, until it is perfectly healed.
Of a fleshy hernia
In this remedy, I have never seen anyone who dares to heal by iron.
And the ancients said that it is made like a splint joined to the bone, in such a way that you tie the splint, after cutting it slightly below.
Then fill it with something, and treat the abscess from what opens up, until the splint moves.
And heal it as we have said, until it is healed.
At times, rot comes in worms, as we have said, and opens the limbs.
And it does not open any of the intestines like worms, and if it opens, it is little, and repairs itself every hour.
Moreover, if it remains too long at that place, the wound or abscess grows, as long as the intestines continue to open.
This occurs due to the extension of the abscess that is in worms, as we have said, because it spreads and softens the limbs and opens them.
And the treatment is by cautery, as we have previously said.
And sometimes it is treated with iron in this manner: And it is that the patient lies prone on his back between your hands, then press the affected side swollen with a large space according to the size of three fingers;
Then extract the sinus that is underneath the skin where the abscess is, then take the rod and place it on the visible side of the sinus;
and press firmly on the abdomen, then cut the two sides visible in the sinus along the rod towards the head;
then remove the rod and do not cover or extend the sinus or anything else, as I have told you in the treatment of intestinal worms; then heal it by the treatment of wounds.
then heal it by the treatment of wounds. And when you cut the threads (of a wound), if they burn and heal the wound, let it remain open until it is healed.
The blister is constricted, and has no appearance in the rupture, and the cautery is moved to this place, and closer to salvation.
of the softening of the skin of the knees
Often the scrotums of some men are softened due to charms that are inside them and it is visible as pus.
And it is necessary, when treating him, to make the patient lie down on his back, and strike the softened skin over the natural skin.
Then bring the two lips together to one stitch, and if you see, cut the excess skin softened by the moisture at three or four stitches firmly.
Then strike between the stitches, and the wound is treated like other wounds until it heals, and the thread is sewn.
The correction or punishment
Know that amputations are condemned in our law, and for this reason I do not wish to speak of them in this book.
And it is necessary only for two reasons:
One reason is that the surgeon should know how to answer if asked about an amputation and its treatment.
And the other, because we often have need of corseting some beasts to help us, such as goats and sheep and cats and others.
Therefore, corsetings are made in two ways: or by attraction, or by cutting.
In the one that we make by attraction, we seat the beast in hot water until its privy parts are softened and relaxed. Then hold them with your hand until they are set and you no longer feel them.
For the branding, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, keep the eyes fixed so they do not move until they heal. It is necessary that you mark the animal, and press the hide of its hump with your left hand, then tie the noose, and strike each eye with the iron spike when you have skinned them well.
and leave any small piece of fat and the fine fat that is on the vessels;
and this method of castration is different from the one made by attraction, because at attraction there remains possibly something from the testicles, causing the animal to desire lust.
then heal the wound until it heals.
Hermaphrodites
Hermaphroditus follows these two ways among humans: one way is when the two testicles are open as in the figure of woman's nature, where there is hair and sometimes in court he urinates.
And another way it is with women, and it has above the penis like a rod and they copulate.
And the healing of man and woman is such that you bandage all the adjacent sores, and heal them as other wounds.
In the second manner, of men whose urine jumps through the scrotum skin, has no cure.
An ulcer is an adjacent sore on the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see; and some women have it as large as a hand, and that is the healing.
It is necessary that you dye the excess of the ulcer in your hand or with onions and cover it lightly.
And do not go too deeply, that bleeding does not come forth, then heal it with another healing until it heals.
And to another sore that arises at the mouth of the wife, and it swells, and by chance jumps forth, and is similar to a cowpox, and for this reason they called it in ancient times "cow disease". It is necessary that you cut it, as we have said in the prescription, and cure it until it heals.
And errhine is when the nature of the woman is not perceived or the wound is small. It is natural by birth, or accidental due to disease that comes upon it.
It is natural by birth, or accidental due to disease that comes upon it. Or it is a sore attached or shallow or deep, and is caused by fullness in the wife, or in the sides, or under, wherever it may be.
They avoid conception, childbirth, and by chance flowers to have.
And the knowledge of these things is through the observation of the midwife.
If the obstruction is close to appearing, either at your hand or at your side.
If it is a small ulcerous sore and it is near the livestock, hurry and treat it thus:
Put your two index fingers together and have her lie on her back, with legs spread.
then form the two livestock so that the ulcerous sore becomes round and is covered by the lips.
then take wool, wet it in oil, and put it on the sore, and make her lie down each day so that it does not heal.
If it is hard and thick, you must cut it with a spatula resembling the leaf of myrtle.
If the covering is new flesh, press it at the onion and pound it.
and prepare the remedies to stop bleeding, such as cucumber juice, dragon's blood, incense, mixed with many eggs.
Then bring a broad strip of linen, so that the wound does not close.
and make it long, and bring a dry tent of linen.
then heal with other remedies until he is healthy.
And when in marriage snow comes, it should be covered in this manner, unless abscesses are aggravated. For to the aggravated abscess in marriage, one should not touch to do it.
Of hemorrhoids Hemorrhoids are openings of veins, which without cord usually do not close, and when hemorrhoids become old they swell.
And we have said in the division the similarities of them, and the signs, and I will tell here those which receive healing.
I say that hemorrhoids and throbs, when they are full in marriage, and do not appear to touch, should not be cured by iron.
Those who are at the mouth of the vagina, they can be felt, are those which one can cure.
Therefore, you must put the woman in a cold house, then pull out the swelling with tweezers at its roots, then sprinkle powdered medicine that stops blood, such as cinnamon and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things.
Then press his feet against the surface for an hour, then immerse them in cold water.
And if there is bleeding, make him sit in a decoction of sumac bark, pomegranate rind, ivy and similar things, then take barley flour, mix it with honey and oil, and apply it as a poultice on his back.
And if bleeding stops, that's good. If that doesn't help, make him wear cupping glasses on the back and around the breasts without cutting.
Then take linen cloth, wet it at the bottom with plantain or marshmallow juice with old wine, and apply it to the affected area.
And when the abscess has healed, treat the area with ointment until it is clean.
And that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles a rough head, if it needs to be covered as I said, cover it with lard. Then treat it until it heals.
Many kinds of abscess come in marriage (a metaphor for the body), such as carbuncles, painful abscesses, herpes, fistulas, hemorrhoids, hot abscesses, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
Therefore, in this treatment, I will explain the hot abscess that comes in the marriage which is not the kind of abscess that wraps around.
And if you wish to know the work of iron, look whether the abscess is hard at the beginning of its coming, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red when you can see it. Then do not hurry to pierce it, but let it die until the pain is alleviated;
Then make the patient sit on a chair, or two chairs where he can lean, and support his back and place his feet at the sides away from the leg.
Spread out his thighs, put his arms under his knees, and tie them well with a strong rope.
Then apply the bellows towards the right side, and bring the instrument used to open the bladder, from which follows the form.
It is necessary that when you bring this instrument, you first pierce the right side to know the depth of the bladder, so that what enters inside from the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and does not hurt the patient. And if the wound is deeper, it should be covered with linen cloth to prevent pain.
And you should insert a cotton swab into it and stain the wound.
When an abscess opens and it is soft to the touch, it should be covered with linen cloth and treated with sputum.
And when the bladder is emptied, you should place soaked and oiled linen bandages or dried green oil-soaked linen in the wound.
Place the linen fabric deep into the wound, place it outside the wound and above the wound a clean linen bandage moistened with vinegar or honey.
Then treat it after two days of ointment application, when it is healthy.
And sometimes lift the wound and the limb with cleansing of water and honey, then with water or licorice roots and long arum roots are boiled. Then return to ointment application.
And if the wound is healed in a marriage (scar tissue), you must be careful not to burn it with iron, but rather treat it as we have said in the previous section.
Of childbirth Firstly, in delivery, it is necessary to recognize the signs of natural childbirth, and when you see the woman dilate down below, and desire to smell the area.
Then the child hastens to be born. Then you recognize that the delivery is natural according to its form, and the infant comes out with its head, and the afterbirth follows.
And when you see these signs, it is necessary to gently press on his stomach so that he urinates quickly.
for if he is vomiting on his head, then the child is born with him, and the husband cleanses himself of his superfluidities through good cleansing.
and this that comes in another way does not come naturally.
For sometimes it comes on his feet, and the intestines or shoulder, or hands, or on his belly, or backside, and is turned by accident on his neck, and in other bad forms.
it is necessary to consult with someone wise and skillful in these matters, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the forms of how to help them.
If the child comes out naturally on the head, and the woman gives birth with difficulty, and the strength of the child is weak, make her sit on a saddle, or let the women hold her.
and mix its oil or fenugreek with boiled water, and then insert the little spatula-shaped plaster into the mixture: and cut the second skin, and scrape it with your nail as far as the moisture that is inside escapes;
and bind the woman's belly until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then you must cleanse the woman with muslin of fenugreek and oil of mummy:
then make her bind herself and fast for forty days, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: Instructions for the thigh.
If the hands come out (of the joint), you must gently pull them back a little at a time. and if they cannot go in, place the woman on the bed, and lift her legs upwards. then tilt the bed onto the ground, and bind the woman so she does not slide when tilting it downwards.
and if the hands cannot go in and the thigh is dead, cut the hands with the knife placed before you, extract the child, and reset the dislocation evenly.
of the birth of the child upon its feet When the thigh comes upwards on its legs, push it upwards. and then turn it a little at a time until it is level.
Then take the piece [of bone] and extend it little by little.
If it can jump up as high as the hips, command him to take hold of it, and make it vomit out with force. if it jumps forward, may God will it.
And if it is not as we have said, turn it bit by bit until it is according to the natural shape. Then it will be easily.
And if it does not jump forward as we have experienced, say take mustard of great height, oil of cumin, and melted resin, and grind them all in the mortar. and place the nature of woman inside it [the mixture] and spread this ointment outside, then make her sit in a cold bath until below the ribs.
and when she has been softened [by the bath], apply the collar of myrrh to her, put it on, and leave it for an hour. Then make him sit on the chair, then make him cough and hold his mouth and nose, and he shall gently press his stomach, for the child is about to be born now.
of the child's excrement over its knees When the baby comes in this way, place the midwife's hands here and there. Then support his neck and hang his feet below, and he lies on the bed. Fold her hands here and there, then hold her hands above on the stomach, and push the cushions aside until she is prepared below. If the child does not come out, take its feet and pull it gently, then push the stomach upward, then put your hands there. Pull the baby little by little. Command the woman to take herself when the child is issued.
From the delivery of the child that comes forth with one hand wide. It is necessary to skillfully reattach the hand. If you cannot reattach it, make her stand up and go.
If it cannot walk, place it on a bed, and bend its legs.
then administer the mustard plaster as mentioned before;
and if it does not give birth, make her sit on a chair, then study to bring back the hand. and deliver the child according to its natural shape, make it vomit, and tell her to hold it until it becomes firm.
Of the birth of the child on its neck, and if it has spread its hands, and its face turned towards the back of its mother. You must press its hand, then turn it little by little, and extract it gently.
and when it is equal, place the natural mustard plaster of high altitude and oil on it, as we have said, then tell her to move little by little.
And when you have done this, make her sit on the chair, and command her to take hold of herself. Make her vomit. in the same way, support her all the second time.
in the same way, support her all the second time. When the feces come out in this manner for all the digestion, take the feces with your nail until the moisture is voided.
And if the infant presses against its face and neck, take it by the buttock so that it is not retained, and let the infant die.
Then push the child back in, as much as you have placed it, and command the woman to take hold of herself once.
of the issue of twins Know that twins are born often, and sometimes four or five are born at once. And this is not a strange thing, happening often. Dislocation is an issue arising from any disjointment of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury. The head of the shoulder dislocates due to moisture, and when it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. In the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, many die. For in the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow. And this is not a strange thing, often happening.
Dislocation is an issue arising from any disjointment of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury. The head of the shoulder dislocates due to moisture, and when it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. In the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, many die. For in the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow. And this is not a strange thing, often happening. I know that they multiply and are driven away by the leech who discovers them, which is tied to the bowl.
And sometimes they emerge naturally like teeth under the skin, as we have said.
And if it [the dislocation] protrudes forcefully, treat it as we have said, and let the balm be subtle, and do quickly and gently whatever it does. and perform such actions that bring salvation. of many children.
Sometimes they [dislocations] are formed in the hand or in the foot or in the arm or in the thigh or in the back or in the chest or in the neck, or more often up to the fifteenth, and they are all formed like a child by the measurement of the sage man, and it is necessary that the balm knows all this, for sometimes similar things happen. do as it requires.
of a dead child.
When curing the woman of a dead child or an empty womb, as I have said in the division, and it does not come out naturally, and you are forced to work with your hands. It is necessary that you know if the woman is of good health, and has no illness or fear of death.
The woman must lie on her back, with her head inclined downwards and legs raised.
The minister should hold her by both arms, or tie her to the bed so that she is not treated in the delivery of the child.
Then anoint the mouth of the woman with moist oil mixed with myrrh and cumin, and then anoint the midwife's hands with those oils and musks.
Then push gently into the woman, seeking the place where she pushes out the afterbirth that is suitable for this purpose, and be careful that the infant is prepared to be delivered on top of its head.
If the onions are inserted into his eyes or neck or mouth or palate or under the beard or in the armpit or near the sides, and if the insertion is below the nipples, it is pierced or pricked and the sides are injured.
And it is necessary that you squeeze the onion with your right hand and place the shell between your left hand fingers, and push it gently to the full extent of your hand, and pierce the onion in any of the places mentioned above until it reaches an empty state.
then pierce it opposite the other onion, or the third if needed, so that the extraction is equal.
And then equal it by moving from one side to the other, so that it moves out, and hold the humerus (upper arm bone) in place with teeth, as shown in this figure:
And if there remains a part of it, the healer should press some oil from his fingers and push that part into it, and pull the other part.
And if there remains no part, place this splint or higher up, and continue until it completely comes out.
And if one hand comes in front of the other and cannot be returned by squeezing, then you must wrap around it with cloth until it comes out completely. Then put the thumb in the joint of the flat part or at the side, and you should do the same with the other hand to both feet.
And if the child's head is large and it is narrow at the birth canal, or if there is a sharp assembly of the head, then you must thrust the pointed spatula between your fingers, and push and draw out the head; or you grind it with the instrument called "almidach," from which the form comes with the instruments or chapter that follows this one;
and in the same way do so if the infant has a large head naturally;
then pull out the bones with the pliers, and if the head pops out and it is held by force, it should be cut until the moisture that is in or near the birth canal is removed;
and if it cannot come out, you crush it into pieces where you can.
If [the patient] is swollen in the belly or beneath the ribs, you must pierce it until the moisture subsides.
And if the child is on its feet, it is a light attraction, and the direction towards the mouth of the womb is gentle.
If [the swelling] is hard to the touch or over the ribs, you must probe it with your hand. And they make the abdomen or the anus, as long as the moisture inside it is corrected;
And if another member has been broken and the joint remains, then push the bale's hand fully into the incision of the hernia, and pull it out until it reaches the mouth of the hernia; then insert one finger or two, and pull forcefully;
and if the mouth of the hernia is narrowed due to hot abscess that has come there, then it is not necessary to work on it, instead, you should provide moist and fatty substances; and apply plasters, and soak in warm, softening, and moistening substances.
And if the intestines are on the side, and you can place it evenly, then apply what we have said in the live child.
And if they do not have power over it, pull it apart into pieces, and leave nothing of the remaining part.
And when you have done this, apply as we have said in abscess poultices that come during marriage.
And if bleeding occurs, bind it tightly and apply other treatments.
I saw a woman whose womb had been dead due to an infant being born, then another one was placed on top of it, and the death of the other was prevented.  (This line is referring to the survival of a second fetus after the first fetus died in the womb) After a long time, an abscess came into the armpit, and swelled until it opened, and began to suppurate greatly.
I was summoned for treatment, and for a long time, I could not heal the wound.   (Literal translation)
I applied a strong adhesive plaster, and an bone came out, and after some days another one did. I marveled greatly because the stomach has no bones.
If I think it is the bones of a dead child.
I wish to treat the wound, and remove the bone as much as the woman is in a better condition. And if the woman recovers for a long time, then a small amount of vinegar on the wound can be applied.
And I have never heard this chapter to be for any other reason than when the master finds something strange that he knows how to treat.
Here comes the form of the pressor, which is used in books;
and turning the heads of the ligaments. However, the horns should be more subtle than the restrictor, and made of ebony or boxwood;
and the mouth of the rod should be wide, and the sides of the trees should be, and long one and a half palm; and between the two ligaments there should be two joints of this same rod, which are fastened on both sides, half a palm or a little more in length;
and these two joints are pushed into the mouth of the mallet to open when turning the two horns.
Another form, resembling more subtle and lighter, should be made of rod of ebony or boxwood, as the resemblance of pliers; and tell the patient to make two shoulder rests, as you see, of one palm length, and two fingers width.
and when you are about to open the woman's privates with all the instruments, make her sit on the bed, legs hanging down and knees apart, then place the two shoulder rests beside her in the opening, and hold the head of the instrument under her thighs. then take your hand with the instrument and make equal incisions, according to the amount that you see the opening of the woman's privates requires, until the man does what she wishes.
This instrument is covered entirely and has multiple similar forms. And when the mirrors have been prepared, the work becomes more urgent, and higher for humans because of their quantity.
Do not disperse the instrument unless you have arranged it, for its necessity cannot be excused.
When the afterbirth is retained during childbirth, you must instruct the patient to hold back her breath and then make her vomit bile, and then hold her hands at her mouth and nose. If she jumps due to this, it's good.
If this doesn't happen, take the pot, and make it perforated or covered, and put therebs that can open the mouth of the mother, such as rue, anise, chamomile, wormwood, and centaury. All these herbs or some of them should be boiled in water on the fire;
Then put a chain or pipe through the hole (pot), and hold the other end in the wife's mouth, and heat it until the vapors enter the wife.
Then make her vomit, as we have said. Then immediately apply the second one.
And if she remains after this cure and does not defecate, as commanded by the lady, tell her to moisten her left hand in oil of sesame or musk-scented water, and then apply it to nature (anus) and encourage her to defecate again. And when she has found it, take it (feces) and stretch it out little by little, so that the wife does not object to extraction.
But you must move it gently from right to left, and then pull it. If it comes out (of place) and dislocates.
And if the mouth of the womb is stretched out (dilated), we have said the treatment for expulsion (miscarriage), and the fumigation of herbs.
And if it is not all as we have said, make sure you do not pull (on the fetus).
But it is necessary that he who is at the mouth of the womb, you tie him to the woman's thigh, then cleanse (the area) with a pessary ointment. If it gives birth and comes forth (the baby).
However, if she gives birth but a bad smell comes from the stomach and head, burn the patient. Therefore, it is necessary to use appropriate fumigations for this:
any of the ancients have tried the fumigation of dill and dried figs.
The form of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman to retain the flowers and the afterbirth is as follows:
And it appears like glass, and put the thin head in the nature [i.e., the fire], and the broad parts above the fire.
and let the fumigation be over the coals, and let the tar be burned until it is spoiled, and start another one.
Many children are born who do not have the foundation pierced, but rather closed with some subtle stopper. therefore, at the birth it is necessary to pierce the stopper with a suitable tool, and not with a sharp stylus, and make sure that the afterbirth does not touch it.
Then put a soft linen cloth soaked in wine and oil on it, then treat with ointment until it heals.
If you doubt that it will not reform, then put or pierce a plaster of lead, and let it remain for many hours, and remove it when the wound appears to heal in rooms.
And sometimes this stoppage of a sudden wound or abscess comes... you must cover the sudden wound: if it is treated, as we have said of the willow bark poultice.
Fistulas that come under the foundation are nodes, and those that come out from under the foundation and go in the space between two parts, or more than one fistula;
and when that node is old, it works, and also moisture awakens swelling or subtle boils, and sometimes these fistulas are persistent;
And are recognized by those who are aware of either evacuation or windiness in the patient when he makes an evacuation, and possibly jumping a step.
And if the fistulas that perforate reach up to the bladder, and up to half of the penis; and reach up to the knee joint, and up to the ankle of the leg.
And thus, one recognizes a fistula persisting at the base, but not persisting: and it is that you insert your index finger or base into the fistula, and insert a fine needle of ivory or iron into the fistula where there is no twisting.
If it has twisting, then you insert a tent of fine fabric, or horsehair, as far as you feel the tent or hair on your finger.
And if you do not understand it, there will be no purulent discharge, no windiness or worms, as we have said. know that it does not pierce at all; hurry in the treatment.
And when the fistula is open up to the bladder or up to the channel of urine, if it gushes out urine and cannot be sealed with medicines.
If it is pierced up to the knee joint, it is coming out at the level. if there is no curvature and the pain disappears around it, then it is already bowed, and neither medicine nor salve will help.
And in these Persian fistulas, there is no remedy except hard work and the folly of those who meddle with them.
In those that are not Persian and are not old, in the hope of health through fire, as I have experienced, the patient lies on his back before you.
And raise the legs up to the thighs, and have the thighs inclined towards the stomach. Then push a tent of pitch or wood, if there is curvature, as far as you know where the dislocation comes from.
If the patient feels it around the base, then you must push your index finger in, then if it feels as though the dislocation has passed.
and be discovered or feel through your finger the socket or the bone, then know that it is passed. if one does not work it no can heal it.
It is said that one can heal some, but this happens rarely.
And help that one does, if it is heating the cautery thinly according to the width of the fistula, as it was said before. And push everything hot into the fistula, until it comes out from the bottom. And do this two or three times, as long as you know that these charred objects resembling a bird's feather should be burnt.
And then heal it with moistened tents in butter, until the charred object is gone; then heal it with ointment made of burning char and resin.
If it is thus healed, it is well.
If this cannot be healed otherwise;
and if the tent penetrates but does not reach the bottom where the fistula is located, place a thick covering of charcoal or soap between your finger and the tent, so that you see the fistula through the cover made from charcoal. If the head of the fistula at its beginning, advances towards the tent and then applies the cautery afterwards, until it reaches the tip of the tent. The tent will be released, and pulled out.
Then cut away those hardened charred areas that resemble a bird's feather, and nothing remains.
And if the limb goes away by itself, and breaks through [the skin], you shall cauterize it with fire or medicine.
For the fire cautery brings about two good things: which is to say, the burning away of these hardened areas that are joined together, and the stopping of blood and the drying out of moisture.
Then treat moist tents with butter or coarse oatmeal until the limbs swell, and the charred areas burn in the butter or oatmeal.
Then treat the wound with ointments made of hard charcoal, and these are the dry medicines.
And when it is restored, it heals and does not return.
If a fistula comes up to the full depth of the foundation and is removed from the body, push your finger or foundation into it, and examine it.
If you feel tempted, and between them is the cloth or linen or charcoal, which is almost to be pierced, there should not be outside it any means of deceit and false hope, by the administration of one of the three ways:
or you cauterize it as we have said, or you strike it to the bottom, or if you can boil it and treat it as first recommended.
and do not go too deep, so that you cover the foundation holding structure, and let the exudations come out through the will of the wound. then treat it as we have said.
then treat it as we have said. By chance, if it is healthy, remove that covering and clean it when it is cut away from the foundation, either by force or by some other instrument pointed. then disinfect the infected flesh in the wound as much as possible; then study to restore the wound, and keep the fistula in the part farther from the foundation.
then study to restore the wound, and keep the fistula in the part farther from the foundation. if it is easier for the patient.
And sometimes fistulas are like this: and when you push the tent in the fistula, it is where it touches the foundation of the skin above, take a pointed tent like this shape: And insert one twisted thread into two, and push the tent with the whole length of the thread through the fistula as far as it reaches on the head.
if it is pierced in the margin of the foundation inside, then pull out the thread of that perforation, so that you push your finger or foundation.
And draw the head with thread, and bring together the two shoulders together, and hold one to the other, and leave it for a day or two.
And keep it restrained until the threads hold the joints that are between together and heal.
Then heal the wound until it is healed and sound.
If the fistula does not burst on its own, make it burst in all possible ways, unless it is too deep. For it should not be covered with a plaster if it is too deep, and then heal it as we have said, until it is healed.
The shape of a spindle with spikes for making a fistula is very sharp at both ends and cuts. And not sharp on the other side because one should not hit what one should not hit, as you can see here:
The emoires are according to two kinds: or they are inside the foundation, like resin, and there are small and large ones, and near the surface there is blood, and there is one or more, and they are pushed away from the foundation and at the head of the foundation.
But those that are dislocated have little moisture, and yet there is still some citron juice or blood, and they have the color of the body.
And the treatment of those with them inside the foundation, is that you instruct the patient to strain for urine in rooms, until the foundation subsides and the urine appears. hurry up, and pierce it with tweezers, or hold it with your nail, then strike at its roots.
and if the tweezers cannot hold it because of moisture, take a cloth or cotton, or a piece of camel skin. stretch them with your hands, then strike and sprinkle some hot powders in place of the cautery. or you cauterize them as said in the chapter on cautery, afterwards you treat them with other treatments until they are healed.
and if the foundation cannot come out, you must clisterize the patient with biting and harsh clisteria to clean the area where the foundation is, so that it can come out openly. but if the patients do not prepare themselves, and if their threads are too long for the foundation, the treatment is easy.
but if the patients do not prepare themselves, and if their threads are too long for the foundation, the treatment is easy. and it is that you grab them with your fingernail or pliers and break them, then treat them as we have said, until they are healed, and until they fear the incision by iron. It is necessary that you make the stitching in this manner:
It is necessary that you make the stitching in this manner: Take the twisted thread and stick it in a needle, then pull the thread above and pierce the needle from another side, and twist the two ends of the thread below the needle, making sure it is wide enough.
and straighten the thread, then knot it, pull out the needle, and do the same for all of them, and leave some space for blood flow.
then place the damp cloth soaked in rose oil or wax on the foundation and cover it, and instruct the patient to rest.
and leave it until it stops bleeding, and when it has stopped, heal the wound and other treatments until it is healed.
the drying of the wounds or foundation Often the drying of wounds occurs in the intestines due to natural constriction and when the disease is old and medicine no longer helps. It is necessary that you scrape off the skin with a spatula or your nail, so it doesn't become wet. Then heal him when he becomes healthy as needed;
and if it cannot heal, then start the shaving more forcefully than before, until it heals well, and blisters; Then heal him when it becomes healthy.
great trembling Fissure is a small appearance hollowed out before the body, and goes in deep;
And sometimes it strikes the breast, and one feels it like death trembling, and spreads through the whole body, and more in the hands than elsewhere.
And the treatment is that you take a reed from an ostrich feather or a strong bird feather, and place it on the trembling, until the purple circles encompass the trembling everywhere; Then turn your hand all around the neck until you grasp it entirely; and put it in fully, and pull out the neck from its roots.
And if you wish, do this with a chain made of iron or steel according to this form, and be careful beneath and pull above. Do not pierce, rather hold tightly and press.
And if you see, cauterize the neck, as it is described in the chapter on cautery.
Sometimes, one does a silver or pitch clisterium, or melted wax or plaster.
And sometimes they make these small and large instruments, according to those for whom they are made. Therefore, when it is used in the treatment of children and those who are weak and suffering, they are small.
Therefore, when it is used in the treatment of children and those who are weak and suffering, they are small. The form of the enema, whether it is large or small, should be above wide, or the belly should be bound in this manner:
and there should be an opening or the abdomen tied, as you see, and the head inside pierced;
and on one side they should be punctured, and on the other.
And let the belly or the one put the medicines from a beast's bladder or parchment, and it should be pierced all around with small holes, and there should be space between each hole, then put strong thread through these holes, twisted in X or around, and assemble the belly like a goatskin. And when the medicine is inside, tie it with a strong thread to the instrument in front, then cleanse (it).
And this is the shape of a circle.
Let the medicine not be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the cleansing cloth with oil or egg yolk, or similar thing, then put it gently inside. Then the minister pulls it out with both hands until it is completely visible, then remove the cleansing cloth, and make the patient lie on his back, and if the medicine appears, press it as much as possible. And if (the patient) sleeps for an entire night, it is (more of) help.
And if you cauterize it in case of disease of the intestines, and the medicine hastens to heal, keep applying it until it is healed.
If the hemorrhoids are either foundation or abscess, then let the enema be as subtle as for a child.
and this is the form of the subtle enema when the skin is tightened:
We have said in the division, the treatment of wounds.
Or you will be told about remedies for hands and medicine, according to the completion.
I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made, and according to the places or wounds where they are made, and from how they are made.
Things by which wounds are made are by impact of stone, cutting with swords and knives, or spear or staff or arrow, or similar things.
or those that are made according to the rules of the body, such as wounds that fall on the neck, or head, or chest, or stomach, or liver, and similar limbs;
I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and I shall begin with the simple wounds of the head, for this reminder will come in its chapter.
If a simple wound occurs on the head and the bone is not broken but it has been caused by an arrow or similar things, and the skin is completely torn and the wound is large, you doubt the formation of an abscess; warmly incise it: immediately make it drain from the head itself if blood comes a little bit from the wound, and let it drain in the opposite direction of the damaged part:
remove the patient's bloating caused by wine and heavy food.
If it does not want to drain, let the patient's meat be reduced, and let him not drink wine, nor eat meat.
And place it on the wound if an abscess comes up there, cotton wool soaked in rose oil only, or in stiptic wine.
If there is no abscess, place it on the wound if it is fresh with all its blood and not moving due to air or wind, I will tell you what kind of powder a little later.
And if the wound has moved due to fire, place some healing herbs on it until it heals.
And if the wound is large like the size of a sword and cannot be closed with stitches, join them by sewing, as I will explain for abdominal wounds.
If the wound is opened to the bone, fleshy and does not hold together, bind it up. Then treat the wound with medicine, replace tough flesh where there is skin, and instruct the patient to eat thick foods such as cooked tests (beans) and wheat, also cabbages and similar things.
And if you find or cut through corruption that is not bone, strike it all with the knife and throw away the rotten part, then heal it.
If there is an artery in the wound or vein that cannot be stopped with medicine, then tie it and if you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread. And if that does not help, cauterize it.
If these wounds are small and simple, the healing is easy. And you put this powder that causes the flesh to heal as soon as the worm has moved it.
The method of making the powder is: Take incense one part; dragon's blood two parts; Live flesh in three parts and apply the fine powder on the wound, and hold it open shaped, until it dries well and joins all its blood.
And then tie it up well, and let it heal by itself if it does not swell. because the medicine is not to be stopped until it heals.
And sometimes they do this with just boiling water, when there is no incense or dragon's blood, but the wound has not yet opened.
And if the wound has moved [healed], in that case do not put this powder on it;
but place some digestive herbs or barley flour made with water and honey on it until it is healed. Then heal it with other treatments until it is healed.
If a bone break comes with the wound and it is small, remove it with fine tweezers;
And I shall tell you after the fractures of the head.
Of the collar wound
If the wound comes from the neck and it is simple, without a difference between it and the one on the head, but if the nerve of the neck or the artery is cut.
If it is the nose, there is no other remedy but to let it heal naturally and not put anything binding, because it harms the nose and makes it retreat. And do not put anything cold on the wound, because the substance of the nose is cold and its continuation with the brain which is the highest member.
But the medicine should be soft like boiled chalk washed in sweet water and mixed with rose oil, and also boiled and washed again in sweet water, and other similar stones moistened in this manner.
And if the wound is large, tie it up with strips, then treat it until it heals.
And if the wounds are deep and swollen and full of pus, pierce or cut it lower.
And if the arteries are cut, bleeding occurs, then tie it off, and cauterize if necessary.
And if the spine of the throat is cut or glands, and the conduit is kept, so that the meat goes, then keep the gland above the throat's cartilage, but do not touch the throat, instead return it to its natural shape. Then apply traction gradually and leave it for some days, then heal with hot poultices until it is healed.
And if the wound presses into the bone, open it. And if there are bone fragments, pull them out entirely if possible, and those you cannot remove, leave until the wound is healed and the opening is even.
And if the wound is fresh, sprinkle the powder I have mentioned on it. And if there is bone in the wound and it has a fistula, treat it as I said in its chapter.
If it is a spear or sword wound and the wound is deep, check if gas escapes from the wound when the patient breathes in: Therefore, know that the wound is lethal;
And if it is not penetrated through and the wound is fresh with all its blood, do not put any powder on it immediately or bind it because the blood will dissolve it and return to the heart, killing the patient. but apply an attracting ointment, and reapply it twice daily;
and if you don't have an ointment, place a piece of old cotton on the wound to draw out moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for three or four days, or more; if no spasm or severe tremors of the heart or any kind of coldness comes on. And when you see good positions, know that the wound is healed. Then release it from bandages and other treatments until it becomes healthy;
If it cannot heal, then open it, from now on know that there is a fistula.
Treat the wound as it should be treated. If the wound is from a sword cut or knife, and it is simple, or worse, on the front or the back, treat the one in front. If it is large, stitch it up.
If it is small, powder it and if it has penetrated the bone and broken into pieces, remove the wound and pull out the parts if they are separated. If they are not discharged, let the wound fester, align the extractions.
And for other wounds on various limbs, the judgement is as we have said.
The rupture of the abdomen
The abdominal ruptures are great and medium-sized and small;
From the large wound the intestines can once jump out or the intestinal nerves, which causes the internal inflammation;
And the stitching is more difficult, and sometimes a small wound is worse than a large one, because it is harder to put the intestines back in if not done carefully from the start.
Because the intestines swell quickly when they feel the cold, they return more easily if stitched in carefully, and because of this, a medium-sized wound is better, since the intestines are stitched back to their place more easily than with other wounds.
And know that the hernia of the belly is according to four ways:
The two common hernias occur in the abdominal hernia, and the hernias of other body parts and the other specific hernias are common to other injuries.
And yet they are more specific with the abdominal hernia, and I will say one of them and explain it.
I say that when the wound is small and nothing of the intestine protrudes, and it is easy to put back, this is one of the four ways: or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen due to cold.
And when it is cold, heat it up in some way: Soak a sponge or a linen cloth only in hot water, or cook in boiling water and cypress and thistle, and warm the intestine until it is removed.
And sometimes do this with restraining wine, and boil it to make it stronger to reduce swelling.
And when you see the swelling diminish, moisten the intestine with either hot or cold water and vegetables that are cooked, as it quickly closes off the opening.
If it cannot enter, then make a small incision in the wound with the instrument used for hemorrhoids.
And the first treatment is to moisten it, as we should not cut too much unless absolutely necessary.
And this is the instrument to break (or split):
It should cut within the hollow part and not bend, and look at its shape: And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines leap out, put them back in place according to their natural shape in their proper place, if you have the power to do so, for it is necessary.
When the wound is wide and it is in the part below the belly, you must make the patient lie down on his back, and put his legs higher than his head: If it is in the part below the belly, put the head and feet higher than the parts below, and so if the wound of the belly is in one of the two parts, be mindful that the affected part should be raised higher than the other:
And thus you must treat as I have said for large and small wounds.
For small wounds, take what is appropriate and gently administer the treatment with your hand, touching all the wound with your fingers and pressing the lips (or edges) together:
And this is the common way of stitching, and you should take a needle or more, according to the width of the wound, then leave from the edge of the wound a distance, and sew with a needle where the good thread is strong. Pierce the two shoulders of skin with two awls, which is underneath the skin, from that part, until you have pierced it, and join the two heads of the awl together in four.
then draw a double thread around the needle from both sides, then join the two edges of the wound together, and leave a space, and sew another stitch.
then tie the thread as you did with the first stitch, and do not stop doing this according to the number of stitches needed, until the entire wound is tightened.
And the needles should be of medium thickness, neither too fine nor too coarse; for fine needles pierce through the whole flesh, and excessively thick ones cannot enter well. because they should be of medium thickness.
and it is not good to push the needles too far through the flesh and skin, lest they pierce and open the wound before the suture.
then bind the heads of the needles to prevent them from pricking the patient while sleeping, and place tents or cloths over the heads of the needles to hold them in place until the wound is healed.
and this way of suturing with needles is more suitable for small wounds, for in large ones, two needles should be used.
The second stitch is common, and it is that you assemble the two bones of the skin and the two bones of the thigh together with a needle that has a strong medium-thick thread.
and when you have pierced all four bones together, you withdraw the needle from the part where you began, in the manner one sews garments.
and place a distance between each stitch the thickness of a finger.
This stitch is for men, and I sew a wound that a man had in his belly, which was cut by a knife, and the wound was more than one palm wide, and inside were intestines that were two palms wide, and the wound was within the belly.
I brought back the intestine when it had been twenty-four hours away, and the wound healed up to fifteen days, and it was cured, and became healthy.
And they had judged him to be dying, but it was a miracle.
and did not treat him with ointment, for I was in a place where no such thing was found nor any medicine. and placed cotton old twice a day on the wound, and washed it with water of honey until it was healed.
Now I will tell you the two proper ways of sewing:
take the needle and thread it from the outside part to the inside.
when it has pierced the skin straight through, then put the end of the thread or sew where you have stuck the needle, and pierce it from the inside to the outside.
And the understanding of this stitching is that you sew it like a tailor sews fur, and that you leave one opening at a time, and then close it from the other side, until the stitching is completely finished.
The second way of stitching, which Galen calls specifically, is like anyone who join two parts together naturally, and apply one end of the suture to the other end, in this manner:
Insert an awl or end of the mirror nearby, and pierce that spot only, leaving the two ends of the suture. Then turn the awl and pierce it from the outside to the inside through both ends of the suture.
Then pierce one and the other from the outer part to within, in the two shoulder blades that are opposite each other.
and this is the twisted method of stitching and the most common one.
Galen said this word, and no one disputes it, that the belly should be stitched with two needles, where there is thread in each.
and one needle should be thrust from one side, and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew gourds.
Know that when the wound is within the belly, the stitching is more difficult than in other parts of the belly.
The judgments of the wound are as those of other wounds:
And it is that when you find the fresh wound filled with blood, as soon as the arrow has moved it, then return the intestines and the bowel.
Then put a healing powder on top of it, and if the arrow has moved it, then put any available ointment on it until the wound heals; and sew the flesh, join the sides, and mend the wound. then heal the wound as with other wounds, until it is healed.
And if you have no medicine, put old cotton on it as soon as it begins to ooze, move it twice a day until it is healed.
For you need no other medicine in many cases where the wounds are simple.
And if you doubt that the wound is spreading to the principal members, it is necessary that you moisten a light linen in warm oil or rose oil, and put it around the joints, and beneath the saddle.
If it feels pain or putrefaction in the belly, and it often occurs, then clisterize with black wine, and especially if the putrefaction comes to the intestines.
and pierce it inside, know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small.
The intestine called "yew" cannot heal when it is perforated, and this is due to the planting of veins in them, and the subtlety of the entire body, and the proximity of its nature to nerves.
And if the worm jumps from the wound, put it back as the intestine does, while it is still fresh.
And if it is old and turned or black, you must cut the black area, so that blood does not come out of it, for there are veins and arteries.
Then cut the part between the ligament and hold both shoulders hanging from the bottom of the wound to align the extraction when the arrow falls out, and the wound is opened.
Of the rupture of the bladder
When the intestines are cut and the wound is small, it can be restored in some people, as I have seen that a man was speared or pierced with a lance through his abdomen.
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, it became an abscess and turned into a fistula, and in it there was excretion and flatulence.
I will treat him according to what I know, and I will not stop refining it until he is well, and the limbs are joined together.
And when I see them joined together, I doubt that the patient does not have illness in his stomach; and it had no illness, but waited for better conditions, and food and drinks.
And the experienced ones said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be tied in this way: Take large threads and then gather the lips of the wound, and when the thread has opened the mouth, place it on top of the two lips so that it pulls out.
and then press the head, holding it so that it cannot separate, and put another thread after in the same way as before, until the wound is all captured. And dress the wound.
If the head swells in the intestines and brings no harm to the patient, and the intestines can be tied with a thin thread cut from the intestines of an animal, as follows:
Take the head of this thread from the intestines and tie it to the head of a thin linen thread, then put the thread into the needle, sew the intestine and remove the waste in the incision.
And this method of stitching swellings is not without risk or hope.
And if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the internal intestines, there is no remedy or health, unless through subtlety.
of a fistula or when it is Know that every wound or abscess, when it matures, is universally called "fistula", and equally when it opens and swells up.
And fistula is hard and white knot-like nodulation where there is no pain, and it is as hollow as a bird's feather.
sometimes clear-bright hollow, and other times thick. sometimes shallow, and other times quite.
and I have spoken about it in the section on wounds, that every wound that is not healed, and there is no flesh, this is not due to anything but one of the NINE causes. namely, because of the small amount of blood or body; or because of its badness; or because there is hard flesh inside it, and above the lips, which does not allow flesh to grow. There is too much pus. The joint is paralyzed, and the material is of bad quality. The medicine is not good in the treatment. Because the corruption is a kind of plague. The property in the region slows down digestion, and health delays, and it naturally dissolves slowly. There are veins or bones.
And I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the treatments of medicines in the division.
Now I will tell you the cure for fistula that is made by handwork.
Fistula occurs in all members of the body. Because fistulas come from large veins, arteries, nerves, the small intestines, the bladder, any of the ribs, the spine of the back, or any joint of the hands or feet. And if it comes to the property of the main member, or similar joints.
All such fistulas are of grievous healing, and there is but labor and ignorance in it.
And if there is any fistula that does not come up to the level I said, and you have faith in its cure, and you know it, take a tent of wax or iron, if the fistula is straight, pierce it.
And if the fistula is twisted, seek a subtle tent of lead, for lead bends with the twist.
And if the fistula has many openings and you cannot seek it with tents, clisterize it through one of the openings, for moisture is so short from one opening to another, and cleanse it.
Then press gently to your power, so that you know if it is bone or nerve, and if it is hollow, and ask the patient carefully about the pain he feels when pressed by your hand, and where he feels it.
and when you know truly where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or in any of the places that I told you, cut according to what I told you, and remove the fracture and the corrupt flesh that is inside.
and then cure it until it is healed, and if the abscess is deeply perforated in the correct place, you must cut to the bottom as much as you can, then put dampened plugs filled with medicinal ointment into the fistula, up to its head, so that the ointment corrodes the superfluous matter that remains at the bottom.
And then put on linen bandages clean, until it heals;
If it does not heal by this means, then cauterize as we have said, and if the bone is rotten from the wound, cut it.
If neither veins nor nerves trouble or main limbs, as we have said;
and if the bone is exposed and there is rot and blackness, as long as all the rot is removed, then treat it with clean linen bandages until it heals;
If it does not heal and bends as before, know that you are not yet at the fountain.
if exposed and cut until you reach the bottom, remove all rot, then reset the joint;
And if it [the joint] is in this state, it is well. If not, know that the corruption is too far advanced, you cannot reach it. if there is no other device than letting it heal naturally.
and if there is a small corrupt bone that you can extract with tweezers, take it out using the suitable instrument for that purpose, and if there are several bones, take them all out without leaving any.
If moisture opposes you and there is no error or fear, press, moisten, and warm the area, and deliver the bones.
If you cannot remove them within an hour, place something stimulating pus on the wound and wait until the flesh grows around the bones, then they will be removed more easily.
And if it is a large bone, as in the leg or thigh, press on the corruption only until all the blackness is removed, then restore the wound.
And if there is much corruption and it reaches to the bone marrow; you must be covered with linen until the corruption stops spreading, and then heal it.
And I will tell you about a fistula that occurs in the thigh bone, so that you may take example and aid in your work.
There was a young man around 30 years old who had pain in his leg due to something coming from within his body, causing matter to come to the leg, and he had a large abscess that could not be opened.
But the madmen overworked [the affected area] so much that the abscesses opened, and they were full of matter, and it became a fistula, and many pustules came out that leaked both pus and moisture from the body.
and many madmen put a cure around it for two years, and there was no wise man in the art of healing as I was called to see him, and I saw his leg and the medicines that were used to treat him, and what ran out through the pustules at great length. And the young man's body became red, and he had a yellowish color.
I inserted a tent in one of the wounds, and then I sought all the wounds, and found that some came towards the other from all parts of the leg.
I quickly went there, and covered one of the pustules until I discovered a part of the bone, and found it rotten and pierced, and the corruption came up to the bone within.
I was appearing to me as the corrupted bone, and I thought that there was no other corruption except that which I left.
and began to treat the wound with salty medicines for long times, but could not heal.
and then I began again, exposed the bone as before, found continued corruption in the bone, treated it, then left it, and tried to heal the place. but I could not go around the bone with my hand, and took it all out by its socket, then treated it with medicines. and it became healed and solid quickly, and there was no need to start the work again except due to the weakness of the patient who could not endure, and due to my fear of death for him. For the evacuation often bloodied, but it became entirely healthy, and grew in the bone a hard cyst, and was of good condition and had no harm or contrary to anything at all, neither on the outside nor coming.
And if a bone is broken anywhere in the body, it must be set in this manner: Take a splint, and hold the end of the broken bone open, and command someone to extend it upwards; and place another thicker splint over the muscle that is torn away from the bone, and hold it in place, extending the fracture so that you pull out the damaged muscle beneath, exposing the bone where you wish to be, ensuring it does not pierce the skin.
and place iron or a plank under the bone to protect the damaged muscle;
it must be set as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and be held in place again.
And if the bone is corrupt and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or a part of it, uncover the flesh entirely.
Then place the brand beneath [the affected area], and then sew the one part of the corruption to the other, and let the length of the suture be equal to the length of the corruption as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, then break the corrupted joint and connect the bone on the other side.
And if the corruption is between two joints, then there is no remedy but to cover it over.
And if the corruption is at the base of the hand or the foot, it is a great difficulty, but nevertheless you must investigate this corruption and find out how it opens. And clean it in all ways that you can, but let neither vein nor nerve hinder you.
And know that the incision and the saws for cutting these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and their appearance, and their thickness and thinness, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness. And therefore, it is necessary to prepare the appropriate tool for each type of work.
And know that the work will show you the tool you need, according to knowledge of this art, and the experience of the types of diseases. Choose the tool that you need according to what is required.
The shoulder may dislocate either internally or externally.
And when you have treated that corruption through the use of medicines, and they are of no benefit, it is necessary to cover that member as far as the place where the corruption occurs, so that the patient may escape death by this or by the greater evil, which is the loss of the member.
And the signs are that the member becomes black, as if it were burned by fire, and after the blackness, the corruption of the limb spreads from limb to limb and attacks the whole body.
If you hurry to cover it, and if the corruption is in the head of the hand, as from the sting of certain venomous creatures such as scorpions, sea vipers, or similar, cover it and do not give it any space to reach as far as the hand.
And if it reaches as far as the hand, strike at the joint so that the rot does not reach the arm.
If it comes to the elbow, strike at the edge.
if it passes the edge, that's death, and no treatment outside the quantity of its power is of any help.
And act thus when the rot comes or the wound weeps: If it comes at the first joint, then you strike after the other joint.
If it comes in the foot, then you strike throughout the entire foot. If it rises in the leg, then you strike at the knee joint.
If it comes above the knee, then there is no other remedy for the patient but death.
The method of striking or soothing the limb is to bind it above and below, and stretch one of the ligaments downward, and another ligament upward, and you cut through the tissue between the two ligaments with a spatula wide enough for the bone to be exposed.
Then strike or soothe, and place a piece of linen on both sides, so that the blow does not touch the healthy part, and bring another injury and abscess to the patient.
And if bleeding occurs when you work, cauterize the area immediately, or apply some restraining powders on it.
then return to your medicine until it is completed, then bind the limb with a suitable ligature, and heal it until it is healed.
And I will tell you what happened to the man in my opinion:
A man suffered a burn that looked like fire scorching, and the scorching began first in his foot, consuming it completely.
And when the man saw the scorching, he cut off his foot, and he was healed.
And long after that, the scorching returned to his hand, and he came to me, and I treated him with things that repelled it after the cleansing of his body, but the scorching could not stop.
And he commands me to cut off his hand, and I will not unless I have hope of affecting the matter. Also, he doubted that if I cut off his hand, he would not die, for the vitality of man is weak.
And he completely gave up hope and returned to his land, and armed himself to cut off his own hand, and he recovered.
And I have never heard of this happening except in the case that it is done differently if needed.
An abscess appears in a charred place and remains for such a long time that it causes a large swelling. Then it bursts and breaks open, and the abscess liquid flows out, leaving the wound exposed like a knight. And the skin that is above is as subtle as the fabrics unraveled, and it will not reach the bone nor the nerve, and such a disease is called "sain", and not "fistula".
but if it is so long that it comes to the bone in full depth, it is called "fistula".
and the skin is such that you must cut all around it, and similarly when it is subtle, as a fabric. and it does not burst due to its corruption.
And if you suspect that the skin will burst, and the corruption is not in full depth, and the skin is thick with flesh, treat it with clysters as follows:
Look to see if the breasts are large, and if they smell bad, then apply Egyptian-made clysterization (enema) in this manner: take asafetida, oil, and litharge equally, cook in a vessel over fire until the medicine is red and as thick as honey;
and then take from this according to your need, make it into water and honey, administer the enema to the breast, and restrict the opening. leave the medicine inside for two hours, then draw it out by straining it.
do this many times until the breast is purified and the pus is removed.
and sometimes an enema of ash should be used when this medicine is not present, and you take vine-wood ashes, pour water on it, let it boil, then strain it, and administer the enema until you know that the breast is purified.
And if the patient cannot endure it, nor the Egyptian medicine, nor the water of ashes, then let him be cleansed with water and honey, or he may have a little powdered licorice. let him be cleansed with honey and sweet wine, for the honey has the property of purifying and washing, and the wine makes the wound heal.
and when you have done this, and you are confident that the breast is well cleaned, then let him be cleansed with what causes milk to grow in it, and take a medication made from fennel, and make it with rose oil and wine.
let him be cleansed with various medicines and ointments, whose properties or treatment of wounds I have mentioned.
And if the wound of the breast is small and the cannula of the clyster does not enter it, enlarge it with a knife a little, and put on it an Egyptian ointment or Basilicon ointment until it is widened.
And if the wound is too wide, allow it to heal naturally so that the cannula or clyster may enter, and if it discharges pus above, lower or press it down.
And if you cannot cover the wound below as desired, arrange it in such a way that the wound drains downwards, because when the wound is deep, do not let pus collect inside and if you cannot cover the wound below as desired, arrange it in this manner. The first part of the bow moves gently downward, and do not let anything from the bow go.
The first part of the bow moves gently downward, and do not let anything from the bow go. Take medicines that strengthen and put them on the wound, and lay a linen cloth over the entire wound. Then press the wound towards the breast, a little larger than the first one, then apply ointment gently on the other cloth according to the size of the wound, and place it over the wound in the chest to align the bow, do not remove the large cloth for several days after some time.
And the one on the wound in the chest often removes it to remove the bow, and knows what moves from the bow, if it is poison or pus or digested or undigested.
And take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has been spread in such a way and you see the nature that rises on the wound of the blood, then know that the breast is pierced already, and approach the healthy.
Then undo it in the morning or midday, and when you undo the wound, change another cloth and renew the ointment.
And if subtle poison spreads for a long time, do not despair of health, because health approaches.
For there are men who delay applying linen in their wounds, and of those who do the opposite;
And if he bends the breast improperly after many days, know that the breast will not heal.
And if the breast takes a long time to heal and is distant, apply drying medicines in substance and wet in effect, such as ointment drying, for there is a great part of vitriol, and it is the last remedy.
Take care of the liniment diligently, and prepare it with rose oil, and mix an equal quantity of old wine in it.
then heat it up and apply it.
And the same procedure works better when liniment is not available. You can take myrrh and aloe and incense, grind them into a powder, and sprinkle it on honey when it is over the fire.
Then you wrap the cloth around it and place it on the breast. Sometimes a long-term philosopher or the root of celestial lily is administered, which is like the flour and cinnamon. and apply simple or compound remedies: grind them, make powder, and sprinkle on the honey I mentioned earlier, and apply it.
And if the wound is deep and not treated with this cure, then know that corruption has occurred completely, and it presses on the bone, or the tendons; If the treatment for fistula, as we have said before, is used.
Panarice is an abscess that grows beneath the nail of the hand or foot, or by chance arises in other places.
When it withers and no care is taken, the abscess bursts out, and runs and throws pus until it reaches the root of the nail, and possibly all of it.
And the corruption reaches the bone until there is a stinking pain, and the toes are swollen, and the color is darkened.
When treating it as we have previously mentioned in the section, and if the treatment does not help, you must cut away all the excess that remains of the nail, then cauterize the wound afterwards. The cautery is very great help if the bone is healthy, and the nail is whole.
and if the nail penetrates the flesh below it and begins to swell and blister, you must place the iron under the nail so that it does not penetrate the skin, and push it upwards, and strike the swelling gently and lightly, and apply the remaining charred material with burning and corrosive medicines to remove everything. then cure the wound until it heals.
And if the corrosion is in the bone, strike and draw out the infected material because as much as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal.
And if you see two bones corrupted, strike them with the same force as before, then cure it until it heals.
And if it is wounded and stabbed, causing great pain, then you must bleed it first.
Then cut the nail with a sharp spatula, slicing across from above, and ensure that the cutting does not reach the skin beneath the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain.
And if it happens, put something on it to soothe it.
One must align the fingers that are born in some men by chance, which are entirely flesh and sometimes contain tendons or bones, and occasionally nails; and none of these grow from the root of a joint, but they grow in some parts of the hand or in the knuckles.
A newborn who is born from the uterus does not move, but one born at the joint of the thumb may move.
The cutting of a fat person is easy in this manner: cut it at its root with a wide spatula.
One born at the root of the joint is difficult to treat: Cover yourself.
In the one who grows or should grow in the last finger, it is necessary that you cut the round part up to the bone, then cut the bone with an appropriate saw, and cure it until it heals.
Simultaneously, swelling in the joints comes from birth, or from injury of the wound, or from burning by fire, or similar things.
You must cover that sore, causing it to repair according to its natural forms. Then place between two linens or cloths soaked in rose oil, so they do not stick together. Or you put between two thin boards, until the wound is healed, as it should be.
If one of its two (joints) comes with the palm, then strike that weld as necessary.
These are large veins filled with melancholic excess that come in many members of the body.
And it happens more often in the legs of those who walk and work or carry things, rather than others.
Therefore, you should sometimes administer purge of bile, and then heal the basilica (abdomen).
The iron cure is according to two methods: One is to strike them, and draw out the black blood. And another way is to open the vein, and draw it all out completely.
The incision is made in this manner: Begin the first incision with deep, hot water, very strongly, until the flesh becomes thin, then hold the patient's leg from above the calf to the part below the kneecap;
then cut the vein in one of three places, with a large incision, then separate and draw out the black blood to your hand, from one end to the other, as much blood as the patient's strength can bear.
And then tie it and instruct him to bind himself with food containing black pepper.
And repeat the evacuation and draining when veins are full, and it harms the patient.
The application of this is as follows: Wash the patient's leg if it has much hair, then put it in warm water, and rub the leg with hot water until it turns red and swells the veins.
And if you don't have any warm water, heat it with fire, and then apply it to the vein near the knee or in the area below the ankle.
Then scrape the skin with a knife and strip the vein from both sides until it appears when touched.
When it is red and black, you will see that it enters the skin like a white string.
Then push the rod in under the skin until it has risen above the skin, and then cut it open lightly at the edge, then strike it in another place 3 inches away.
Then scrape the skin over the vein until it appears, then rinse with water as you have done, and puncture it again in another place, as you have done before.
Then make another incision, or several if necessary, then rinse it, and puncture the thigh bone, then pull and rinse until the second incision.
Then pull apart joint by joint, until it completely dislocates, then hold it.
and if you cannot pull it apart or lift it, put a very thin sharp needle through its length and tie it, then push it down, and turn your hand from one side to the other until it dislocates. and be careful that it does not snap back, for if it snaps back, it cannot be pulled apart or lifted, and this causes harm to the patient.
and when you have treated it, place over the wound wool soaked in vinegar and rose oil. and let it heal until it is healed.
And if the wound is constricted, twisted and rolled together, and it is not straight as we have said, then you must cut it forcefully, but do not cover it. And pull (it) as we have previously said.
The shape of the iron that is used to pierce the bladder is curved and does not cut, but rather it should pierce the vein.
and is of large curvature, because if it is subtle, it would pierce the vein, but it should be large as we have said, and here is the shape:
This vein is in the legs, in warm areas where there are no herbs or trees, and in dry ground.
And by chance it may appear elsewhere than in the legs, and this happens due to inflammation that comes from under the skin, as it appears inside the body and spreads like a snake, it pierces between skin and flesh.
And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are that there is a very large swelling in the leg, then the flesh changes and the vein begins to protrude, just like the root of a plant.
When the shoulder is opened, you must wind around a piece of wood from one and a half feet up to two feet, and tie it, leaving the wood on the leg, and each time it protrudes, you should wrap it around the wood again, and tie it.
If it is too long, cut off a part of it, wind up the remainder, and do not cover its root completely until it is all out. for if you cut it off, it will go back into the flesh, cause an abscess and putrefaction or evil disease.
Therefore, it must be treated little by little until the head is reached, and nothing remains in the body.
And sometimes this vein, when treated of five or ten fingers in length, a man came to me once whose it issued from ten fingers in length, and when you open it, the body or the foot bursts out and pierces through to its end.
Empty the matter that is inside it, and bring medicine against corruption to its place for any day, then treat it as an abscess does.
Sometimes in this vein many waters collect, and especially when it opens at the joint of the foot or arm, there is much leakage, and it jumps out with a gush.
Treat it then as we have said before.
The worms that are born between skin and flesh This disease is called in our country "cattle disease", because it often affects oxen, and it is a small worm that grows between the hide and flesh, and travels all over the body expanding and contracting, and one feels it moving from limb to limb until it breaks the skin or jumps out.
And is infested with putrefaction of certain humors, such as worms, serpents, and roundworms or ascariasis (roundworm infection) in the abdomen.
There is doubt about its malignancy, because when it goes through the body, it rises to the head, and it comes to the eye, perhaps enters, and destroys the eye. And this happens many times.
When you wish to cure it and draw it out, one can force it out only when it goes (through the body):
Therefore, you must lie the body above and below with a strong rope tightly tied, then press on it from above and draw it out forcefully, and if it goes through completely into the flesh, and you cannot pull it out, cauterize it with fire until it dies.
And the greatest harm it causes is that it runs oil, as we have said.
and if you see it coming or near the oil, hold the sorcerer's knot under it, then strike above and draw it out.
And the patient must use body cleaning with medicinal powders to remove bad humors, and avoid eating spoiled food.
The pain coming from windiness This disease is called on our land "vakirir," and is a pain that comes in some members, and then moves from member to member.
And I have seen what I told you. I was called to a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the armpit of the arm.
And then, the face turns upward like a worm towards the shoulder, as soon as anything else, just as living silver when it cuts from one place to another.
The pain separates from that place and penetrates into the shoulder, and then a little afterward runs through the whole body, until it reaches the other arm.
Then he told me that it would return around the body, just as I saw it.
I wondered greatly how she moved from limb to limb, for I had never seen this disease in such a way. Indeed, I wanted many times that pain would move from one place to another, but I did not want it, just as I saw in the woman.
And I thought that was because the woman had a dry body, and her veins exposed, and for this reason appeared such constrained windiness.
And they do not appear according to this reason to those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and veins returned. (Translation)
When you see to cure this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it opens as we have said, close it immediately both above and below quickly, and then press down hard so that the windiness is constrained at its place. (Translation) And cauterize the place. (Translation)
And if you do not see it with your eyes, cure the windiness with those who dissipate them, such as fetid pills and serapin pills, and similar ones. (Translation)
Arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and the places in the body where they strike.
The differences among them are that some have large points, small, hollow, and solid. (Translation) And of those that have two angles, and of those that have tongues, and of those where there are joints.
and the dislocation which occurs in any member falls according to two ways: or in a principal member, as the head, heart, liver, spleen, lungs, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When it dislocates therefore in any of these members, and the sign of death that I will tell you here after, appears to you: if it is necessary that you beware of the extraction of this arrow, for death comes afterwards in many ways. and when this sign does not appear to you at all, and the arrow is not in deep, draw it and treat the wound.
And the sign of the skull when an arrow strikes and pierces the bone, and a swelling appears on the head that is above the skull, is like scotomia (blindness), sclerosis (hardening of the tissues), edema (swelling), erythema (redness), inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasms and confusion of the mind, and vomiting of bile; and perhaps without swelling of the nostrils or ears. and perhaps it loses speech and voice. And from the wound moisture white like pus gushes out, and it also swells as if boiling with fire.
And if this sign appears to you, refrain from treatment, and withdraw the arrow if it is not embedded.
The sign of the arrow when it pierces or strikes is that it is near the left breast and feels as if it were thrust into a hard object, not empty. And sometimes the arrow may move like a hair and produce black blood in the court, and there comes cold sweating and fainting. Then one must realize that death is approaching.
The sign of an arrow that penetrates the flesh deeply is when there is no scum discharge from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient turns pale, breathes heavily and seeks a warm place.
If the arrow pierces the cover of the mattress, it will be deloused from the small ribs; and produces a great wound and great pain and sighing. And all the limbs of the shoulders move.
And if the arrow falls into the stomach, by chance, something of indigestible meat may jump out from the wound.
And if the arrow falls into the belly or abdomen, and does not jump out through the intestinal route, there is no hope in the cure nor in the extraction of the arrow.
If the arrow pierces the bladder and makes it jump and causes it to flow out, and the patient feels strong pain. Know that the wound is lethal.
The other members, such as the arm and neck and throat and shoulder and loin and hips and legs, and similar limbs, are safe according to many conditions. When the arrow is in the nerve or artery and it does not move, as I will tell you what happened to me, for this reason that you do the following:
It happened to someone that an arrow or dart struck him in the root of the nose: I pulled it out from the other side under the fat of the ear, and it came out senseless.
And pulled out another arrow that struck him in the oil gland beneath the paper beneath, and the arrow was bent, and could not be straightened except the tip towards the fust (shaft), and the arrow was large like a Turkish bow, all light weight for ears.
The game was senseless, and no bad accident happened to it.
And pulled out an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic (made of ears).
I was a barber, and became skilled enough to treat it, and the Christians were healed.
Draw an arrow from a man's head or abdomen, and I thought he would die;
but after thirty days had passed, his condition did not change. I made an incision over the arrow, guided it, and drew it out without any harm.
If a man has an arrow stuck in his back, and the wound is sutured over.
And the arrow remained inside him for a long time without changing his natural condition or causing any harm in any of his natural functions.
And there was another man with an arrow stuck in his face, and the wound was sutured. And it remains thus without enduring great pain.
And many other similar things.
And pierce an arrow through the side of a prince's king who was lying in bed and was slightly leaning to one side. And the arrow was completely straightened out.
I was summoned to treat him after he had lain for three days. I found the wound narrow.
I took great care not to feel it at all. And he felt a sharp pain and discomfort under his right ear.
I thought it was from the point of the arrow, so I placed a plaster with soothing and digestive properties on the place where there was no swelling. And I appeared the head of the arrow.
And I appeared the head of the arrow. I held the plaster for many days and healed the wound directly, and kept him like that for a long time until he felt the arrow within his groin;
and he told me. I put on the wound a healing medicine corrosive for many days until it healed, and then I probed, and felt the head of the arrow that was adhering to the place;
then I probed in the opening of the wound with that corrosive medicine until the head of the arrow became visible;
and it exceeded the term of four months, and then the wound that I had treated began to swell, and the meat on both sides could not be drawn out.
Then do not cease to refine and devise methods of instruments, until I take it the following day with well-made tweezers, as its shape will come at the end of this chapter, while drawing it out and returning the wound.
And the experts judge that the nasal cartilage cannot be restored: I will then restore it, and the wound will heal, and the patient will be completely healed.
And I have told you the quality of extracting some arrows, so place your care on what I do not say, for the books cannot grasp everything entirely.
But wise masters compare themselves on very little things and on what is present and failing, they find new work, and new instrument, in the understanding of things strange that happen in this art.
I say that arrows do not enter the limbs where they are fixed except in two ways: either through the side where they enter, or from another side.
and that which jumps out from where it enters is an arrow entering into the flesh, and sometimes jumps out now and then.
And if it does not jump out now, leave it until the flesh is swollen around it, and the opening is widened.
and similarly if it is fixed in the bone and cannot come out, leave it like that for several days and move it every day.
then it jumps out, and if it does not, pierce around it with the sharp tool everywhere that the flesh is widened, and then pull it out.
If the arrow is repositioned in the body so that it cannot be seen, seek for it with all your effort; And if you feel [it], pull it with any suitable instrument.
If the tightness of the wound and the depth of the arrow make it impossible to pull [it], and there is no bone, nerve or vein, open it as wide as possible.
Remove the arrow if possible, and if there are ears in the arrow like handles holding it in place, remove the flesh that is embedded by two parts as far as you can reach, and then break or bend the arrow's ears so that you can pull it.
Be careful not to break the arrow while pulling it out.
And if you cannot dislocate it once, push the leg towards the joint, then draw it, for extraction will be easier in this case. And if the bleeding from the wound opposes your efforts, use the remedy we have mentioned in its chapter for treatment.
And beware of incising the nerve and the vein, and make instrument as you can pull out the arrow safely, quickly or gently; firmly or lightly.
Place the patient according to his form when the arrow fell in, for this is the greatest aid that there is, and if you cannot, then place him according to what the signs show you.
The arrow that comes from another part, or it opens anything of its, or the skin is swollen near where it can be seen or felt.
Cut therefore above, as far as pliers can reach, and then pull out. If it was shot from a bow, now jump on it with your foot, and if you do not have the strength to pull it out, then tie a cord around it and pull it out gently.
And if it is held in the bone, turn your hand roundly until it enters the bone, widen the bone, then pull it out.
And if it cannot come out, leave it still, then continue with the extraction until it comes out.
If it be of the arrow shaft, push it all out.
If it be a broken arrowhead and you wish to administer binding, give the instrument with hair, so that the point of the arrowhead enters the hair of the instrument.
Then push further, and if the arrow is covered with hair, push the instrument with point entering it, for easier extraction.
If the arrow is touched, it is necessary to cut all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can, then treat the wound as appropriate.
And if the arrow be in the groin or belly or bladder or side, and it is near and you can cover over it, do so.
And keep from cutting the vein and the nerve, then make an incision, then cut the wound, if necessary. And care for it until it is healed.
The shape of the pincers used to remove arrows is similar to an owl's beak, and here is its shape:
There are many ways to do this. Large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrowhead.
The form of the buttock hair is also like the feather of a bird, to push at the point of the arrowhead, as shown here:
Of veins that heal are thirty-one, hence there is a head of sixteen, meaning: They are the beating ones that are behind the ears, which are called the two "herbechs". and the two arteries which are in the two temples visible. and the two veins that are in the two inner corners of the eyes, which are called "aspirers". and the vein that is under the forehead. and the vein that is at the head of the nose. and the two tendons which are at the neck. and the two veins that are in the upper lip above the mouth, and these are called "augeheriches". and the two veins that are under the tongue.
The veins which are commonly known to be V in each arm:
The first sentence is: "One is the cephalic, and it is on the left side of the chest, and lay people call it 'the vein of the head'. The middle sentence is: "The middle one is called 'the artery', and it consists of the cephalic and the basilic, and lay people call it 'the vein of the heart'. The last sentence is: "The basilic is on the right side of the chest, and lay people call it 'the vein of the abdomen', and it is above the liver, and it is that one from which blood is drawn, which opens clearly near the wrist.
The sentence is: "The saphenous vein is the vein that is between the little finger and the ring finger, and it has two branches.
And in the leg and foot there are three veins: The first one is below the calf of the left leg, and the second saphenous vein which is at the ankle of the right leg; and the vein called "nisse," which is in the ankle of the other side.
And there are three veins below those [veins] in the other leg.
The sanien vein which is after the ears helps with ancient catarrhs and migraines;
and the qualities of the sanien vein, as I tell you, is that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the place where the veins are with a rough cloth; then tighten the neck of the patient to a peg, until the two veins appear behind the ears in the two places dependent on the head. Touch the place where your thumb is located, and where you feel the pulsation beneath your thumb, apply pressure on it.
Then take the lance, push it through the vein until you reach the bone, then pull your hand all along the vein and cut both skin and vein twice through its thickness, and make the blood come out as you can see.
Then tie and hold it until it is healed;
And I have already spoken about incision and cautery in the first book.
The healing of the two arteries that are in the temples is beneficial for migraines, scrofula, and ophthalmia caused by eyes filled with tears.
And the qualities of a surgeon are as I say: and it stretches the neck of the patient until both veins appear openly; and feels the pulse under your thumb, then applies pressure;
then pours blood from the vein on your index finger to the top, and stick the lance below, and pour the vein out, cut it, as you have done in the other two veins, and make the incision according to your need.
then release the patient, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, then put cotton over it. and then tie it securely, and leave it until it is healed.
and we have spoken of their binding and extraction, or the beginning of the book.
The draining of the vein in the forehead is worth as much as the draining of the head in old facial diseases that have migrated and turned red;
And the quality is that the patient twists their neck to stretch it out, until the vein appears; then take the tool called "fosseur", which has this form (here is its shape):
And place the point on the vein, and press down with your hand (or something else), and let the blood flow according to the quantity that you see. Then release the patient's neck, and tie the vein when it is clean and never use fire for the procedure.
Furthermore, the fire should not be too sharp (agus). And the bone is displaced, because it is close; and by accident the flames break when it is fragile.
The sinews of the two veins that are in the eyelids help them, and at the hinge, and at the joint, and at the tendon in the oil, and at diseases of the face;
and the qualities of their sinews are such that the patient stretches his neck by twisting some rope, as before;
Then the bone, and the sinew across, a short piece of flame, a bit wide, for there is no fat there. And if the flames are fragile, by accident they break;
Then make a corroding of blood, as much as you need, and then tie it up with linen, and bind it well.
The vein of the neck is useful against ague, and against dropsy, and diseases caused by heat, such as inflammation or redness that comes in the face, and especially when it is old.
and the quality of the vein is that the patient squeezes their neck, then presses their neck to your left hand, and takes the subtle flame long, and thrusts it into the space between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well elsewhere, and the blood will start to flow now.
and do not go too deep, and let the bleeding stop according to your need, then rest it for a night, because it is quickly restored.
The juices of the two guindages aid in the hardening of the alainne and at the beginning of boiling, and much for diseases, putrefaction, ulcers, corrosion, herpes, and stomach ailments.
And the qualities of the juices are such that the patient strains his neck under one and the other, as we have said;
And the master standing above the patient's head and the patient leaning on the seat, then open the vein slightly but widely, then draw out the blood moderately, as much as is necessary.
Then repeat on the other vein, then untie the ligature, and gently hold and close both veins so that the patient does not strain. Leave it until morning so the wound heals.
From the liver surgery The purification of veins in the mouth above helps to cool [the mouth] and promotes decay of the gums, fissures in the lips, toothache, and surrounding areas.
And the quality of healing is to have the patient sit in front of you and hold their neck as I have said; Then turn the jaw and look at both of them, the one is to the right jaw and the other to the left, and they are recognized by being black, and by the small black veins around them;
Take hold of both of them, and if you do not recognize them, and are in doubt, take the larger one from each side, and also handle the two veins above and below, as they are the same way.
From below the tongue liver The healing of the veins below the tongue assists after the healing of the cervical, and it is in the restraint of the throat, and diseases of the eye, and diseases of the mouth.
And the qualities of the surgeon are that the patient lies between your hands in front of the sun, and he licks the tongue, and gazes beneath into each side a black vein:
Then one and the other, but do not go too deep, for beneath are the arteries.
The veins of the cost side which are commonly used are often opened in two ways:
or by poking with all the flame of the mirtin large or olive oil subtle as you know cutting tools, and is called "anesil"; and are large and subtle according to the width and narrowness of the veins. The form of the flame mirrhine is very renowned, and it is wide as you can see:
And it is necessary to open the thick veins that contain large, turbid blood: And this is the form of olive oil flame:
and it is pointed more subtle, and it is for treating subtle veins that contain subtle, yellowish blood.
The basilica sainie (which is one of the veins), helps with illnesses that are under the throat, neck, breast, and stomach;
And it requires the lord to bleed profusely, and to empty the artery that is below; If you puncture the artery, and blood flow occurs, then it requires stopping (clotting), as I have said; And the flame should not be pricked but cut like an onion.
If the basilica does not open clearly, then you must incise (open) it and change to another one; Or if you want any other route (vein), or bleed in the place of it from the arm: It opens manifestly; And apply the fire cauterizer as we have said.
And if you wish to find the place of the wound, then it is necessary that you straighten the arm and touch the place where you feel the pulse. Then mark the location, tie the arm, and burn the vein with fire cauterizer. And beware not to wound an artery when you see it swollen, for that is the artery. Avoid it then.
And if you see swelling high as the urine of a child, and it is red and thin, know that it is not an artery. Hurry up then, and place your hand firmly on top, afterwards remove the bone without stopping its flow of blood, for this often happens. bind the arm, and let it remain in this position, and do not move it by the patient.
and be afraid, and do not move it until it is healed.
And if the bone does not stop bleeding and it swells, and no medicine is present for you, then cut open the artery if it is open, because the head of the wound will contract. Stop the bone from bleeding.
Take a slice of the plaster of Paris, and cut it, take one half and bind it firmly until tomorrow.
If the bone does not bleed anymore, that is good. If not, if [you] cure [it], as we have said, with powders that stop blood.
And the stopping of bleeding is not always necessary in multiple positions due to the small size of the wound and the strength of the ligament of the arm.
The vein in the middle helps to treat bleeding from the head above and the body below, because it is composed of the basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said;
And the lord [should] turn himself towards the nerve that is below, and if it pricks too deep and he finds the nerve, it swells and the wound becomes painful and may not heal.
And this nerve often opens multiple times, and if it does not open in some people due to their subtlety, then you must heal [it] with the instrument anesthetic. And you shall cut the nerve at your will.
And if there is a vein between the two nerves, make it long.
The bandage of the head if helps, that it draws blood from the head and aids the eyes.
And it is necessary to bandage when pricking with olive oil or myrtle fire, because this is the safest of all veins, because there is no nerve or artery below it. However, you must seek the lighter joint, and do not harm anything if it is necessary for the first time, and then repeat. And sometimes joints swell in some people, when it is necessary for the first time, but do not harm anything.
The quality of the urine is according to your thinking.
The first thing you must know about bandaging is that bandaging is not brought for any other reason than to keep health and to avoid coming diseases;
And make the incision in one of the three veins that are called 'cubitus'. This means, cephalic, axillary, and basilic; (the three veins) And the incision should be made in the beginning of spring, or autumn and winter after eating, when the signs of filling appear.
And the incision should be made either on the first day or the third day, after two or three hours (of the procedure).
The incision for diseases does not have a fixed hour, but when it is needed day or night, at all hours and at every moment.
And it should not be incised for children until they are fourteen years old, nor a woman carrying a child until the fourth month up to the seventh. One should not treat the old who have passed sixty years.
And when anyone wants to heal themselves in any way, it is necessary that their intestines be cleansed with a gentle enema, if they have retained much filth, so that the veins do not release the waste products of the intestines that can harm the principal members.
one should not heal who is too salty with meat or drunk, to such an extent that he farts or drools.
and one should not want to heal after colic pain, vomiting, stomach distention, multiplying of coitus with a woman, labor, watchfulness and fasting, and those who exhaust their strength, or by something from the weapon or body.
Then thin the fluids, if it is possible, with food and drinks and medications, if you have the power.
Then bathe [the affected area], if nothing prevents it, to thin the blood and heal the vein in the third place as we have said.
And keep that day from work, pain, lust, and similar things.
And lie down and rest, and let the bandages be higher than those who are being healed, and rub the arm two or three times, then gently pull out the stitch above, for if it is too tight or small, it cannot heal without.
And then rub the place with your hands until the veins swell and feel them.
Then moisten the punctures with a little old oil, then place your thumb of your left hand on that vein beneath the place where you wish to lance it, so that the vein does not break or split when piercing.
For there are veins that flee like cords when pierced, and there are those that are filled with windiness, such that when flame is applied, it recoils and cannot open the vein, and this is one of them. And if it opens the vein, the wound will be too narrow, for this reason the lancer must be aware of these matters.
And if the vein opens the first time, that is good; If not, begin again a little under or above that place where it is not inflamed.
And if the area is inflamed and the patient becomes frightened, allow it to rest for a day or two, but do not bind the arm. If by chance an abscess comes;
Do not enter it into water, then treat the wound if it pleases him.
And if the wound is small, or the opening of the abscess is not large enough to expect as much blood as you see, trust in that same wound and apply heat directly.
Open it a little quickly, but only when the area is inflamed; for this often happens when the wound is small.
If you see the joint swollen, do not start the bleeding again, and put some oil of lilies on it, for it calms the body's blood, and in this case, the oil is its remedy.
And administer the oil of lilies in each bleeding that you perform, to stop the flow of blood;
and this same thing causes a triacle and boil from them when it is put on the joint. If the pus and blood are too thick, separate them carefully.
If a large abscess comes, which often happens, especially when the vein opening is small and the bleeding is not performed often, hurry, put moist sponge on the joint in hot vinegar and oil, and hold it for an hour;
And it is necessary that you do this after the evacuation of blood from the vein, and if it stays in place after several days without any blackness or greenness, it will not harm [him]. And if you see, place something of aloes or myrrh beneath it, in a powdered form, mixed with oil, or similar.
Many times an abscess and appearance appear at the incision of the basilica:
Place your hand on it then, if you feel it soft to the pressure of the hand, that is a bad sign. Then do not place anything there as we have said, for it may happen without an artery.
But cover the wound with dry bandages to harden it, then treat it with another remedy until it heals.
And draw blood according to its quantity based on its virtue, and the color of the blood.
If the wound is black, leave it to drain until it turns red. and if you see a large lump, let it become refined (or reduced in size). and if it is hot, let it cool down.
For the person who is wounded and pierced, requiring bloodletting, make the wound larger and let the veins be wide.
And for the weak person, do the opposite, and he must be bled little by little, and it should be bled by cutting across (or transversely), not by pricking.
And this method of bleeding avoids misdirection of blood and nerve damage, and is more effective than the long bleeding rather than the wide.
And to him whose body needs healing, it is necessary to give soft bread beneath green apples. If it is scalded, let the blood be bled three or four times; and if of a cold constitution, eat before healing soft bread in syrup sweetened, or in aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and anise, and fragrant syrup.
And if it [the wound] festers at the wound site, after much bleeding, then it is necessary that he drink a broth of char, and an aromatic subtle syrup, and use other things as we have said in the section or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of blood.
And if you want to fracture some bone, and heal it again as needed, when it is weakened by excessive healing, it should heal little by little, according to the quantity of its power continuously.
And if you want to fracture some bone after the first healing, and it has strong flesh, it heals seven hours after the first healing, or after the ninth hour.
And if you want to heal from another part, it should heal on the second or third day.
For there is much blood within the body which is already scalded and causes fever. Then a large amount should be bled, and the peritoneum should be opened as much as it can choke on a cloth. After you have taken care of all the conditions for healing, place your hand on top of the foot when it is healed, so that death does not come in the place of a cloth, and this happens many times when healers are negligent.
And it is not appropriate when you dislocate the arm, and cause blood to flow a second time, and the wounds are closed, that you press firmly. And if it is curved, stretch out the arm as much as possible, for that would be bad;
but leave it until it heals a second time; or you pierce with the tip of the flame until the wound that has frozen shuts, and place on it a piece of linen soaked in vinegar and press lightly.
And if the vein is burst, leave it and do not squeeze it until the abscess has been soothed.
And if the necessity arises to draw blood a second time, do it in the same place or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The veins in the arm are healthier than the vein of the head because it is composed.
And the method for healing is that the patient plunges their hand into hot water until the flesh becomes red;
then it should be bound moderately, so that the vein is visible, then heal it now across, not wide or long.
And let the wound be wide, and let it be cleansed closely near the joint of the hand, and if you cannot draw out [something] from there, then put the hand in hot water, and let the blood flow in the hot water, until you have enough.
but if it is frozen, do not hit the hand with hot water, for one puts more in winter than in summer.
and the cleansing of this vein is safer than all other veins, for there is neither an artery nor a nerve there.
The cleansing of the sheath of the right hand is effective for all diseases of the liver, and this is how it's done:
hold the hand, and push into hot water until the vein is empty, if you can see [it]; And if the wound is transverse, and you close it completely, it causes no harm.
And do not go too deep, because the nerves are entirely exposed bare under the skin, and then put your hand in hot water, if the blood doesn't freeze in the wound, it cannot come out.
And when you have drained the blood as much as necessary, put oil and linen over the wound to bind it quickly, and do this with each wound.
The purgative of the left hand is good for the disease of the mouse, and do as I have told you regarding the right one.
The vein of the spine is effective for all diseases that are under the body, such as ailments of the back, and retention of phlegm, and diseases of the lungs, and knees and old legs, and similar illnesses.
And the quality of the wound is that the patient puts his foot in hot water, and rubs it on the wound until it burns, and ties it above the ankle joint. And the wound is at the ankle, and from above the foot there is much pain.
Therefore, make the wound wider or larger at the ankle, which is more effective.
And if you wound on the foot, watch out for nerves that are underneath, and wound through also as in cutting;
and let the flames be quenched.
And if the bone cannot come out, place the foot in water and let the vein empty well.
And if bloodletting is necessary for the first time, begin again slightly above because the wound is salty;
Do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and do the same with the soothing of the other foot equally.
The wound of the sciatic nerve is at the knee joint, and its cleaning relieves pain in the ankle, when it is hot with blood.
And the quality of his wound is such that the patient immerses himself or herself in water, and pulls above the ankle four fingers twisted, for otherwise the vein will not open.
and if it opens, you can bleed in all ways that you can, and across; And it is more useful to break it [the shoulder], for the joint is dislocated, and it responds well to human hands.
And it is more useful to break it [the shoulder], for the joint is dislocated, and it responds well to human hands. And if you do not reset it [the dislocated joint], no healer will open or close the door to it, and turn it towards the little finger and beware of nerves.
Make such correction of the blood as you see fit, then untie the ligament [binding the shoulder], and put cotton on it and hold it in place. It is now healed.
Blisters are made of horns, or hare's fat, or glass.
And blistering can be done in two ways: To draw and attract blood, or to avoid wounding.
And this ventosation which is meant to avoid wounding has two methods: or it is with all fire, or without fire.
and the ventosation which is made by drawing blood and extraction of blood is performed in 14 inches of the body, from which one is completely in the head. and the others are in the neck. and the others in the two sides of the neck; and the wound under the chin. and the wound in the two shoulders. and the wound on the shins. and the wounds in the two arms. and the wounds in the two legs. and the wounds in the two ankles.
And the ventosation (ventousation) does not deal with blood, except for minor veins that are scattered in the flesh, and therefore one should not avoid it at all, as when performing venesection (bloodletting); and it should not be administered, neither at any fire nor hot iron, in any disease that comes from congestion, until the whole body is emptied.
If there is a necessity to ventose for diseases, or by custom, then we will administer it each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in the middle, and every time.
because there are some who, when they need to be ventosed, have a swollen head;
And for those who find swelling and redness in their body, and in their head, and at the neck, and blackening of the eyes;
And for those who find a spot of blood in their mouth, and their tongue has swollen, and they bleed; And if there are such who have convulsions, and see blood in urine and vomit and death and similar things.
And when we observe these signs, especially if it is in the month, we order to ventose after 3 hours of the day.
The pain of the head assists in the swelling of the eyes ... that comes to the eyes, and it is not necessary that this be after the evacuation of all the body.
And this ventilation is in the place of the pain of the head, and it is not necessary for those with cold constitution to use it, or who have diarrhea, because it does great harm to them.
And for this reason, it is not suitable at all that the watchers [or caretakers] should use [this method], nor those who have a cold head disease.
And those who often heal themselves become negligent, and for this reason, the cupping glass should be placed a little lower due to the fear of negligence.
The ventosation [therapy] is in the location of the head and the basilica, and for this reason it is effective against the swelling, and for fracturing the channel of the skull, and for all that, and for filling.
It should be pushed gently, for if it remains too tightly, it may cause obstruction in the intestines or stomach and the heart.
The ventosation at the costel joints of the neck is effective against headaches, otalgia [ear pain], migraine, strangulation, and tooth root pain, and is in the location of the basilica cavity.
And you must command the lord to press his hand to put it (the dislocation) back into place, not to cut the artery, and no bleeding should occur.
Ventilations beneath the chin are good for mouth disease, corruption of gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth. And it is in the place of the salivary glands of the two lips.
Ventilations under the armpits are useful for diseases that originate from heat and fullness.
Ventilations along the ribs are as good as three veins in the arm, for it draws blood from these large veins.
Command the lord not to press too deeply, for the skin is bare and knows beneath nerves and arteries.
Ventilations on the buttocks are good for hemorrhoids from the base and diseases beneath, and the ventilation should be large and made of goat's hair, as it needs to draw well. And by chance, if it is delicate, it would break. It makes large wounds.
The boils on the legs burst open widely because they draw blood from all over the body, and they are old sores of the rain, the marriage, and the bladder, and they reduce the flowers.
They are located in the armpits and elbows, and despite that, they weaken the body after a long time, and bring pus in various forms.
The way to put a boil is to first empty it, then touch it gently and quickly, stir it evenly, and not stop doing this until you see the area turn red and swell up, and make the pus appear red from blood.
Then heat (or cauterize), and apply cuppings, and take care in the arrangement of the body, for there are some who have cold flesh, and clear pores. If you should cut only once, and it should be large incisions, and one deep wound. suck gently (or draw out blood).
And if the swelling is large, then you should cut twice: The first time for thinning the way for thick blood to flow out.
And if the swelling is very thick, then you should cut a third time;
And when we want to draw out blood drop by drop, we should only puncture once. And if you want a lot of blood, we will do it often.
And if the limbs are thin, they should be strengthened fully, and the joints should be quickly pierced so that the cores are perforated; it is necessary for those with thick and hard skin, and those with narrow pores, to anoint the joints of the boils with stimulating and dissolving oil. if it is in this case, with violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or oil of pumpkin seed.
and if it is in yew, with the oil of parsley, or of lilies, or of chamomile, or something similar.
And if the excess is thick and cold, take bitter almond oil, or balsam oil, or anise oil, and similar ones.
And if the person to be healed has a tight and narrow wound, no oil should be put on it, but it should be washed after being lanced with rose water, cold water, lemon water, curds water, or porcelain water, or any similar thing.
And he who has much moisture should rise from bed with the aid of aspen wood, or water of myrtle, and similar things.
And those with thick excesses should rise from old wine, or vinegar water, or decoction of anise or chamomile, or something similar.
And it is not advisable to apply cupping before bathing or in bathwater, but after the bath for an hour or two.
And he should not sleep after cupping, and it is necessary that he warm himself, when he needs to be cupped and when he has been cupped.
Watch out for the one who is being bled is choleric, and let him not be too sharp and inflamed; He must take cold things, such as pomegranates, endive, and lettuce in moderation, and similar things. Eat light foods, such as mutton meat and moist meats.
Eat light foods, such as mutton meat and moist meats. And the one with a cold constitution, take honey syrup, moderately fragrant old wine, and eat little, and eat light foods such as small birds and young birds and sparrows.
And on the day when it will vomit, it should drink more than eat;
It is necessary to give certain men sometimes treacle or muscatel before or after vomiting, to strengthen the main limbs; And let the wine be made thin, but it is not good for those who are hot to drink it.
The vomitings that are placed on wounds are those placed on the liver, and the spleen, and gout, and on the stomach and the bowels and the loins and the thigh, because these limbs do not tolerate being wounded, and it is done for nothing but to draw blood from member to member, as we do with the breasts when milking;
To remove the viscosity from the limb, as we place cupping glasses on the abdomen and the buttocks to reduce it.
and remove the pain when there is an obstruction or stone, by attracting its nature through chance, or dislodge the stone from its place.
and so it is done when placed on the liver and the bladder when there is retained wind, and these cupping glasses are administered empty to only draw blood. And sometimes they are administered with fire, and sometimes filled with cold water, as in diseases of the pleura, and so the cupping glass is filled with hot water or with water that has cooked herbs convenient for it.
The form of the bladder treated with fire is as follows:
And it should be two fingers and a half palm-width long, and have a hole in the middle about a thumb's width wide, like pushing an awl, made of bone, soft beforehand so as not to prick the patient when placing it on the limb;
and make it through the middle a rod of bone or iron for placing a splint inside, and let them be both large and small according to the diseases and age of those who take them;
for the swellings of children are different from those of the old, and thin from fat.
And this splint should be placed thus on the limb:
grasp the splint with wax or linen and place it in the splint through the hole in the middle of the splint, so that the brightness is at the bottom of the splint so as not to burn the patient.
And then place it on the member, and your fingers should be on the sore as we have said, so that when one looks at it, if steam comes out, then open the blister.
Then apply the thread as before, and renew it often, if needed.
In the blister that is given in case of pleurisy, it should not have a worm nor a sore, and it should not be applied unless when it is full of liquid, and it should only be placed on the member.
and this is the form:
Suppurating abscesses are not applied unless in members where blisters cannot be placed due to their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar areas. And in naked flesh, such as thigh or shin, and similar places;
And the quality of the person is that when you find bladders that are in sweet clean water without purge, if you take them;
and put them in fresh sweet water until they are familiar with it and have nothing in their bellies; Then let them be purged of the veins and bowels, then scrub the member until it is red, and place the bladders on it;
And when they are full and hot, if there is a place to apply a cupping glass, let it be applied, for it works well.
If not, raise the limb above water level, and then below water, very good, and then wrap it;
And if the limb remains too long without the body's warmth, moisten a linen cloth in cold water and place it on, until the pain subsides.
And if the limb becomes multiple (or split), place broken glass, or gall, or similar things on it until it subsides.
Place half-peeled beans on the limb and let them remain until they adhere to it, which will cause it to subside now.
And if you need more help, take other warm limbs.
And if the warm limbs do not want to take hold, scrape the limb with fresh blood or insert a needle until it comes out, then place them on, and as soon as they feel the blood, they adhere.
And when you see them dripping, sprinkle a little bit of aloe powder and crushed seeds or ashes on them, they will stop now.
Here begins the book of fractures This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it is the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Know, dear child, that the foolish man falls into this chapter who has never seen any of the old books, nor read any of their letters.
and for this reason, medicine is unknown in our land, as I have never found anyone good.
I do not know anything else except through the science of the old books, which I have studied so much that I have treated it and by experience, and by the custom of my life.
I have described in this chapter what is contained therein and have summarized it at the end and have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are brought forth, just as I did in these two chapters before.
Therefore, let us say the summary of this book, the number of words and chapters where the wise put their understanding and dwell on truth, so that those who have been proven knowledgeable will know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when breakage or dislocation or twisting or fracture comes to anyone, it is necessary that you straighten the patient from one side and the other, if anything does not stop you, as weakness of the body, or infants, or the elderly. or if the time is not very hot, or too cold;
and do not eat cold meat, that is to say raw or undercooked meats, and do not drink wine, nor consume any fatty meats, and do not stuff yourself too much with foods that fill the veins with blood, until you have doubt of an abscess heating up, nor expansion of matter in the member.
The patient returns with a slight movement to the first management. (Here, "governement" can also be translated as "treatment")
And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary that you nourish the patient with foods that make large stools, or they have thick consistency, such as cooked wheat in water, and peas, and heads, and feet, and pork belly, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things. For this nourishment brings on softened stools and the broken bones heal more quickly.
And know that the broken bones of old and decayed people cannot be well recovered nor welded according to their nature due to the weakness of the limbs, neither those who are too tender, as in the case of small children.
but there is no cure, reset above the broken bone and hold together the limb tightly until it heals as it was before. and do not let him at all perform his work, and for this reason, he must be fed with large meats, as we have said.
And know that the breaks are various in many ways.
For the break of the neck is different from the break of the foot, or the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all ways of break. There is a break that grows over time, and another that sharpens, like the quill for writing.
There is a break that grows over time, and another that sharpens, like the quill for writing. And there is a break with a wound, and a break with a small crack.
And in every way he has his equipment and proper instrument for restoration, according to what the memory comes to mind.
And it is known as bone fracture because the limb is twisted, widely open due to displacement, and feels pressure when touched with the hand.
And if there is no twisting or touching, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture.
But it may have twisting, splitting, or small fractures. Do not move the hand, but apply medications that follow, and then hold it gently.
Know that the fracture that goes in the arm and has two parts separated, you should now set them equally, otherwise abscesses will grow on it.
And if abscesses grow there, leave it for as many days as the abscesses are calmed;
Then set it equally to the motion that you can easily and wisely move, and know that the restoration of it is easier than the restoration where there are fragments.
Then hold steady, as required hereafter.
If the bone is broken into pieces, if it's in the foot or hand, or if it's a small member, or a two-finger break, or a single finger break, using both hands.
And set the limb according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the limb are disjoined, you reset them with all means possible and ensure that through your work no injury or pain comes to the patient.
And align well the two joints of the bones according to the best shapes.
And feel it with your hand if it seems to you that it is not quite right:
If it is straightened well and not stretched too much or pressed as those who force it by their work to bring about an abscess and contraction in the limb, as we have seen many times.
And when the limb is in place, keep the patient still so he does not move, neither while watching nor sleeping or turning or otherwise. And be sure that the limbs are so secure that they feel no pain at all. For if it feels no pain, then it is not broken, and it must be put in such a position that it feels no pain.
And be sure that the limbs are so secure that they feel no pain at all. For if it feels no pain, then it is not broken, and it must be put in such a position that it feels no pain. And ensure that it is placed straight, so that deformity does not come when it is restored.
and the qualities of the broken limb are as I tell you.
Know that broken limbs are various in smallness and largeness and shape.
For there are small members such as fingers, toes, and similar ones: It is necessary to wrap thin and soft linen cloths around them. And the large ones, such as thighs and legs:
It is necessary to wrap with a wide and hard bandage, for the broad bands embrace the whole large limb equally, and hold it tight from all sides without any gap.
Then tie light bandages around it three or four times according to the limb, and hold your hand slightly on the entire bandage, then go above the break and hold less, leaving a slight space from the break.
and soften the bandage a little, until you take a large part of the healthy part, then take another bandage, and turn it directly over the broken place.
then return to the part below the break, and hold moderately, not too strong nor too loosely, as we have said in the first lesson above.
Then put between the joints of linen or cloth strips that are all even, and then bind them all together above [the affected area], and then place your well-made splints on top, if there is no abscess or inflammation.
And if there is an abscess or inflammation, put on top something soothing for the abscess that is hot, and which removes the inflammation, and leave it in place for some days.
Then bind the splints, and they should be half the width of a thick cane, or a staff used for splitting wood, or palm branches, in this manner:
but it is necessary that the splint placed on the fracture be slightly larger and wider than the others.
And let it be as long as necessary for the member, whether small or large. then pull up on the sutures just as you did at the first stitch, then sew it up with thread following this fashion, just like at the first break. the wound is narrower now, less so later.
and the thread should be of moderate size, not too thick nor too thin, and made of flax yarn.
for if the thread is thick, like those I have seen in the works of fools who sew with twisted flax yarn, it is a great error, because the stitch cannot be even if it is too thin, and it should not have less than two fingers' space between each suture.
And if the patient is gored by the shafts of arrows after being wounded in healthy limbs, you should place linseed oil or linen cloth on them to prevent bleeding.
When the wound is fractured and the ligaments are torn apart, here is the remedy I shall tell you.
And know that it is not necessary to hold splints on all broken limbs for the first day. For when the limbs are large, no need to insert arrows before five or seven days, or more according to your assurance of the abscess healing.
And here is the manner of ancient plasters for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists:
And it is that you take flour that is kept near the mill walls, and mix it with abundant egg, and put this mixture, not too clear nor too thick, on the fracture, and this is the common manner of the plaster restoring the fracture in various positions, and likewise for women and small children, for it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Another manner of the plaster restoring the fracture and the dislocation and the twist: Take [a] probe, lancet, and tweezers and dissecting scissors and asbestos and Arabic gum, to X [the patient]; Take myrrh and aloes, to V [the patient]; apply ointment VIII [to the affected area]; and make powder, mix it with egg yolk; if the complexion of the man is hot, use this plaster, because it has good composition and quickly sets broken bones and is beneficial to many men.
Another way of making a plaster that is effective for sprains: take asbestos and lard, to X [the patient]; myrrh and aloes, to VIII [the patient]; This sentence appears to contain a Latin abbreviation with numbers, but it is not clear what it means within the context of this Old French text. As such, I cannot provide an accurate English translation for it. Boil Armenian bread X З, crush it well, and concoct with vinegar or abundant egg, and administer it.
Another method of emplaster for dislocated joints and displaced bones, and to alleviate the pain occurring, and to treat with a tool, you shall cut the bone and break it. Take new linen, dampen it in warm water and cooked oil, and place it on the area.
This splint does not restore [the bone], but it is good for relieving abscess heat and bone pain properly.
Another method of emplaster to heal broken bones: Take dried fig leaves and earthy parsley, crush together, and make an emplaster.
Another way to splint for the healing of the fractured bone and for encouraging the return of abscesses. Take root of vismalve, chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of vetches, of each one an equal part;
and grind, and make into a paste with wine, and if the limb is scalded, make it with moist coriander water or vinegar, and use it.
Another method of emplastrum (medical plaster) stronger than the first, when an abscess hard comes to the restoration of the limb. Take roots of vismalve, flax seeds, thistle, lentils, and sage, as well as the flowers of violets and chamomile, in equal amounts; grind, and make into a paste with salt water, sweet water, or vinegar according to the heat of the limb, and its rest period.
Hippocrates states in his book that no other substance should be placed on a broken limb for restoration except for a plaster made of beeswax and oil, and nothing else, and he says it should be between soft and firm but not too soft or too hard.
And it seems Galen that dry and slightly warm things should be placed on a broken limb for restoration, such as myrrh, aloe, incense, and similar things, as we have said.
Another way of plaster that is good for wounds and pain: Grind up moths and human hair, feathers of birds, and mummy, and grind them evenly, then make a paste and apply it.
Then after that, dissolve a little bit more, and make sure the patient feels no pain, nor has the bones moved from their place. But do not dissolve it for many days. If pain, itchiness, lack of rest or swelling occurs at the site, hasten and dissolve it immediately, remove the paste now.
Take a thin cloth, sea sponge moistened with seawater, immerse it in water, and apply it to the site until the itchiness stops, and the pain is alleviated. Then let the limb rest for an hour, then put dry linen on it, moistened in vinegar or rose oil, and tie it up until you are sure of the abscess heating.
And let the inflammation of the limb rest and the pain disappear, then resume tying it up delicately, a little plaster, and do not tighten it too much as before. and thinly enough that it heals.
If you see that an abscess has been opened and drained, reddened, painful, and swollen, and you need emplastrum and linen, start it as before equally.
And if no improvement comes to the limb in what we have said, do not loosen it until after 3 or 4 or 5 or 7 days. And sometimes leave it for 20 days, as we can see, until the fracture heals and the joint approaches the bone.
Then it should be held more firmly than before, and the flesh should be fattened, as I said before.
If you see the place drying out too much, know that nourishment cannot come to it; Therefore, immerse the place with warm water, every time you dislocate it, and do this for three days and let the ligament loosen a little.
By doing this, then you cut off the nourishment to the limb and hasten what the foolish man does, who keeps the limb twisted.
This is bad, and it is dangerous work, and I see no other solution but to rest it and treat it correctly.
There are many ways of breaks, and various shapes, and the causes are intended for specific purposes.
For there are fractures that are made by sword blows, and the collar bone breaks the whole bone up to its shaft which is beneath the bone, as a crack or splinter does. And for this reason, such fractures are called "splintering".
Or if the sword strikes the bone from above causing it to pierce, such fractures are called "absolute".
And these two types of fractures can be either large or small wounds.
And if there is impacted percussion, cleavage, fractures from falling on stones, or other similar things.
And if the fracture penetrates through to the membrane underneath the bone, or it is on top of the bone, and this wound is large or small.
And if the wound is healed into the bone as thinly as a hair, and the crack is small, it is called "hairline" fracture.
And if the wound is made by striking with a stone, or falling, or something similar, and it introduces a bone fragment into the lower part, and the fracture lines are level like a potter when making over the pots. If the arrow enters within [the body].
And this occurs more often in those who have a moist head of bone, as in a child's head.
and it happens in all these ways of breakage, as small pieces are disconnected, like bones. I will speak about its place.
And we shall know all ways of breakage by the dislocation above them, and the inquiry into their cause, and by the corruption of the flesh that is on top.
The hairy resemblance is known by those who, when the bone has been uncovered and scraped above it, the breakage appears black.
In the treatment of breakage, beware of the patient's accidents; and if you see any bad accident, such as vomiting bile, loss of understanding, extension, paralysis, fever ague, and the eyes to come out and redden, and other similar signs in various dispositions, it cannot heal without doubt.
And if you do not see a doubtful accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
When the navrez comes first to you and it is in winter, then remove the bone before the fourteenth day at the muzzle.
And if it is in summer, hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the tissue below the bone is corrupted, and the accidents as we have said come.
And if the fracture of the bone comes up to the membrane that covers the brain, then you must cut the split part like this:
And it is that you take the patient's head and expose the bone in all ways you can, and over the shape of the wound as much as you can, and if blood discharge comes to reveal the bone or abscesses appear, help him with what is needed, and it is that you fill the cavity with damp cloth soaked in rose oil. And make the wound rest until the abscesses are calmed and ensure no more bleeding occurs. Then begin to remove the bone around it, and this is done in two ways of workmanship.
The first way is that you cut narrowly ahead (in front) and this is the form:
Then insert another cutting tool larger than the first.
And the second method is that you have many diverse sizes, some narrow and others wide, sharp-pointed, and made of iron.
And work lightly, lest you wound the head.
If the bone is hard and projecting, you must bore around it lightly so as to administer sizes with drills, not piercing beyond the bone of the skull, and should have a margin or circle above the point that does not let the point pass beyond the bone.
and you must have more than one, so that each comes into its place according to the thickness of the bone, so that you have drills for all bones.
and this is the shape of three types of drills:
The quality to pierce around the broken bone is that you place the needle on the bone and turn it with your fingers until you feel that the bone is pierced;
then replace the needle somewhere else a little afterward, and do this all around, then cut the incision in the bone gap that is between the fractures, and do it as subtly as possible, and lightly, as we have said, until you draw the bone to your hand, or any of the tools you have such as pliers, tweezers;
and ensure that you do not touch the brain nor the marrow.
and when you have pierced the bone and treated it, if it is necessary that you reset the sharpness that has remained in the bone to any other tool resembling a knife, but it must be thinner and more delicate than the other knives.
And if something remains of small bones, no scales, lightly extract them with instruments. then treat the wound with linen cloths and ointments as we have said.
And another method of work is that which the Greeks call, which is more severe. and he strongly commands, and this is his word. It is necessary first that you expose a part of the bone, where the open break moves, so that when you have exposed that part, you place it under the head of this lever-like instrument, as follows in shape:
And do not cut it from one side, and the parts are sharp on two sides, so that you cut towards the bone.
then strike a small hammer on it, so that you lightly break the bone all around, and be careful of the cloth that is underneath.
if it is pressed against the bone, lightly extract it, for you can break it senselessly and out of fear.
And if the bone fracture does not penetrate through to the membrane, and the bone is cut only from above, and there are small pieces, then it is necessary to smoothen them out afterwards, and remove the scales with a sharp rasp of various sizes, in order to provide the most suitable solution for each case, according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
Then pass over with a large rasp, and afterwards with smaller ones, and continue doing so until it is smooth.
In each of the other hairy forms or subtle fractures, it is necessary that you apply a remedy according to its nature.
and this is not something that can be replied to by him who has put his study into this art.
And if the wound is exposed, it is necessary that you take a linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, moisten it in rose oil, and place it on the wound. Then take another linen cloth folded double (into two or three), moisten it in wine and rose oil, and place it on top of the first cloth. and do it more gently than you can, so as not to burden the wound, then administer more (linen) below, but do not strain it any more than necessary to cover the wound.
And let it rest for a day or two, until the abscesses are soothed, then release it, and administer medicines as if with lilies' roots, and barley flour, and incense powder, and Aristolochia, and similar things.
Make powder of these things, and place it on the wound, and immediately administer reliable medicines without biting.
And ensure that the wound is always clean, do not leave ointment or scabs on it, because when scabs accumulate on the brain's cloth, they will rot and cause great harm to the patient.
For if you place anything biting on it, it will rot from above. Therefore, if any bad accident happens to the patient as we have said, it is doubtful that he will recover his senses.
And if blackness does not come violently except for the medicine that has been placed there, which has this effect, then you should take a part of honey and three parts of rose oil, mix them with linen cloth, and apply it to the affected area. Then cure it in the manner of the treatments that are required, until it is healed.
Know that sometimes the two parts of the nose above are broken, or one by itself, because they are two bones.
And the one below is cartilage and does not break, unless it swells or twists, then it heals.
If one of the two parts is broken, then you should place your little finger or thumb into the nose and align the fracture within the index finger and at the nostril exit, until the nose returns to its natural shape. And do it gently, ensuring that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
And if the break is in the upper part near the neck, and the arm cannot come to its place, then you must align it with the head of a straight stick, about a finger's breadth.
If the break is in two parts, then do the same thing, and hurry to restore it as soon as possible if you can.
If it is not in two parts, then after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess has subsided, bind the wound with strips of linen on top of the head, if the break is in one part.
Or you bind from another side, if there is a break there. And the strips should be as thick as they fill the wound on the head.
And they said to some restorer that one should moist the tents with butter, and to stir each day. It does not seem to be good to me, but they should be moistened in the mixture of egg whites and flour. Wait for the swelling to subside, until the bones are hard, and the cartilages have stiffened.
And sometimes feathers from geese are used in place of swellings, and if soaked in linen cloth and held together, the break is kept, and the patient is made to breathe. or do whatever you see fit.
And if an abscess breaks out while you are working on it, put either beeswax or softened cotton in oil of roses, or a pinch of turmeric.
If an abscess does not come out, apply a plaster on the outside, made of flour from figs and incense powder mixed with egg white, then place light poultices on top, but do not bind it too tightly.
And if the break in the neck is small and it breaks into small pieces, take appropriate instruments for this, then make an incision, and treat with things that are healing and binding, such as plasters and ointments suitable for this.
And if there is no wound within the nails, treat it with tenets, and place plasters of linen until it heals.
When the jawbone is fractured beneath and there is no wound outside, and the break is only external, but not broken in two, it is curved within, if this can be recognized easily.
If the break is in the right part, you must insert your index finger into the patient's mouth; And if the break is in the left jaw, insert your right index finger into it gently and adjust it to the other side with the other hand, and hold evenly.
And if the fracture of the jaw is separated by 2, then you must administer an extension of 2 parts, until it is even.
And if the teeth move or fall out, hold them with a thread of gold, silver, or silk, then put cotton on the broken jaw and place a double cloth over it. Place a broad and well-made cushion or an equal piece of leather, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it above the muscles that you can reach, and command the patient to rest and eat light foods.
And if you see that the shape changes (dislocates), dislocate it again on the third day, and then reset it to its correct position. Apply a poultice on top of it (the dislocated joint), using flour from the mill and egg or meal from a plantain after you have removed the cartilage.
and put a light linen poultice on top of it (the reset joint), if the poultice swells, and the position of the patient does not change, leave it until it heals. It often heals in three weeks.
And if an abscess swells up, bring what we have said many times.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, beware that no part of the bone is removed. Use subtle instruments for the removal of the fractured parts.
And if the wound is narrow, dilate it with fire according to your necessity.
And when you have removed all the bone fragments and there is none left over, stitch up the wound if it is wide, and put on one dressing suitable for this purpose to promote healing until it heals completely.
The broken bone breaks many times toward the shoulder, and the break occurs in three ways:
it is broken and dislocated in two places, divided into parts, and is the easiest to restore.
or there is a break with an open wound.
And the procedure when the bone break is without an open wound, you should have two assistants, so that one holds the shoulder where the bone is broken. and the other extends the neck toward the affected part;
then align the break with your hands so that the shape is as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor deviation.
And if you need to extend further, place a round pad of cloth or linen under the patient's shoulder, and make it as thick as necessary for your needs. And stretch and lift the limb, and hold the ball (joint) with your hand, so that you align the break as required.
And if you cannot draw out the head of the shoulder by force because it comes in fully, then the patient should lie on his affected side and place a small pillow under the shoulder, and the attendant should push the shoulder forward, until the bone of the collarbone is raised.
Then direct the break to your fingers, and if there is a piece of bone projecting, it is necessary that you cut above it.
and pull the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot join due to any obstruction, strike it with one of the incisions you have. but place the limb under this instrument, to prevent the break from splitting apart.
and resemble a spoon, not concave, and be as wide as required, according to the size of the bone and the power of the job.
and have two handles, as you see, one wide and the other narrow, as the route of the wound that you made when treating the bone.
And when you are certain of the abscess heat, if it opens a wound, and if the opening is small, or you doubt about the abscess heat, then use linen cloths and bandages, according to its size.
And if abscess becomes cold, immerse it in rose oil and asafoetida and wine, and place it on top.
The bone setting, when it has wounds and swellings, is that you put the plaster of flour and egg white on the bone, and place light bandages over it, and put a sphere under the setting if needed. Then take a very wide bandage of one palm width, then place two layers of linen cloth over the bandages, and apply the plaster. Then take a thin stick of three feet long and wide, and wrap it around that bandage, leaving the ends hanging. And place the iron upon the break, turn the bend upon the neck, and sit the healthy below, and the sick above. And reset it from each side, and when you see that the ligature holds the break together, and you clearly see that the iron does not move above the broken bone, then watch over it every day, and when the ligature slips, hold it.
And make the patient lie on his back, and place a small pillow under his buttocks, to raise the shoulder up. Align the break with a sling using the shoulder, or tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie it unless a bad accident happens, for twenty days.
Then continue with the manipulation (of the dislocation), if it seems necessary, and hold it steady, until it is restored.
It is restored within twenty-eight days at most, and in less time for some men.
break of the shoulder
It hardly ever happens that the shoulder bone breaks or moves far from its place unless it is felt by touch.
If the limb adheres according to the shape of the fracture, and you reset it according to its natural form in all possible ways.
Then apply powder from the mill with plenty of egg and soft feathers on top of a folded cloth. Then place a large and thin stick, slightly larger than the shoulder, under which there are no hairs in any part of the shoulder, if there are hairs underneath the stick, use soft feathers of linen to pad it so that the stick is even.
Then hold it all in a great strong bind, so that the bone does not move from its place, and look at the ligament every day.
Whenever it grinds itself, you should straighten and align the bone if it is out of its place, and make the patient lie on his side.
And the shoulder will be restored in twenty or twenty-five days.
And when this number is completed, dislocate it and be careful, because it is not the bone that easily goes out of its place again.
And if a bone fragment protrudes in front, but not underneath the skin, lift it up and remove the bone, and follow what was said earlier in the setting of a fracture to treat an abscess with hot cautery.
of the fracture (of the) thigh
The thighbone may sometimes be broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; but it often breaks at the end.
When it is broken in the middle, it declines below and causes the patient great pain, and lack of nourishment, and immediately vomits blood, and opens the fractures in the bones that are broken, and he feels it all very acutely.
The restoration is that the patient lies supine on his back, and you place the cushion between the shoulders, then press the shoulders, and assemble the ribs of both sides to your hands, and be subtle in aligning it in every way possible, until the figure of the bone is as it should be.
Then place plasters and stoppers over the subtle stick of salt or another light rod, and wrap it in a cloth, and bind it to the broken bone so that it does not move. and twist the cord round tightly at the back, and hold it in place as needed, and check every hour if the bone has healed, and if it softens, apply pressure again.
and if it is necessary to release the bone due to corrosion or itching in the area, or pain or abscess, then hasten, remove the plaster, and direct those who have come for treatment.
Then reset the bone until it is healed.
of the rib fracture
Know that the break in the ribs occurs only in large bones near the back and the neck, and they do not bend except because they are slippery. and it feels well at the examination of the fingers.
And the restoration is that you set the fracture equally as necessary. Then put a splint, and tighten it with a stick if needed.
And if the rib breakage is tilted downward, then the patient feels very great pain and shortness of breath, just as with pleurisy, because the bone pierces through the lining. And it points with tips, and quickly and vomits a large amount of blood, and this is a grave sickness, and the ancients have made great effort to heal it.
And if those who say that it is necessary to administer foods that swell the abdomen in order to push out the fracture.
We do not let hot irons come if they have not arrived. And if they have arrived, make them healthy.
And they said that one puts bladders on the site to suck out pus, and this seems reasonable. Every time, there is doubt as to whether the bladder will draw out superfluidities to its place due to its weak composition.
And some say to cover the joint with damp linen in hot oil and put tents between the ribs to make it equal on all sides; then it should be cured with pleurisy cure, meat, and medicine.
If the patient feels great pain that he cannot endure from the bone that does not pierce the membrane, and doubt is in the patient, then it is necessary to break through the rib and place an instrument under it to press on the bladder.
Then it should be cut open, and gently pulled out, and then the two edges of the wound should be sewn together if it is large, and it should be treated with plasters until it heals.
If an abscess appears, place moistened rose oil-soaked cloths on it and apply it to the affected area.
And let it lie still in that place which needs to be incised and abscessed, and let it rest on the side where it should be, until it is healed.
And similarly in the spine of the back.
And if this happens and you want to know whether it will be healed or not, take note if his hands become softened, swollen, and dead, and he cannot move or stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, there is no pain felt.
Know that it is mortal in many ways, and if the hands are silent and feel well when they are pulled or pricked, know that the bone joint is saved, and that the patient should be cured if care is taken.
If something similar happens in the spine of the back, and you want to know if it is healed or not, take care if the pain is from soft parts, and if there are accidents that are in hands, and the back gives a jump with involuntary movement;
And when it has been laid on its stomach, it jumps with involuntary movement. And if it is prodded on the back and it wants to heal, it cannot. Know that it is deadly: Do not labor at all in his treatment.
If this accident does not happen to him, it is a lighter matter.
And the treatment is that you reward him if there is an abscess heated, then place on it spine oil or egg yolk oil until it is soothed.
Then place one of the comforting and drying ointments on it and tie it with a thread, and instruct the patient to rest. And he must not sleep on that part where he feels pain until it is healed.
If any bone is dislocated, it should be covered with vinegar. Break the bone, then bring together the two edges of the wound if it is large with stitches, then treat it with healing ointment until it is healed.
And if the joint of the bone (shoulder) is broken, which is called the "joint of the cow," push your left hand's thumb against it and align it with the other hand within your power, then place the splint and the steel on top if needed.
Then bind it (the broken joint), and if there is bone protruding, push it back into place, and treat the wound until it heals.
of the fracture of the leg bone
It rarely happens that the bone of the thigh is broken, and if it does happen, there will be only a slight reduction in the size of the head. Make it long and bend it toward the inside, bringing pain to the patient at the place that is broken and causing it to swell.
And the resetting is such that you extend your hand above, as long as you are over the break. and know which is the fracture and the shape of it;
and if the fracture is only at the neck, then equalize that fracture so that it has its natural shape.
And if the break is long or declines within, then make the patient lie on his belly, so that the restoration of the break is presented to you. And when you have made it equal, place the splint on it, then place a stick or rod on top of the splint and hold the fracture so that it does not move.
and apply the lever underneath the ribs, as long as the handles are equal. Instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or back.
And if an abscess opens up, do not touch it until the abscess has subsided, and place on it what we have previously said. Then return to restoration, and hold it as needed, if there is no bad accident.
Of the dislocation of the shoulder
The shoulder blade is what is between the ribs and the neck of the shoulder, and if it is broken, it should be restored according to one of the two ways:
The first way is that you take a splint made of coarse material in this shape:
And tie the heads together with cords, and lift them up and place the patient on top of it.
Then throw the broken arm over the splint, until it comes to rest, and have a bend in the splint in the middle, then lift it up with some heavy thing or the assistant stretches it downwards.
Then place the mirrors in equal position to each other, at hand level, until the breaker returns as required.
And another method is that one restrains the patient on his bed, and ties his hand to his neck, then commands two servants that one holds the one who is above the fracture with his hands, and the other holds below along all the limb, and extends each one to its part.
If you see that the extraction is too strong, hold the ligament under the break, and above the break, and extend each of the attendants to their own part.
And if the breaker is near the head of the shoulder, then you must place the middle lien under the neck and the other one towards the cost side, beneath the breaker.
And in the same manner if the breaker is towards the cost side, then you must place the lien slightly but without effort, so that the breaker is equal on top of the level and on the cost side.
Then you must equalize the breaker as required and hold it in place if no abscesses come up.
And if abscesses come up, do not hold it in place for more than 7 days, and put soft linen soaked in rose oil on top of them until the abscesses are calmed.
Then hold, and the method of holding is that you place the elbow on the dislocation, then bring the arm above the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or the chest;
And cover it, and hold above the shoulder and the arm so that the arm is in its place, if nothing prevents it, or if the bone is not moved.
And if you doubt that the bone is moving, use splints, and place a larger and stronger splint than the others on the dislocation, and have two spaces between each splint, and let each splint be so large that it passes the dislocation three fingers of each side.
Then tighten (or compress) on the studs (possibly referring to a splint), as I said at the beginning of the chapter concerning fractures, more firmly and less when loosening.
And if you see the position of the studs (possibly referring to a splint) and the tightening, as we have said, when restoring the broken limb, and you doubt the abscess is hot, leave it to heal until the seventh day, as we have said.
Then observe every three hours the healing (or the suture), that no inflammation arises there or pus comes to the limb because it is too tight. If the direction, as we have said.
And if no such accidents occur, do not loosen (or remove) the sutures before three days or more. Let the patient lie on his back and have his hands on his stomach.
And place a bandage of evenly-cut linen underneath the shoulder, and observe every hour of the day or night that the fractured limb does not move, or the tendons are not softened.
If the direction is by the virtue of medicine, and they are given meat as we have previously mentioned, in such a manner that the meat is first finely minced. And when it begins to heal, if it becomes thick.
It is customary that the shoulder and leg should be healed within forty days of all this. And then it must be dislocated and warm baths and herbal treatments should be administered to direct its position.
And if the stricture is deformed and blocked, it will take days or two months to dissolve.
In case of a broken arm:
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "forearm," one of which is small and this is the one that follows the elbow.
And the others are large, and he who is beneath, turns towards the small hole.
Sometimes only the large bones break, or sometimes both the large and small ones, and sometimes it happens together.
When the small bones are broken, the repair and healing are easy.
And when the large bones are broken, the healing is bad, and they grieve more than when they are broken together.
If it is only the small boil that has been broken, one should extend it slightly and make it level.
And if it is a large fracture, then it must be set harder;
and extend it towards the keyhole, and press down on the handle of the hand higher than the others, and the small finger lower than the others, and let the patient cross his arms over himself, and the keyhole in front of him higher, so that the patient does not feel any pain.
Then extend your arms to the part below yours (the patient's), or one attendant should be on one side and another above.
And then the mirror adjusts it to its equal, according to its best form.
If the break is in several places, put each one back in its place, and if there is any displacement that pricks the bone, and you cannot restore it to its place, then cut and remove it, as we have said before.
And if there is an open wound with the fracture, I have discussed it in a specific chapter. Take care (of the patient).
And if at the beginning of the reset there are abscesses that burst, anoint the linen cloth made of rose oil and white beeswax, neither too hard nor too soft. Place (the cloth) on top gently until the burst abscess is soothed.
Then remove the beeswax, apply the plaster of flour from the mill with plenty of egg, then place the sticks (splints), and the splint of the fracture should be further out and a little wider than the others.
And know that it must have six splints or more depending on different positions. Whether the fracture is in one bone, or two.
And hold it more above the break than elsewhere, and all day less in loosening, as I said at the beginning of the chapter. The bandages that are above the break should be soft and moist, not hard nor rough;
The bandages that are above the break should be soft and moist, not hard nor rough; And let the thread, with which it is held, be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
And hold the limb and the joint afterwards for some days. If any bad accidents come to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, then you must irrigate the limb with hot water until the itching is eased.
Let the limb not rest narrowly.
And then begin the binding again, and if the joints are weakened and the bones dislocated, or something similar, advise accordingly.
And if the urine cannot reach the member because it is too narrow, you must soften it with a little medicine, and leave it like that for some days, until the urine flows into it, and then hold it closed.
And if none of the things that we have said come to the patient, do not undo (the binding) until twenty days.
Or, around it then, after that you bind its neck with your hands, and let its neck be even, and guard against movement and turning, and sleep on its back.
And know that this break is restored within 30 or 35 days, and perhaps in 20 days, according to the compositions and complexions of the virtues.
of the break of the hand
Know that at the back of the hand and in us at the fingers, there are few breaks, but it only occurs multiple times.
And when the plant (or joint) of the hand is broken or bent, the patient must lie crosswise, and sit straight before him equally.
Then place his hand on the extended cloth, and the attendant extends the broken bones and makes them equal, placing them correctly until they are well joined.
And apply the plaster and poultice, if an abscess does not come, then place a splint according to the size of the limb. And it should be wrapped in one linen cloth.
And if the fracture is at the front, around the navel of the thigh, make a bandage of cloths and instruct the patient to bind it on their broken thigh. Then bind a long strip of cloth and make it as wide as the palm of the hand, and bind it, as necessary.
And if the break is on the outside [of the bone], then you must place a splint above and another below in the sole, so that the hand is open and straight, then bind it completely around the hand, and compress the ligament between the fingers.
And if the fracture comes to any of the fingers, whether it is the back or the front, set it straight, as necessary. And bind with the palm and if you see one that is crooked, place a small straight splint to lift the fracture and do not allow it to move.
And if the fracture is in any other fingers, such as the index or one of the others, set it straight and bind it to the healthy finger that follows. Or tie them all together tightly, as is appropriate, or place a splint upon it, as one would a pouch.
and take care in the restoration and arrangement of an abscess, and treat those who come for it, as I have said.
The bone of the thigh is often broken, and it is well seen when it twists forward and backward.
And the restoration is that one ties the ligament above the break, and the other below. The patient lies on his face, then each minister extends his ligament equally on his side.
And this is when the break has entered the bone.
And if the break is near the root of the thigh, it is one of the ligaments toward the knee, and the other ligaments below the break.
If it is near the knee, then the ligaments should be loosened at the knee, and the extension should be below.
Then put the mirrors the bone equal to its two hands, as it should be according to its natural shape, and then place the splint, and the ligature, if an abscess does not come up.
And if there is an abscess burning, let it be appeased first, then return to your work and to your care. The ligature is made in this manner.
It is necessary that you wrap above the break and bind it firmly with one or two layers, and remove the excess, then turn the leg until the heels come to the root of the thigh, and push the long thread between the thigh and the leg, below the knee, and bring the end of the thread up.
Then turn towards the leg and the calf, then bind with bands, then place on the fracture splints, and place a splint on the bone of the leg.
Use a bandage of soft cloth measuring about 12 fingers between the leg and the calf to equalize the bindings, then start binding in the form of 3 or 4 turns on the splint. and as you go higher up the splint, loosen the bindings.
Then insert the threads between the leg and calf that you had placed earlier, bind three splints above them, then go back below the top thread to the foot end until you reach the heel.
Keep it immobile in its place, then leave it like that, so that no abscess or inflammation or any similar thing comes. And if it happens, dislocate [the bone], and align that which comes out, as we have said many times.
If there are broken bones protruding, it is necessary to set them, if possible. And if one cannot, then it is necessary to break the bone and draw out marrow. And heal as we have said, until it is healed.
Sometimes the thighbone is broken in such a way that splints are set on it, as in the shoulder or arm.
However, in this kind of restoration, the patient does not necessarily recover.
Know that the thigh is restored within one day, or a little more or less, according to the various complexions.
Know that in the knee joint there occurs little fracture, but it bends many times.
If it breaks, it is not so much a fracture as a fissure or a wound that causes pain everywhere and feels painful.
The restoration is such that one equalizes what is rounded to its sides until it is assembled and moves as much as possible.
Then place the arm-brace, and if needed put a round staff there, and hold it as required, then check all the placements that we have mentioned in other breaks, like an abscess or something similar. Keep applying to each case whatever is needed, until it heals.
of the leg fracture
Know that in the leg there are two bones, one is called correctly "badger," and the other is called "fox.
And the break occurs in a similar way as it happens in the arm, and for this reason, the restoration is the same as that of the arm, and the work is all the same. And if the two bones are broken together, then the leg turns in every direction.
If the thin bones are broken, they turn forward.
And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain, and it can be seen. and turns under.
Then apply extension, make it even, and bind the limbs equally;
However, if the fracture is deformed and there are several parts, the extension should be less and lighter; align it according to your skill.
And when you have completed your work, take two rods with crossbars that support the leg from one side and the other, and be of the length of the leg from the knee to beneath.
then wrap it in two layers of bandages above and below, and bind it in the middle so that the leg will not decline to the right or left, and thus it is good.
And no one administers the iron rod of the leg length, and it is bound, and the leg is held still, and properly done in the break where there is pain.
And move the leg every day to see if there is an abscess or other incident. Treat it until it heals.
of the fracture of the bones from the foot
At the ankle, there is no fracture, but the bones of the foot sometimes have a fracture and the toes also, and there is no cure except with many positions.
If there is a fracture of the foot bone and you see the bones pressing against each other, then put the patient's foot on the ground as if he wants to walk, then put your foot on his foot where the bones are raised, then press it until they return to their place.
Then put the splint and padding on it, and under the foot of the patient place a small flat table with two even feet, then hold the foot forward, then, after you have wrapped cloths around it, and other things you need.
And when three or four days have passed, loosen the linen, for you will find the bones even, whether they are broken or dislocated.
And if any of the two bones are broken, restore them as we have said for the hand's bones. Then insert a splint along the length of the broken bone and make it slightly wider, then put the foot under a table as I said before, and bind it tightly.
and if there are two or three, or more broken bones, put a splint over each bone according to its quantity, wrapped in one linen cloth, and bind the table under the foot. and let it stand above the table's head away from the belly of the foot, so that it covers it well.
And you must not forget the other things I said about broken bones, from what we have said before. And attend to each accident as needed.
of the wrist bone fracture
When the bone of nature (hip) breaks the woman, make her sit upright, then lean her towards the lower back and hold from behind.
Then fill the hollow of nature (pelvis) of the patient with cotton and put in as much as will fit.
Then turn the woman, lift her lower back little by little, and then pull the cotton out until it comes to the entrance of the pelvis, and the bone returns with the head.
And when she wishes to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, reset it, and do this for seven days or more. The break will be restored, and if you see, take a bladder of goat's skin, and attach a tube to the end, and blow all the air out of the bladder into the pelvis. Blow air into the hollow of the thigh, until the bladder is inflated within. The nature will heal the break.
Then fill it with cotton and leave it thus for some days until it is healed.
And when the shaft of the arm bone is broken, whether for a man or a woman, restore it as we have said in the thigh bone.
These breaks shall not be concealed from one who applies his study and experience to them; read my book.
For the break indicates in many positions the right way of restoration. And so on.
In a spear when it is broken, take an owl's gourd and insert the spear into it. Then wrap cloths around [it], and leave it for three days or more; and it will heal quickly.
Of breakage with wound
It is necessary for one who has a breakage with wound, especially if it is large such as the bones of the leg or shoulder, that it be healed now, so that the wounds that we have mentioned bear witness to it.
And if the wound heals, anoint it with vitriol (if you have no other), then immediately begin to heal the breakage in that same hour or day, unless abscesses appear.
If abscesses appear, wait until the ninth day for healing to begin, allowing the abscesses to subside; do not touch it on the third or fourth day as it may cause harm.
And if the bone breaks out near the opening, it should be gently set back into place with slight extension.
If the extension is not equipped for you to equalize with your hands, then straighten it with this instrument made of iron, which is 7 or 8 inches long, and the width according to the size of the wound. and therefore it is necessary for the surgeon to take 3 or 4, according to what is needed in each cure of breaking.
and be round and slightly large, so that it does not bend during the compression on the member at your work, and sharp in front, and thick from the middle to the tip, like this:
And it is called "palainche," because the crooked neck should be placed on top of the prominent bone (i.e., the cheekbone). and push it once, until it goes back to its original position, and make sure it is even on both sides. And if the break is subtle and the tool cannot grasp the bone well, you must cut the head of the bone, so that the tool has power over it.
And if you cannot reset the bone as we have said, then strike it with an appropriate instrument, either a chisel or a hammer, within your power.
Then carve off the protruding part in the bone with sharpness and small chips.
And when the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterward, know that it is not in its natural place.
Continue until it is in its place, then wet the cloth with black sticky wine, and clean it thoroughly if it is heated. and do not put any oil or other substance on the wound that could cause pus and corruption to form.
Then administer ointment when you have reset the bone, and leave the wound open, and cover it all around, according to the size of the wound, and be careful that the wound is not constricted with a fracture.
And many times this has been done by foolish people, and they have caused the patient to become sick or die, or corrode at some point. And the bindings should be softer and more flexible than other fractures.
And if the wound is bad or large and you doubt that a bad accident may come to it, as we have said, and you feel pain at the place, do not put ointment on it. But wrap around it instead of ointment, with hard cloths, and tie them up.
And after a day or two, when the wound has begun to swell, take away what you have put on it and apply healing ointment for wounds, such as healing ointment made from four substances and similar ones.
And you should loosen the limb two times a day, in the morning and at evening, as long as it is healed and sound.
And the limbs should be aligned in such a way that the bone moves downward gently.
And if it passes for many days and cannot heal but again bows, you know that there are small bone fragments; therefore, you must press the wound with force, and remove all the dislocated bone fragments that cause the pain.
And if a fistula or other form of corruption comes to the place, you must treat it, according to what is written in the chapter above.
And when the bone is broken and exposed through a limb, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder, or similar large members, do not draw it out, for many times death occurs. But let it be until it can be drawn.
perhaps after twenty days or thirty, then treat the wound if possible.
and if you cannot, then leave it.
Often after the healing of the fracture, especially when it is near the joint, a terrible sight is to be seen on the appearance of the limb. And perhaps the limbs cannot perform their natural functions.
Therefore, take care for ourselves. If you administer medicines such as aloes, incense, myrrh, sarcocola, acacia and similar things, take one of these things or all together, crush them with a sharp stone or grind them with pestle and mortar, and then mix them with vinegar, egg white, or honey. And he places it on a bed of ashes, and holds it tight, and does not loosen it for many days.
And he places it on a bed of ashes, and holds it tight, and does not loosen it for many days. Then he dislocates (it) again and begins another, until the swelling is gone;
or you hold it on a well-made plank. for the properties of the plank are such that they remove all the swelling from the limbs;
and if the swelling has turned into hardness like stone, it must be removed by striking the top of it and making the excess visible. or you grate (it) with any scraper until it is removed, and treat it until it heals.
The limb which is weak after being treated
When the bone fracture has been restored and stays after that, the limbs remain weak and delicate due to many causes. Because one was tied too tightly and was not tied as it should have been. because there were too many bindings, and the limbs could not receive the necessary nutrients. due to excessive bleeding. due to excessively large movements, not at the right time. because he has little blood in his body, so he is weak.
And the cure is to make the patient eat, and make the body strong, until the blood is multiplied in him. and administer baths, and give joy and pleasure.
then put wax on the member, so that the wax attracts great nourishment, and the wound often bleeds cold water, until the nourishment returns to the member. And return to its natural shape.
twisted limb after health When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the bones are broken open, and the shape of the limb is ugly, nevertheless do not lose its natural function.
do not believe the foolish ones who say one must break the limb entirely anew, and many have done so in our land.
and this practice is condemned, and it brings great harm, and by chance death.
Nevertheless, if the nodes and tortures are fresh, it is necessary that they be cauterized with hot water, or herbs softening should be cooked, such as mallow leaves, radishes, and medlot roots, and similar things.
And you make the plaster soothing, as one well knows how to do, and you take the musk of vismalve, and mix it with linseed oil or camomile oil, and apply the plaster on top.
And you take figs softened in oil, and grind them with the straw of wheat, and similar medicines that reduce inflammation.
And sometimes, the dislocation is opened by rubbing continuously and for a long time with moist hands. Movements should be brought to the limb every hour.
And if the twisting is swollen and hardened like stone, it requires to be cauterized, so it must be covered up to the bone, with a subtle incision made lightly. And put poultice and linen in the treatment.
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation occurs in any limb, it must now be reset carefully.
For if it is delayed, the wound swells, and perhaps it is reset to its place.
For this reason, one must not move it when swollen. Often causes spasms and other pains.
However, when this happens, if you can make the patient purge, let him rest until all abscesses are appeased.
Then immerse the limb in hot water and oil, gently reset it, and treat each member according to its place.
And I have arranged the chapters on shoulder dislocations from head to foot.
It rarely happens that the jaw is dislocated outwards, and dislocations of both occur in two ways: or they are slightly displaced from their places and softened a little. or they are completely dislocated and hang towards the bottom, with the saliva running from the mouth that he cannot hold, cannot close his mouth, and wraps his tongue around with speech.
When a dislocation is small, it often returns with multiple displacements.
And if it is whole and complete, you must reset it quickly, without delay.
and in such a manner that the assistant holds the head of the patient, and pushes one of his fingers into the root of the dislocation of the jaw within the mouth, if the dislocation is in two parts. and the other hand should be open, to hold evenly.
instruct the patient to soften, his jaws, and move them in all directions. And the patient must keep the meat equal, until it returns to its place.
If the resetting is painful, especially if it is both jaws together, apply sharp hot water and oil, until they are reset easily.
Do not delay in resetting, as we have said.
And when they (the dislocated limbs) are reset equally, the patient's mouth should close well and soften with a poultice made of rose oil and wax, then gently tie it with a few bandages.
The patient should sleep on his back, with his arms between two pillows, so that they do not move to the left or right, nor try to move at all, but take soft food until the pain is gone, and the jaws are sewn.
And then eat whatever he wants lightly, and do not make an effort to open the mouth to eat or drink, until the jaws are well sewn and healed.
And if the two jaws cannot be set right within an hour and are not restored to their place, fever and usual symptoms may occur, and possibly a stomach problem or vomiting of clear bile.
And when you see this, then know that it is destruction. and many who experience it die within eight days.
The noose cannot dislocate from the inside along its length and width, but it can be dislocated at times from the outside, and one feels it.
And the restoration is that the patient lies face down on his back, and extends his arms. then press the place firmly with your palm, and it will return.
then put the splint and bandage on it, and hold it.
and the head that is towards the side cannot dislocate. if it should not do so, and if it does dislocate once, reset it to its place, as we have said;
then put the splint and bandage on it, hold it, and instruct the patient to rest until he is well.
And similarly, the head of the shoulder is repositioned when it is dislocated from its place.
Of the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the dislocation of the shoulder occurs in three ways:
The first is when it dislocates at the part below the socket. And the second one is to the part of the thigh; And by chance, it dislocates in the upper part, and this happens little.
and it does not dislocate behind because of the shoulder, and it does not dislocate inside due to the nerves.
And it often dislocates downwards towards the buttock, especially in those who have little flesh, for these leap out suddenly.
In those with enough flesh, it leaps out very little and returns very little.
And sometimes it happens to some men that they receive a blow or break and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated due to this.
Therefore, you must examine it, as long as you are certain; And then begin the treatment.
Dislocations are known when they move downwards towards the buttock, and you should distinguish between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a clear difference between them. You will find a hollow at the top of the shoulder, and press down on it with your thumb so that you can put the head of the shoulder back into place, just like setting a bone. The patient cannot return their hand to its original position or make any movement.
If it is dislocated upwards, do not hide it, for you can feel it clearly with your thumb.
This type of dislocation is not only able to be reset when it is new, but also if the infant is ill.
The manner is that the attendant lifts the hand of the patient up, then places their fists under it, and forces the joint upward to its place. And the ministers place the hand, stretch it upwards, then put it underneath; It will come immediately.
And if it does not come as we have said in hands for several days, then the patient should be bathed in hot water. and he is given a soothing and calming balm, such as the decoction of elder and fenugreek and melilot in hot water, and it should be administered.
Then the patient should be made to lie on his back, and a cloth of equal thickness, not too soft nor too hard, is placed under the affected area. Then the minister holds the heel of the patient while pulling the arm of the patient with care.
And another assistant holds the head of the patient still, so it does not move downwards. This shoulder returns immediately, and if you see it dislocate again in this way:
and it is that you have someone who is larger than the patient present. and stand opposite the patient's side, push his shoulder under the patient's armpit, lift the armpit upwards so that the patient hangs on the arm. and another assistant pulls the patient's hand down towards the belly. And if the patient is too weak, they cannot bear any heavy thing, and the dislocation returns immediately.
It is also reset in another way:
and it is that a long needle is stuck into the ground so that the head of the shoulder is as round as a pea, but not too thick or too thin. Then lay the patient down, but with soft sheets under him, and the patient should be long on the bed.
Extend the affected hand below towards the other side, and the joint will quickly return to its place.
And if it does not return by all these things we have said, perform this treatment: Take a stick of two hands' length (approximately 91 cm) and four fingers' width (about 20 cm), having the head rounded for easy insertion deep into the anus, in this shape:
fold the top of the stick with cloth so it does not hurt the patient, then insert it into the anus of the patient.
extend one arm above the stick, place the patient's shoulder on the stick, place the hand at the top of the stick, then place the other arm above an elbow-sized support and extend both hands below, leaving the body hanging from another side. the joint is now revealed.
And when the joint is reset, whichever way it may be, you must place an equal piece of woolen cloth beneath the joint; then apply an ointment made with flour from the mill, along with incense and egg yolk over the entire shoulder and around it; then hold the limb below the joint, and twist the linen thread around the ointment, and embrace the hand at its neck, and keep the hands in place.
It is necessary that he eats little food, until the limb is comfortable, because it will heal faster.
And then move it more after five or seven days, and let it move. If it is hardened and not softened, it is healthy.
And if the joint is out of place due to moisture or for some other reason, then you must administer fire cauterization at three places as stated in the chapter on cauteries.
And if you do all this and it dislocates after seven days and the joint does not hold together and cannot lift its arm above, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is crushed or stretched or softened. And know that the joint will never be properly set in its place.
A dislocation that is towards the hip or the buttocks, or behind, is caused by violence and stretching of hands, and another treatment is administered.
Treat it until it heals.
And after the healing comes pain in the member, and slow movement, then the patient uses warm baths many times, until the pain subsides and returns to its original state.
of the dislocation cost
Know that the dislocation of the shoulder is dislocated at the point and returns at the point.
And it is dislocated from all parts, both front and back, and the dislocation is not repositioned, because it can be seen clearly and felt. And it dislocates according to each shape. And when you join the bone of the patient with the healthy one, you should see it clearly. For the joint is thick, and cannot bend the arm nor reach the shoulder completely.
And you must reset it in the same way as an abscess comes to a head, because if an abscess comes to a head, it would be harmful to reset.
And perhaps it cannot be reset completely in every way, especially when it is at the back. If so, it is worth more than other dislocations, and it is of greater pain, and perhaps death may come from it.
And the restoration [of the shoulder] is such that you extend your hand to both hands. And his arms should be spread out, and the hands to the mirror according to the cut around, outside and inside, and push the joint to its sockets together, or to the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is at the front, it will return when you fold your hand to the other, and press from the root of the palm on the side that has been dislocated.
And if it does not want to return to its place, apply strong traction;
and two men should stretch the arm, and one should pull it, so that it does not move during traction;
Then turn the arm on each side, and when you have wrapped a double long and wide cloth around it;
And when the mirror has joined the joint to his hand, apply some oil to soften the joint, then push the joint together, until it returns.
And when it is in place, put a dry plaster made with egg on it and hold it in position, and keep the arm around the patient's neck for some days, then release it.
And if the joint is closed in its place, then leave it alone;
and if you see that the joint does not hold together well, then repeat the plaster and bandage, and leave it like this for some days until it is firmly set. Then release it.
And if it hurts after the reposition of the joint and swells, then wash and rub well, and press until it is soothed. Or place a sheepskin pad over the joint, leave it for a day and a night, then remove it, and make it enter water. And when it swells, gently rub the joint, then place the arm over it, and then immerse it in water. And do this two or three times until it is healed.
If you see it, place warm and moist sheep's wool on it and bind it up.
It will return to its position.
the dislocation of the hand
The joint of the hand becomes dislocated, but it returns to its place more easily than other joints. Immediately, you must put it back in its place as soon as it is dislocated, unless the joints are swollen or hot with abscesses.
And the repositioning is that you place the affected hand on a table, and extend the fingers of your assistants, and align the mirror to it so that the back of your hand rests on the appearance of the joint, and push until it returns.
Therefore, you must ensure it is properly set. Place the patient's hand on a table for extension and repositioning. And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, place the patient's back of their hand on the table, and have them place their other hand on the appearance of the joint.
If it returns to its place now, that is good. If not, press the affected area with plasters, and let it rest to start healing.
And if the patient cannot bear it, and you cannot set it in place after any days, then the dislocation remains twisted.
Furthermore, the patient should not be harmed excessively as long as his hand is injured and cannot exert any force. Therefore, know that nerves or arteries have been cut.
If there is no other tool available except to straighten it with a fire cautery, it does not have any other value.
And when the hand is injured, apply the plaster as we have said, then strap and leave for five days, then unbind and let be.
If it cannot move well and there is no swelling, moisten with warm water and rub until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
The fingers of the hand are occasionally dislocated on both sides, occasionally at the back of the palm or the belly.
Then push the dislocated finger back into place as it returns, then hold the finger's head and bend it towards the side where it is disjointed.
And let it rest for two days, then equalize it on that day.
Then bind it, as we have said, and dislocate it for a day, and make it move, then tie it back in place.
And do this often until it is narrow, and do the same thing if it is dislocated at the stomach of the hand, and do what you have done before, until it heals.
And do the same thing when it is dislocated from another side.
When the vertebrae of the back are dislocated.
When the vertebrae of the back or neck are dislocated, or there are multiple dislocations, there is no cure, for death soon follows the patient.
And the signs are that the emissions leap without will, and it cannot be held; and many times, some limb is softened, either both knees or the two arms or one.
And many times, the spine becomes mute at four parts;
The dislocation that occurs at the back is called "gilbositez":
The treatment is to check if the gilbositez has occurred from birth: if it has no cure or healing from the very beginning.
And those that come from falling or beatings or similar things, the old ways of cure used to be described with great words, but there is no real benefit in all cases.
However, I have shortened it according to my intention, and made instruments in various ways.
I say that in the gilbositez coming at the worst place, there is no remedy or health.
And similarly the one that comes directly between two sides, and cannot be cured except by the one that comes at the back as I said.
And it is that the patient should be extended on his face in the same place, and have support beneath him so he does not bruise.
Then insert the iron point into the base of the head and the other at the feet, and tie a rope over the soles of the patient, and another around the ankles, and the knees, and the shins.
and two assistants hold the ropes, one at the head and the other at the feet, around the two iron points.
and they should be tightly closed, the iron points as we have said, and the mirror places his hands on the spine until it returns.
And if it does not return with this treatment, take a board three feet long and sharpened at one end, place the patient on his side, push the chief of the board under the back, then place the middle of the board on the spine. And place the mirrors on the opposite head of the table, and press firmly, until it returns to its place.
If you see it, do so using the lathe that turns with your hand. And you insert two pins into the head of the patient's large arm, and between each pin, have about a span of space on either side.
And let there be in each pin the lathe turner, and the pins must be firmly set in the ground, so that they do not move.
And between each pin, place the turning pin as in the loom, and have two small pins of a span length to turn the lathe.
And then tighten the ligament that is between the shoulder blades towards the head, and the other ligament towards the feet at the opposite shoulder blade; each of the ministers turns his shoulder blade to the entire ligament, and the masters align the spine equally as we have said.
And when it is aligned, place a desiccating plaster with egg white on top, then bandage (it), and then bind with a stick of wood three feet long that reaches the swelling and the healthy part of the spine, then tie with a ligament as we have said, and use warm and subtle poultices until it is healed.
And if anything comes at the end of healing, it is necessary to administer softening and calming medicines, along with the stick that we have said before. And sometimes a piece of wood is administered, and sometimes the appearance appears at the rear spondyle of the back, and it is thought to be dislocation. This is the bone that opens, which is why one should not have any presumption about it: By chance may come death.
Know that the joints of the neck and the shoulder come out only due to dislocation, they do not come loose like other joints.
The joint of the neck is dislocated according to four parts: inside and outside, front and back.
More towards the inside, but less dislocated in front and back.
And the knowledge of its dislocation within is that when the sick leg is joined with the healthy one, it is longer and the sick person's knee opens wider than the healthy one, and the sick person cannot bend their knee in fire. And it is the joint that is dislocated swollen with abscess heat, because the hipbone comes there.
And the sign of the one who experiences this happening, is that this event is contrary to those beforehand.
And the signs of the one who has it in front, they should be well aligned according to completion. However, the knee does not bend in pain, and if you want to make it walk, it cannot move forward, and it retains its urine, and when it walks, it passes over the heel.
And the signs of the one whose leg is twisted behind, is that he cannot extend his knee nor bend it, and this leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the head of the calf is below the ribs.
The remedies for this kind of dislocation are that you look if the dislocation is old and stays according to its position, without any treatment. And it should not be assumed that there will be recovery in such cases.
And in the one whose dislocation is fresh, and it is of the four types of dislocations, hasten that you turn the joint, and push it inwards and outwards, and move it to the right and left; In case it returns, it does not need any further treatment.
And if it does not return in this manner, then you must apply strong pressure to the limb with both hands, or tie it with a rope above the knee. and another assistant stretches his hand over it in such a manner that he pushes his hands underneath the buttocks, then tightens a strong rope above the calf. and others hold the head with the rope.
They extend upwards and downwards all at once, until the patient is raised off the ground all at once, and remains suspended.
This method of extension is common to the four similar cases, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is good.
If that does not work, it is necessary to treat its appearance.
When the dislocation is at the front, it is necessary that you make the patient lie on his healthy side, then tie a rope around the root of the thigh, and the limb which is below the joint, then pull the rope up towards the joint, and towards the shoulder.
Then take another attendant to hold its arms, and embrace the sick limb's thigh with both hands, and extend it outwards as far as possible. It will return to its place now.
And this method of dislocation is easier than the others.
And if you cannot hold it in this manner as we have said, then you must bind the two feet of the patient together tightly with a strong rope above the heels and knees, and the affected leg should be extended two folds more than the others.
then hang it from a pole by the head, and suspend it two arms length above the ground.
then instruct the minister to grasp the thigh, and let another minister be hanging with the patient, who will hold the thigh firmly, as the joint is returning now quickly.
And when the dislocation is at an angle, let the patient lie down as we have said in the one with displacement, and tighten the rope around the affected leg properly, and around the body also.
Then insert the hot irons, one at the head and another at other places, then push the iron between the thighs towards the patient. And place damp cloths around it to prevent burning the patient, then extend each assistant away from him, and equalize his hand with the dislocation.
If it returns (to its place), that is good.
If not, put it on a table and press it as we have said in the gilbositeit, and let the patient lie down on the healthy side.
And when the dislocation is present, you must extend the patient's leg immediately, and as I have said. And place the hand of the assistant on the upper part of the dislocation, then press with the other hand and push down towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is at the back, you should not extend the patient downwards or lift him up, but rather it should be as when a bed is dislocated at the back, as we have said in the laying on two beds. And place it [the affected limb] on a flat surface, and extend the ligament as we have said before, and press firmly on the joint with the table. And when the patient extends their legs, they will be even and equal. Then adjust the thighs, put the splint on, and tie a bandage so that the limb does not move. And rest for three or four days, then untie it [the bandage], and put the splint on again.
If you see that they [legs] are even, tie it [the bandage], as before, and leave it for three days.
Then untie it [the bandage], and make him walk well, until the limb is comfortable.
The dislocation of the knee
The thighbone (femur) is dislocated in three ways: That is to say, from within and outward, and backward.
And does not dislocate forward.
And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend his leg at the knee, and if it does not bend at the knee, then he is dislocated.
and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit straight, extend his leg if he can, and place your back on his face, and place his foot on your feet.
Then take the thigh with both hands, pull it towards you between your arms, and bend the two sides of the thigh. And another assistant extends his foot until the thighbone returns to its place, and the signs are that he slightly bends his leg at the knee.
And apply the plaster on it, and immobilize the leg at the knee for three or four days, then release it.
And do not make the patient walk at all, until the limb is comfortable.
And if the limb is not broken, administer strong stretching, as we have said in the treatment of dislocation, until it is healed.
of the ankle dislocation
The heels are sometimes bruised, and sometimes completely dislocated, both inside and out.
The signs are that the ankle is swollen, and it bends towards the part where it is dislocated:
The reductions (dislocation corrections) are easy, and they should be extended lightly to the hands only when relaxed.
And when it is dislocated completely, you must make the patient sit upright, and hold the limb (the affected arm) by the ankle above the ankle.
Then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, then to the left hand twice, then lift it up and push the foot up forcefully.
And do it as we have said, by pushing and pulling on the limb;
if it goes back into place, that's good;
but if not, repeat the procedure as it will return;
and if it cannot return in this way, place the patient on his back on the ground, drive the spit firmly into the ground between his knees, and tie cloths around so as not to prick the patient.
then mark the minister the thigh, and another minister extends the limb to his hands or elbow, so that he holds it up at the neck of the limb. then each minister extends himself evenly, and the passerby remains close between the thighs of the patient to hold him down when stretching.
Then place the patient's hand with the dislocation equal to yours, and another servant hold the healthy leg below it, and the dislocation will quickly return.
And when it is positioned, apply the plaster and the cloth, mold it firmly, tie it to the leg, and guard the nerves which are behind the ankle, so that the bindings are not too tight.
Then leave it for two or three days, and if the bindings loosen, tighten them again.
Then untie it on the third day or the fourth, and let the patient walk for four days. And if he goes before that time, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
If an abscess opens, you must calm it, as we have said elsewhere, until it heals.
of the two When the arms are dislocated, they must be stretched out gently without effort, and it is an easy thing to do.
And if the dislocation is in any notch of the back or neck, you must make the patient sit on a flat surface or table straight, and put your foot on what opens the joints, then press firmly on your foot until it returns.
And when it is even and there is no opening, place a table under the foot of the shoulder, then hold firmly and leave it for three days, then release. let it rest until it heals.
of wound and dislocation together
When a wound comes with dislocation and it is to be restored, many times the patient dies.
Do not be hasty in the cure, if you are not wise in the art and have not practiced it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful, do not be bold.
And at the beginning, apply soothing ointment on the abscess and leave the patient in God's hands, if you see no hope of healing. And when there is hope, reset the limb to its place, so that the abscess heals.
And when the limb is in place, apply soothing ointment on the abscess and treat the wound as required, using dry cauterizing ointments.
And if there is a dislocation with fracture and broken bones, set them and do as we have said in simple illnesses.
And beware of entering into fear, as I have said, for it will harm you according to your Creator, and by the wisdom of your weapon and body.
