Having completed this book for you, my sons, which is a part of the science of medicine in its entirety and having reached the pinnacle in its clarity and explanation, I deemed it necessary to complement it with this chapter that pertains to the practical aspect of surgery.
For practical surgery, its excellence in our country and during our time is utterly non-existent to the extent that it has almost vanished along with its knowledge. There remain only a few remnants in the books of our ancestors, which have been corrupted by human hands and marred with errors and confusion to such an extent that their meanings became obscure and their benefits remote.
I have decided to revive this practice and compose this chapter in a style that combines explanation, clarification, and concision. I shall also include illustrations of cauterization instruments and other surgical tools as it is an essential part of clarification and a vital element that needs to be addressed.
The reason why there is no skilled practitioner in our time is that the art of medicine is a long process and its student needs to master anatomy, as described by Galen, beforehand. So that one may understand the functions and structures of body parts, their temperaments, connections, and disconnections, as well as knowing bones, nerves, muscles, their numbers, exits, pulsating veins, stationary ones, and their locations.
Therefore, as Abquraat has said: 'Those who are called physicians are many but those with the actual knowledge and skill are few, especially when it comes to practical surgery.' We have mentioned some of this in the introduction to this book.
For those who lack knowledge of what we have mentioned regarding anatomy are bound to make fatal errors, as I myself have witnessed many who delude themselves into thinking that they possess this knowledge without having any actual understanding or awareness.
For I have seen an ignorant physician who made an incision on a warty tumor in the neck of a woman, thereby opening some of the carotid arteries in her neck which bled so much that the woman died right before his eyes.
I have also seen another physician who, when extracting a stone from an elderly man, whose bladder stone was large, acted recklessly and removed it along with part of the lining of the bladder. The man died about three days later; I had been called in to remove it, and upon seeing the size of the stone and the patient's condition, I estimated that this was likely to happen.
I saw another physician who made his living from the medical practice at the house of one of our city's pimps.
There was a black boy who had a fracture near his heel, with an accompanying wound; the physician, in his ignorance, hurriedly bandaged and splinted both the break and the wound too tightly together without allowing for any drainage of the injury.
He then left the boy to his own devices for a few days, telling him not to loosen the bandages until the boy's leg and foot had become swollen and he was close to death.
When I was called in to see him, I quickly unbound the boy's leg and his discomfort improved somewhat; however, gangrene had already set into the limb, which could not be saved.
The damage continued to spread through the limb until he died.
I have seen another physician who cauterised a cancerous tumour, which after days of ulcerating further greatly increased the patient's distress; this is because when a cancer is entirely made up of black bile it should never be touched with an iron instrument.
Except if it is in a member which can bear to have all of it amputated.
For this, my son, you should know that manual work is divided into two types: work accompanied by safety and work which in most cases causes injury.
I have warned you in every place where this book mentions work which is risky and dangerous, so it should be avoided and rejected.
Lest the ignorant find a way to object and criticize, so be firm in your decisions for yourselves and gentle with consideration when treating your patients.
Use the best path leading to safety and a commendable outcome, and avoid dangerous diseases that are difficult to cure.
Purify yourselves from anything you fear might cast doubt on your religion and worldly affairs, for it is more lasting for your reputation and will elevate your status in this world and the hereafter.
As Galen said in some of his advice, 'Do not treat the sick with bad medicine lest you become known as bad doctors.'
This treatise is divided into three chapters.
Chapter One.
In cauterization with fire and sharp medicated cautery, classified and arranged from the head to the foot, including illustrations of instruments, cauterization needles, and everything else required for manual surgery.
Chapter Two.
In incision, venesection, bloodletting, cupping, surgery, arrow extraction, and the like, all classified and arranged with illustrations of instruments.
Chapter three.
On setting bones, dislocations, the treatment of strains, etc., organized in order from head to foot and with diagrams of instruments.
Chapter one.
On cauterization.
Before we mention the procedure, it is necessary to state its advantages and disadvantages and in which conditions it should be used.
Speaking of the benefits and drawbacks of cauterization is a lengthy topic, an intricate science, and a hidden secret that has been discussed by many sages.
There is disagreement on this matter, but I have condensed the discussion due to its length.
In general, cauterization is beneficial for all types of unhealthy conditions with or without material, except for two specific conditions: a hot condition without material and a dry condition without material.
Regarding the dry condition with material, there is disagreement: some claim that cauterization is beneficial, while others argue it is not suitable for illnesses caused by heat and dryness because fire's nature is hot and dry.
It is impossible to treat a hot, dry illness with something that is hot and dry; those who disagree argue that cauterization with fire can be beneficial for hot, dry illnesses in the body. When you apply fire's nature to the human body and its moisture, you cool down the body.
I agree with this statement, as my experience has revealed it to me on multiple occasions; however, one should not form an opinion on the matter without extensive practice and training in cauterization. He observed the different temperaments of people and the conditions of diseases themselves, their causes, symptoms, and duration.
As for the other temperaments, you need not fear them, especially cold and wet diseases; all physicians agree on this and do not differ regarding the benefit of cauterization in such cases.
And know, O my sons, that one of the secrets of healing is cauterization with fire and its superiority over cauterization with burning medicines because fire is a single essence whose action does not extend beyond the organ it cauterizes and only slightly harms any other connected organ.
Cauterization with burning medicines may have an effect that extends beyond the intended organ and could even cause a disease in it which is difficult to treat, or even result in death; but fire, because of its noble nature and essence, does not do this unless there is excess.
That has become clear to us through experience from long service, attention to the craft, and understanding of the facts.
For this reason, I have dispensed with lengthy explanations; were it not for the fact that it is unbecoming to my book, I would have expounded upon a profound secret of fire and its action on bodies, as well as its ability to dispel diseases, using philosophical proofs that are beyond your understanding.
Know, O my sons, that they have differed regarding the time that is suitable for cauterization and considered the best time to be spring.
I say that cauterization is suitable at any time because the harm caused beforehand is outweighed by the benefit gained from it. Especially if cauterization is necessary for powerful, urgent pains that cannot bear delay due to the fear of subsequent harm which is greater than minor internal damage caused by time.
And do not assume, my sons, what the general public and unskilled physicians may believe: that cauterization which cures a disease will never return or be necessary again.
The matter is not as they assumed, that cauterization is like medicine which changes the temperament and dries up the moisture that causes pain.
Except that cauterization is preferred over medicine due to its rapid success, powerful effect, and strong influence.
The disease may return at some point in time, depending on the patient's temperament, the severity of their illness, and their overall health; as well as other factors such as dietary habits.
Unless the disease which requires cauterization is a mild one, affecting a part of the body with minimal excess matter and moisture. For example, cauterizing the molar for pain: it is possible that the pain may not return in this case, especially if the severity is minimal.
Regarding the common belief that cauterization is the final resort in medicine, this statement is true but not for the reason they assume; as they believe that no treatment will be effective after cauterization with either medication or other methods.
The meaning behind the statement 'cauterization is the last resort in medicine' is that, when we have exhausted all other forms of treatment for a disease without success, and then cauterization is used as a final method which brings relief; it is from this context that the saying originates. Not according to the meaning inferred by the lay public and many ignorant physicians.
The ancients have mentioned that cauterizing with gold is better than with iron, and they said this due to the moderation of gold and the nobility of its essence. They also stated that the site of cauterization will not become ulcerated, but this is not absolutely true.
Because I have experimented with this, finding that it only produces such an effect in some bodies but not others; cauterization using gold is indeed better and superior to iron as they [the ancients] have said. However, you will be unable to determine when the gold caustic has reached the required heat due to its redness.
Also, because cold [air] rapidly affects it; if you increase the heat too much, it will melt in the fire and run together, causing trouble for the practitioner. Therefore, cauterization with iron is quicker and more convenient to work with, God willing.
I have arranged this chapter on cauterization into sections, organized from the head to the foot, so that it is easier for the student to find what they need, God willing.
Chapter 1.
For cauterizing the head, one caustic [is required].
This caustic is beneficial for an excess of dampness and cold affecting the brain, which are causes of headache, frequent catarrh flowing from the head towards the eyes and ears, excessive sleepiness, toothache, and sore throat. In general, it is useful for all diseases caused by coldness such as paralysis, epilepsy, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
An illustration of this cauterization is that the patient should first be ordered to purge by using cathartic medicine, which cleanses and purifies the head for three or four nights depending on the strength, age, and habits of the patient.
Then command him to shave his head with the razor, then make him sit between your hands cross-legged with his hands on his chest.
Then place the base of your palm on his nose between his eyes, and where your middle finger ends mark that spot with ink.
Then heat the olive-shaped cautery iron, which is illustrated here:" [illustration of an olive-shaped cautery iron]
Expose a portion of the bone about the size of a garlic clove or a chickpea, then lift your hand and if necessary reapply the same iron or another one if it has cooled. Do this until you have exposed the bone as mentioned, then take some salt and dissolve it in water, soak a cotton pad with it and place it on the spot for three days.
Then apply a cotton pad soaked in lard, and leave it on until the sizzling of the cautery stops, then treat with the four-fold ointment until it heals, God willing.
They say that the longer a wound remains open, draining pus, the better it is.
Some mention cauterizing the skin down to the bone, and holding the iron until some of the bone's thickness burns, then what has burned is removed from the bone afterwards, after which it should be treated.
Others say that cauterization should be excessive, affecting the bone strongly so that it falls from the bone like a small ring or pulley; they claim that this releases vapors from the head and leaves the wound open for a long time.
Then it is treated until it heals, and I do not see these two types of cauterization at all except in some people as a risky method. Avoiding it, in my opinion, is better. Goodbye if the skull is weakened whenever its natural connection is broken, as we have observed in other body parts.
Especially if the patient's skull is naturally weak, and the first type of cauterization is safer and better in my view; I use it and work with it to be safe, God willing.
Chapter Two.
On cauterization of the skull, too.
If there is a persistent headache and the patient suffers for long, having used eyrges, koukaiates, snuffs, ointments, and dressings, especially if they have had one of the cauterizations we described without any benefit from all that, then look into it. If the patient's skull is naturally strong in structure, not weak, and they suffer from severe coldness, cauterize another spot above that one slightly. Then cauterize each side of their skull, until the skin thins and reveals some bone as we described. Cauterize a spot at the back of their head, in the location known as the 'axe', but be gentle with this one and do not reveal any bone; for the patient will suffer severe pain from it, unlike any other skull cauterization. I shall describe this type later.
The cauterizing iron for the sides and back of the skull should be gentler than that used for its center, this is a picture of it.
Chapter Three.
Non-chronic migraine.
If a headache occurs with pain, extending to the eye, have the patient vomit using purgatives for the head and use other treatments mentioned in the sections on diseases. If that does not work, cauterization is performed in two ways. Either by caustic medication or with iron.
As for cauterization with caustic medication, take one clove of garlic, peel it and cut off the ends on both sides. Then make an incision in the painful area of the temple with a broad lancet until there is room underneath the skin to fit the clove.
Insert it underneath the skin until it is hidden, then bind it tightly with bandages and leave it for about fifteen hours. Then release it, remove the garlic, and leave the wound for two or three days before proceeding.
Apply a piece of cotton soaked in butterfat until the area becomes suppurated, then treat it with ointment until it is healed, God willing. If you wish, you may do this with some caustic medications mentioned in chapter eighteen on caustics.
As for cauterization with iron, it is done in this manner: Heat the iron tool which has this form [image of the tool follows].
It is called the nail-shaped iron because its head resembles a nail, with some curvature and a small bump in the middle.
Then place it on the painful area, holding your hand as you slowly rotate the iron. The amount of skin that is burned should be about half its thickness. Raise your hand so as not to burn the lower artery and cause bleeding, then moisten a cotton swab with salt water and place it on the spot for three days. Then cover the cotton with lard, treat it with ointment until it heals, God willing.
If you wish, cauterize this seizure with the blunt edge of the iron, taking care not to cut the artery in this fresh seizure especially.
Chapter Four.
Treating the chronic seizure.
If you treat the seizure with the methods mentioned previously and in the disease chapters, but the treatment is ineffective and you notice that the problem cannot be resolved by the aforementioned first-degree cauterization with medication or fire. You should heat up the iron with a blunt edge until it becomes white-hot, then apply it to the painful area in one long line approximately half an inch or so in length and leave your hand there once as you pull back to sever the artery towards the bone.
However, you must be careful not to affect the jaw hinge that moves during chewing and thereby burn the muscle or nerve that moves it causing spasm.
Be cautious of the bleeding from the severed artery as there is great danger in this procedure. Especially for those who do not know what they are doing, have no experience in this practice and should avoid performing the procedure.
And the treatment of bleeding from an artery will be described in its proper place in the book, God willing, if you see any condition that cannot be treated with this cauterization.
If you find the patient's condition tolerable, apply the cauterization to the middle of the head as described, and treat the wound until it heals, God willing.
You may choose to use the cauterization method mentioned in the chapter on 'Removing an Artery with a Hot Iron', which is more effective than this one.
Chapter 5.
On cauterization for earaches.
If an earache occurs due to cold and is treated with laxatives and other remedies mentioned earlier, but the pain persists, heat the iron called 'An-Nukta', which looks like this:" [Image: A small, pointed iron tool]
Then, after heating it, use the iron to cauterize the entire area around one ear (or both ears if they are affected) in a circular motion. Keep the cauterization slightly away from the base of the ear after marking the spot with ink. The cauterization should be equivalent to about ten small dots in each ear (or thereabouts). Treat the marked areas until they heal, God willing.
Chapter 6.
On cauterization for toothaches.
Toothaches that can be treated with cauterization are those caused by phlegm, as mentioned in the section on disease types.
One should avoid cauterizing types that cause dryness and nerve contraction.
When you treat this type of illness with eardrops, snuff, and fumigation, and your treatment is not successful, the patient should be cauterized with three burns. One at the base of the ear, the second slightly below their temple, and the third at the corner of their mouth.
Make sure your cauterization is on the opposite side of the affected area because relaxation only occurs on the side that appears healthy.
The illustration of the cauterization shows a burn opposite the top of the ear, just below the forehead, and another on the temple, with a length equivalent to the thumb.
Lower your cauterizing tool to burn about half the thickness of the skin. This is an illustration of the cauterizer; it's a type of small knife, as you can see, but slightly finer than the one shown previously. The knife should be slightly thicker than usual, and then you treat the area as mentioned previously; it will heal, God willing.
Chapter Seven.
On the cauterization of chronic apoplexy.
If apoplexy becomes chronic, treat it as we mentioned; if that treatment is unsuccessful and the patient has no fever, cauterize them four times. One burn on each side of the head, one in the middle as mentioned previously, and one at the back of the head.
Prescription for cauterization, as described above. Additionally, cautery can be applied to the mouth of the stomach, which may prove more effective. Afterward, treat it as previously explained.
Chapter 8.
In cautery of forgetfulness.
One suffering from forgetfulness caused by phlegm should first be given large doses of ayurvedic preparations and blood-purifying grains.
Then, one's entire head should be shaved and a poultice of mustard seed, as described in the chapter on dressings, should be applied to the back of their neck. This is another form of cauterization.
Perform this treatment as previously instructed. If the patient is cured, then that is well and good; otherwise, cauterize them three times on the back of their head, with the marks in a straight line from the top of the head to the nape of the neck.
Leave the width of a finger between each cauterization mark, then treat as previously described. If you wish to increase the treatment and if the patient can withstand it, then apply an additional cauterization in the middle of the previous three marks.
If you wish to increase the treatment further, then cauterize them on the temples and treat until healed. The cautery iron should be olive-shaped as previously described.
Chapter 9.
In cauterization for paralysis and relaxation of the entire body.
One should first purify the head using ayurvedic preparations and the methods we have previously mentioned. Then, shave the patient's head and cauterize them once in the center of their head, once on each temple, and once at the back of the head.
Apply three cauterizations to the vertebrae of his neck; if in a case of bodily relaxation you require more than this and the patient can bear it, and the disease is strong and stubborn, then apply four cauterizations on the vertebrae of his back. Be thorough with the cauterization until you burn most of his skin, then remove your hand and treat it as previously mentioned until he is healed if God wills; the cautery should be shaped like an olive.
Chapter 10.
In cauterization for epilepsy.
The epileptic patient should be cauterized only if the cause of epilepsy is phlegm; his brain must first be cleansed by large cuppings and other methods we mentioned in section one, provided that the patient is an adult who can tolerate medication.
If it is a child unable to tolerate medication, then gargles and masticatories should be used for many days beforehand to cleanse the brain along with an improved diet.
Then shave his head, then cauterize one spot in the center of the scalp as previously described and another at the back. And cauterize once at each corner of the head; if he is strong and can bear it, then apply the cauterizations previously mentioned for a case of paralysis and bodily relaxation to his cervical and lumbar vertebrae using an olive-shaped cautery as described before.
If it is a child, then use a mild cautery shaped like this.
Chapter Eleven.
In the treatment of melancholia.
If the cause of melancholia is putrid humours and thick phlegm, cauterize with the same cauteries that we mentioned for someone suffering from hemiplegia.
If the cause of melancholia is an excess leaning towards black bile, and the patient's body is moist, then administer remedies that purify the brain as mentioned in the previous section on humours.
Then shave the patient's head, make a tight cake of linen like a circle, and place it on the top of their head while they are seated cross-legged, holding onto each side. Then take one pound of old sheep's butter.
Heat it over a moderate fire, just to the point where a finger can tolerate it if inserted; then pour it into the circle on their head and leave it until it cools. Do this for the patient once a week along with all other good management until they recover, God willing.
And if you wish, cauterize with many small punctate cauteries without holding the cautery instrument in your hand; rather, do it by applying pressure. This type of cauterization moistens the brain moderately.
Then apply to it a piece of cotton wool soaked in butter or chicken fat.
Chapter Twelve.
In the cauterization of watery discharge from the eye.
If you identify the initial stages of watery discharge from the eye by the signs mentioned in the section on humours, then immediately administer to the patient remedies that purify the head and protect it from all moisture. Sweat them in the bathhouse while fasting for several days.
Then shave his head and cauterize a spot in the middle of the head, then cauterize two spots on the temples if the discharge begins in both eyes or from one side if it is in one eye.
Then cut all the veins and arteries beneath the skin with an iron, let the cauterization marks be as long as the width of the temples, and beware of bleeding.
If you see any of it, cut it off immediately with whatever treatment is possible; we will come back to the subject of extracting and cutting arteries and how to avoid bleeding.
One may cauterize on the back of the neck under the two bones with deep burns.
Chapter 13.
On cauterizing chronic tearing.
If the eye's tears are chronic and constant, coming from veins and arteries on the surface of the head outside it; and you ascertain that this is due to excessive cold thick phlegm, cauterize with exactly the kind of cauterization I described for the beginning stages of discharge. Cauterize a spot in the middle of the head, two spots on the temples, and two spots at the back of the neck under the bones; if you need more, cauterize with a small iron one spot on each side between the end of the eye and the edge of the eyebrow.
Chapter 14.
On cauterizing the fetid odor of the nose.
If you treat it with what we mentioned in the previous chapter and treatment is ineffective, quickly send for a medical practitioner; shave his head after three nights and cauterize the central spot with an oily iron. Then cauterize it with the spiked iron twice above the eyebrows, just under the hairline and take care to avoid the artery; do not cut it. This is an illustration of the spiked iron.
Chapter 15.
Cauterization for relaxation of the eyelid.
If the eyelid relaxes due to illness or moisture, cauterize it with a single application of this crescent-shaped iron.
You may cauterize it slightly above the eyebrows with two applications on each side, keeping away from the temples, and let the length of each application be equal to that of the eyebrow.
Do not exaggerate with your cauterization; only do it to the extent that a third of the skin blisters, and let this be the shape of the iron.
Chapter 16.
Cauterization of the eyelid.
If the eyelashes turn inward towards the eye, cauterization is performed in two ways. One way is to cauterize with fire, and for this you must instruct the patient beforehand to stop plucking their eyelashes so that they grow longer and become even.
When the eyelashes are long enough, tie their eyes with a bandage so that they do not move until they grow and become even; once this happens, have the patient lie on your lap and mark the eyelid like an as leaf with ink.
The mark should start close to the eyelashes, and underneath the eyelid you must place some cotton soaked in egg white or saliva of the aloe vera plant; then heat up this iron as shown below:
Then cauterize in the shape you marked, a little at a time, in many repetitions until all of the skin's surface, which is like an ivy leaf, has been burnt entirely; especially on its outer layer. A sign that your work is healthy is when you see the eyelid is tightened and the hair above the eye has risen.
Lift your hand then and leave it for three days; then apply cotton with butter until the scab is removed, after that treat it with ointment so that it may heal by God's will. If some hair grows back in time and the eyelid relaxes again...
So repeat cauterization on that spot as you did at first; if the hair is in the lower eyelid, pluck it so that it returns to its natural position without scratching the eye. As for cauterization with a burning drug, instruct the patient to let their eyelashes grow long and even.
Then make an ivy leaf pattern out of paper; take a [small amount] of the usual soap and quicklime, each weighing about one drachma, crush them both well together, doing this quickly so it doesn't dry up. Spread it on the paper you made like an ivy leaf and place it over one or both eyelids; put under each eye some cotton soaked in egg white, with the patient's head resting in your lap.
Place your index finger over the medicine and press it lightly, moving it whenever the patient feels a stinging from the drug because they will experience a burning sensation like fire; as long as this sting continues, leave the medicine in place but keep moving it with your finger. Once the stinging stops, remove the medicine and wash their eye(s) with water.
Look, if you see the eyelid has risen like it does when lifted with fire or cut, otherwise apply more medicine to the spot where the medicine did not take effect and has not blackened until your work is complete and the eye is fully opened, then place cotton soaked in fat on it until the burn blisters are removed.
Then you treat it with palm ointment or another remedy until it heals, and when working, one should be extremely cautious that none of the medicine falls into the eye; if the eyelid becomes slack after a few days and something from the hair is feared in the eye.
Reapply the medicine to that spot where the eyelid has become slack, specifically as you did first, then treat it until it heals; this is a depiction of the myrtle leaf.
Know that people's eyes may vary in size and magnitude, so adjust your lifting accordingly; the correct approach is not hidden from one who has experience in this practice.
Chapter 17.
On cauterizing the fistula that occurs in the corners of the eye.
If you treat the fistula with what we have mentioned in the section on diseases and your treatment is ineffective, it should be cauterized in this manner.
Have the patient place their head in your lap, and have a servant hold their head firmly between their hands to prevent any movement or jolting of the head.
Then place a cotton wool pad soaked in egg white or in the saliva of the barberry plant on their eyes, then heat this cautery iron shown here.
It is hollow, shaped like the tube of an eagle's feather on one end where cauterization occurs. If you wish, it can have a perforated other end and if you prefer, it could be solid like a rod, although this hollow one is better for your work, God willing.
Then you compress the fistula if it is open, draining out its pus and drying it; or if closed, you must open it to extract the pus before placing a hot iron cauterizer on it, gripping it with your hand until bone is reached.
Keep your hand slightly away from the eye when cauterizing toward the side of the nose, so as not to make a mistake or disturb the patient and cause the iron to fall into the soft part of the eye and damage it; for if you reach bone on the first application then well and good, but otherwise repeat with the hot iron once more should this be necessary.
Leave it for three days, then apply a ball of cotton soaked in lard and treat it with the drying ointment until it heals; but if after forty days no healing has occurred, use caustic medicine so that bone is laid bare, stripping it according to what will be mentioned later, God willing.
Another method of cauterizing a fistula was mentioned by some ancient authors: you deliberately target the site, incise it, and then insert into this same incision a thin funnel as shown in this illustration.
You pour into it a quantity of molten lead weighing one dirham, holding your hand firmly on the funnel with no movement by the patient whatsoever lest the liquid lead flow into their eye; and you must put on this person's eye a ball of cotton moistened in egg white or water.
For lead burns the fistula site and heals it in a remarkable way; if the fistula is healed by what we have mentioned of cauterization and treatment, otherwise there is no choice but to use drilling into the nose and returning the fistula to the nasal passage, as will come at its specific place.
Chapter Eighteen.
On the cauterization of cleft lip.
Cleft lip often occurs, known as "the thread," especially in the lips of boys; it frequently happens. If you treat this cleft with what we mentioned in the previous section and the treatment is ineffective, heat a small, chisel-shaped cauterizer like this one.
Its hollow should be as thin as a knife; then place it hot with the wheel into the cleft until the cauterization reaches its depth, and treat it with cirrate until it heals, God willing.
Chapter Nineteen.
On the cauterization of fistula in the mouth.
If a tumor appears at the root of the gums or in the palate or at the roots of the molars, then it suppurates and bursts, and due to the flow of pus a fistula forms; if you treat it but the treatment is ineffective, you should heat a cauterizer to fit into the fistula.
Then insert it hot into the fistula's hole, and keep your hand steady until the cauterizer reaches its depth; do that once or twice, then treat it with what we have mentioned of treatment until it heals, God willing.
If the discharge stops and healing occurs, otherwise it is necessary to examine the area and remove the rotten bone according to what will come in its chapter, God willing.
Chapter Twenty.
In the case of loose molars and gums.
If the gums become loose due to moisture, and the molars move, and you treat them with medication but it is ineffective, then place the patient's head in your lap and heat the iron, which appears after this, after placing the pipe on the tooth.
Insert the hot iron with haste and hold your hand there briefly until the patient feels the heat of the fire reaching the root of the tooth, then raise your hand and reapply the iron as many times as you wish before the patient rinses their mouth with salt water.
They should hold it for an hour, then spit it out, and the loose tooth will be fixed, the relaxed gum tightened, and any foul moisture dried up.
Chapter Twenty-One.
On burning toothache.
If the toothache is caused by sensitivity to cold or due to worms, and it does not respond to medication, then burning is required in two ways: either burn with fat or burn with fire.
For burning with fat, you take cow butter and boil it in a metal spoon or shell before taking cotton wool, wrapping it around the end of a stick, dipping it into the boiling butter, applying it to the aching tooth swiftly, then holding your hand there until it cools.
Then return it repeatedly until the fire reaches the root of the tooth, and if you wish to dip a pad or cotton in cold butter and place it on the painful tooth, and put above it the heated iron until the fire reaches the bottom of the tooth.
Scorch it with fire by taking a copper or iron tube, and make sure that the body of the tube is somewhat thick so that the heat does not reach the patient's mouth, then heat the cautery instrument as shown in the illustration and place it on the same tooth; hold your hand until the cauterizing instrument has cooled down. Do this repeatedly.
Then the pain will disappear either that very day or the next, and after cauterization, the patient should fill their mouth with good butter and hold it there for an hour before spitting it out. This is a depiction of the cautery instrument.
Cauterize with whichever end you prefer, depending on what is feasible, and this is a depiction of the tube.
Chapter Twenty-Two.
On cauterizing of hernia.
If hernia is due to phlegm and cold moisture, and it does not respond well to medications and requires quick maturation, then heat the hollow cautery instrument with both ends open, as shown in this illustration.
When cauterizing, smoke should exit from the other end; place the heated instrument on top of the same swelling once or twice if needed until you reach its depth. If the swelling is small, make sure the cautery instrument's size matches it.
Leave him for three days and apply to the wound a cotton pad soaked in grease until what was burnt by fire heals, then treat it with ointment and dressings until he is healed if God wills it.
Chapter twenty-three.
On cauterization for hoarseness of voice and shortness of breath.
If phlegm prevails in the windpipe, especially if it is accompanied by a cold disposition, then the patient should first be purged with laxatives and afterward cauterized on the nape of the neck at the base of the throat in the lowest spot.
Be careful not to cauterize too close to the windpipe and do not burn more than half of the skin, then cauterize again at the nape of the neck where it joins with the skull, with a strong cautery that has the shape of a nail as described previously.
Then treat him with what has been mentioned above until he is healed if God wills it.
Chapter twenty-four.
On cauterization for lung disease and cough.
If cough and lung disease are caused by cold phlegm, and the patient has no fever or consumption, but rather it is a chronic condition, then cauterize twice above the collarbones in the soft, sunken spots, and perform another cautery on the chest between the breasts.
The cautery should be nail-shaped as previously described, and if you wish, you may perform a punctate cauterization with the instrument called "the point", whose shape has been described in the chapter on treating earache; the number of points may range from thirty to about that number.
Then treat it with what has been mentioned earlier until it heals. You can make a three-pronged cauterizer in this form, and use it for quick cauterization because you can cauterize three areas at once with it. This is an illustration of the cauterizer.
Chapter 25.
Cauterization of the armpit.
When the head of the humerus dislocates due to slippery moisture, or it fails to be fixed in place during reduction until it becomes habitual, such that it repeatedly dislocates even with minor movements, as we have observed, then the joint should first be reduced. Then the patient should lie on their back or on their right side, and the skin inside the armpit is pulled upwards with the fingers of your left hand if the joint has dislocated inward.
Then heat the cauterizer with two prongs, which is illustrated here.
Use it to cauterize the skin until it penetrates through to the other side, resulting in four cauterization marks. You can also use a three-pronged cauterizer, which will result in six marks. The prongs should be as thin as veins.
This is an illustration of the three-pronged cauterizer.
Alternatively, an additional prong can be used, resulting in eight cauterization marks. The patient should then apply crushed pellets with salt and rest the treated area for a long time to allow it to heal.
Apply a cauterization on the shoulder with one good forked iron or with multiple irons as dots; then the joint will become firm, moisture will disappear and the patient will recover.
Chapter Twenty-Six.
Cauterization of the stomach.
If there is coldness and excessive moisture in the stomach, moving it away from its normal state, with frequent vomiting, and treatment does not help, then the patient should lie on his back, stretching out his legs and arms; then cauterize him three times. Cauterize under the breastbone, an area equal to a finger's width with a forked iron; then make two additional cauterizations below and on either side of the first one so that the cauterizations form a triangle. Space them out sufficiently so they do not join together if pus develops. The depth of each cauterization should be about two-thirds of the thickness of the skin, and their shape...
In this manner and to this extent - no more.
Alternatively, you may cauterize with one large iron in the middle of the stomach as described above.
The iron used for this single cauterization should be circular in shape, as illustrated.
You can also cauterize the stomach by dotting; this is done by marking out on the stomach as many dots as you wish with ink, then cauterizing these marks with a dotted iron; then treat it in the usual way until recovery.
Chapter Twenty-Seven.
On suturing cold liver.
When a portion of the liver causes pain due to coldness, dampness, or excessive wind, even deviating from its natural state, and the patient is treated with what we mentioned in the classification, but it does not take effect. The patient should lie on their back, and three cauterizations should be marked with ink in this particular shape and size on the liver just below the diaphragm where the elbow ends.
There should be a one-finger width distance between each cauterization, and the cauterizations should be applied in a straight line along the body. Do not press the cautery instrument too hard.
The amount of skin burned should be approximately half its thickness, no more. The patient should be standing on their feet; if they cannot stand, they should lie down with their legs extended and arms raised. This is an illustration of the cautery instrument.
You may cauterize these areas with a knife-like instrument if you are skilled and careful in its use, being mindful not to overdo it and burn through the entire skin layer, which could cause abdominal burning and damage the intestines; be aware that the skin there is very thin.
Chapter twenty-eight.
On treating liver swelling with cauterization.
If there is an abscess in the liver and you want to determine whether it is located in the hepatic parenchyma or the capsule, know that if it is within the parenchyma, the patient will experience a sense of heaviness and pain without acute severity.
If the problem is in the liver's membrane, and it causes intense pain, and you find that doctors are unable to treat it effectively, then the patient should lie down on their back. Then mark the swollen area with ink.
Then heat the iron in the fire, which is an iron similar to a mile. This is its image. You burn it with one iron, burning all the skin and continuing to cauterize until you reach the membrane, so that all the pus is released. Then treat it like an abscess until it heals.
This type of cauterization should only be performed by those with extensive experience in medicine, who have treated such diseases repeatedly and successfully. In my opinion, it is best to avoid such procedures.
Chapter 29.
On the cauterization of fistulas.
The ancient scholars described cauterization with the root of thornbush for cold fistulas in this manner: take a long, dry root that is as thick as your finger and soak it in oil before heating it in the fire. Then cauterize it with one burn between the collarbone and neck, two small burns just below the jugular veins towards the chin, and two large burns over each breast between ribs three and four.
Then cauterize two more areas between ribs five and six, angled slightly towards the back, another in the middle of the chest, one over the stomach, three behind - one between the shoulder blades and two on either side of the spine below the burns between the collarbones.
The hand should not penetrate too deeply during cauterization, but the process should be confined to the surface of the skin. Some ancient authors have mentioned that some people used an iron rod resembling a needle, which they would heat and insert between the ribs until it reached the tumor itself.
The pus is drained as mentioned in the case of a liver tumor, and this type of cauterization for an abscess is risky; either the patient dies immediately or develops a fistula at that site which cannot be cured.
Chapter Thirty
Cauterization of the spleen.
If you treat a spleen disease with the method mentioned in the previous section and it does not improve, there are three correct ways to cauterize it: by applying three or four cauterizations in a row along the length of the spleen.
Arranged in the same pattern as the cauterizations for the liver, which we have previously illustrated; each should be spaced about one finger-width apart or slightly more. The rod and its heating are described in detail earlier when discussing liver cautery; do not penetrate deeply with your hand while cauterizing. The patient lies on his back during this procedure.
Another method is to cauterize at the elbow; lift up the skin facing where the spleen ends, which corresponds to the left elbow of the patient and your lifting should extend across the width of their body so that the cautery marks fall along its length.
Then insert two very hot rods through the skin from this side to emerge on the other, and withdraw them so you are left with four cautery marks; or if you prefer, use an alternative rod which has three prongs.
Then treat the cauterized area after leaving it to discharge pus for many days; this is more effective than all the treatments mentioned previously.
Chapter 31.
In cauterization for ascites.
Cauterization is particularly beneficial for ascites in the abdomen. If you treat the patient with the various treatments we mentioned earlier and they prove ineffective, then you should cauterize them four times around the navel and once on the stomach.
Another cauterization should be performed on the liver, one on the spleen and two behind the back between the scapulae, one opposite the chest and another opposite the stomach. The depth of the cauterization should be close to the thickness of the skin. Then leave the cauterized area open to discharge pus for a long time.
Do not neglect to treat the patient after cauterization with what is appropriate, combining both methods to hasten recovery. The image of the iron used for cauterizing the back should be nail-like as previously described, and that used for the stomach should be olive-shaped.
Chapter 32.
In cauterization of the feet and legs.
If the feet swell with yellow fluid in a patient with ascites, then they should be cauterized on the top of the foot at the depression between the fourth and fifth toes.
Hold the iron steadily without angling it, then lift your hand and do not return it. The yellow fluid will discharge from the wound, and this should be the shape of the iron used.
Then two cauterizations should be made on each leg, and the cauterization should be done with the tip of the cautery iron in the shape of a knife. One should be made lengthwise along the leg, one under the knee, another below it towards the middle of the leg, and on each thigh two cauterizations should also be made.
Leave the cauterization open without treatment for a long time until water drains from it, then treat it with all that we have mentioned.
Chapter 33.
In cauterization for diarrhea.
If diarrhea is caused by cold and moist humors that weaken the constrictive and digestive powers in the stomach and intestines, and if it has been treated with different kinds of remedies without success and you see that the patient can endure cauterization and is strong enough, then cauterize them with a large cautery on their abdomen. Accordingly, cauterize the abdomen with a circular cautery iron and four light cauterizations around the navel using a soft-pointed cautery iron, as well as one large or two small cauterizations on the coccyx.
If you see that the humors are excessive and the patient can endure it, then cauterize them with one cauterization on the pubic bone and one on each flank; perhaps increase by two small cauterizations near the large one on the abdomen. This is a successful treatment that does not fail to bring benefit, God willing.
Chapter 34.
In cauterization for hemorrhoids of the anus.
If there are many chronic hemorrhoids or just one in the anus, and they are caused by thick cold humors or corrupt moist humors, and if they have been treated with what we mentioned in the previous chapter but treatment was not successful, then cauterize the patient with three cauterizations at the base of the coccyx, slightly below the sacrum arranged in a triangle.
A cauterization below the navel, about the size of two fingers. And if you estimate that their stomach has cooled and their food is not digesting, and you see their face swollen, then cauterize them over the stomach with a large cauterization, as mentioned before, and another on their liver. Another cauterization on their spleen with a nail-like cauterizer, and leave the cauterization open for some time; then treat it until it heals, God willing.
Chapter 35.
In cauterizing warts.
After cutting it, if you cut the wart, heat up the cauterizer which is like a stylus; then insert it hot into the same cut wart and press down with your hand until the cauterizer reaches the mouth of the vein from which blood flows. Do this once or twice.
If the warts are many, cauterize each one with a cauterization as described before; then treat them with salves that suit them until they heal. If you cauterize it with a large cauterization on a piece of cotton, it will be more beneficial.
Chapter 36.
In cauterizing the fistula which occurs in or around the anus.
If the patient does not respond to the incision and procedure we described in its place, and is afraid of it - maybe they will heal with cauterization. If a fistula occurs in one side and becomes chronic; pus flows from it along with corrupt moisture, then you must first measure it with a thin probe.
Then determine the depth of the abscess with a probe, then heat the cautery instrument that resembles a stylet; insert it hot into the fistula in line with its depth and the extent to which the probe entered. Apply the cauterization over this area once or twice or three times according to your needs until all putrefied matter is burnt away.
Take care not to burn a nerve, should there be one, or a large artery; and if the fistula leads into the body of the bladder or into the bowel.
So be careful of all these areas, and only do this if the fistula is in a fleshy place and you judge that it cannot heal itself; then treat the area until it heals. If the wound closes up, stops discharging and remains like this for some time, know that it has completely healed.
But if it continues to discharge, know that the fistula is communicating with another cavity or that there's a piece of bone in its depth or something similar which will be mentioned later under their appropriate headings.
Chapter 37.
On the cauterization of the kidneys.
If renal colic is caused by cold or flatulence and sexual intercourse is contraindicated, then the patient should be cauterized twice over both kidneys with the pointed cautery mentioned previously; perhaps three times in a row on the same line would be even more beneficial.
Chapter 38.
On the cauterization of the bladder.
If there is weakness and relaxation in the bladder due to cold and moisture, such that the patient cannot hold urine, then cauterize it with a hot iron below the navel over the bladder where the pubic hair begins; also cauterize once on the right side of the navel and another time on its left side.
And after cauterization on each side to the extent of a thumb's width, you may also cauterize it once at the bottom of the back or twice if needed; the cauterizing instrument should be shaped like a nail as previously described.
Chapter 39.
On the cauterization of the uterus.
If the uterus is affected by a discharge due to cold and moisture, preventing conception and spoiling its seed, or if there is pain upon intercourse, then it should be cauterized with three hot irons around the navel as mentioned previously regarding bladder cauterization. A hot iron should also be applied to the coccyx below the back or twice if needed; the instrument being nail-shaped.
Chapter 40.
On the cauterization of hip dislocation.
Moisture and phlegm may settle in the hip joint, causing it to become dislocated; this is indicated by one leg appearing longer than the other when compared together, with a feeling of emptiness at the site of dislocation. In such cases, the patient should be cauterized over the hip itself using an iron shaped like a semi-circle.
After you have marked the hip with ink to trace its extent, ensuring that it is centered within an imaginary circle, use a cauterizing iron resembling the one previously described for abdominal cauterization; if unavailable, three applications of the large olive-shaped instrument will suffice.
Make an area for cauterization to a depth equal to the thickness of all the skin, and then treat it until it is healed, God willing.
Chapter forty-one.
On cauterization of sciatic nerve pain.
If there is pain in the hip joint due to cold and moisture, and you treat the patient as mentioned before but it doesn't work, then it should be treated by easing the patient of thick humors with stinging nettle seeds or prickly pear seeds, etc.
Then cauterize it, and the method of cauterization is of two types: either with medicines that burn or with fire. Cauterizing with fire can be done in many ways; one of which is to make three triangular cauterizations on the hip itself, like this image.
Make them of a suitable depth, and ensure there is a distance between each cauterization equivalent to the thickness of your finger. The cauterizing instrument should be olive-shaped. You could make one cauterization in the middle on top of the hip itself; this would result in four cauterizations. Alternatively, you can do one cauterization using the circular method mentioned before for dislocated hips.
It should be a circle that surrounds the entire hip and burns through all layers of skin. This is how to cauterize for sciatica pain when it occurs only around the hip itself without radiating down towards the thigh or leg.
If the pain radiates down towards the thigh and leg, cauterize with two cauterizations on the thigh in the area that the patient indicates as painful. Then do one cauterization above the ankle four fingers from it, slightly to the outer side. The cauterizing instrument should be knife-shaped, and the depth of the cauterization should match the thickness of the skin only.
If the patient indicates that the pain extends towards their toes, cauterize as indicated three or four times or more if needed; and if they point to a spot below the knee towards the shin, burn it there with one bisectional iron.
Be careful in all your cauterization to avoid burning any major nerve or artery, lest you cause the patient serious harm or a debilitating condition.
I have seen two instances where cauterization was applied above the hock, and it was taken too far, causing the leg to turn black all the way down to the foot; it became perforated throughout, and the entire limb deteriorated. Afterward, diarrhea and death occurred. If pain occurs on both sides, cauterize them in this very manner.
Some scholars among the wise have mentioned cauterization of the hip with an iron caustic in this manner: it is shaped like a cup, its diameter half a span; at its mouth there is a thickness equivalent to that of a date pit or slightly less, and inside are two more cups, one within the other.
The distance between each cup is the width of a thumb, and they are open on both sides; their height is around one or two spans. A handle is made for it from iron that has been securely attached to the cups. This is its illustration.
Then it is heated in the fire until it glows red and sparks fly from it; then it is placed on the hip joint, with the patient reclined on their right side, burning them three times round in a single motion. Then you leave them for three days and bandage with butter fat, leaving the wound open for some time afterward.
You repeat this often, then treat with ointment until it heals. The author of this book says that we rarely use this type of cauterization due to its ugliness and fearsome appearance; few are those who can bear it. Nonetheless, for those on whom it is performed in the proper place, it is a good form of cauterization.
And cauterization with burning medications is to make two cups similar to the lock of a door that descends from brass or iron.
There should be a rim on their edges about two finger-widths high, and the distance between them should be the thickness of a finger. They should be open at the bottom and top, and they are joined together like this.
Then you lower it on the right hip, with the patient lying on his right side, and tighten your hand well. Then pour between the two circles some sharp water, which has been slightly warmed by fire, and hold it there for an hour's time. The patient should bear the stinging and burning sensation, for he will feel a sting like that of fire.
Until the sting subsides, then you lift your hand with the tool and wipe off all the sharp water from the hip with fresh water. Then leave it for three days, applying grease until the blackness of the burn goes away. Leave it there for a few more days as pus flows from it; this is most beneficial.
Then you treat it with ointments until it heals. If the pain extends to the thigh or leg, make a mold for him that holds water as you did for the hip. This is the description of sharp water, and I have explained it further in the article on improving medications.
Take one part saltpeter and one part quicklime, not slaked, grind them together and put them in a new pot with only one small hole at the bottom, just large enough for a rod to pass through. Place another glazed pot underneath it.
Pour fresh water over the saltpeter and quicklime, enough to cover them by one finger's width after you have pressed them together firmly with your hand. Leave the pot until all of the sharp water drains into the glazed pot below. Then gather that water altogether and pour it onto more quicklime and slaked lime.
Then it becomes very sharp and is effective in many medical procedures, including cauterizing various body parts because it acts like fire itself. Among the medications that are also used to cauterize the hip are: thapsia, honey from the plant al-bldhr (perhaps asparagus), lime with soap being rubbed on.
Galen relates the story of an ancient man's treatment for hip pain and sciatica, greatly exaggerating its importance and claiming that it is superior to all other treatments, curing patients in a single application.
To the extent that he might be carried into a bath and exit it cured, although this is unlikely. The treatment involves finely grinding some fresh or dried green hellebore (veratrum viride) with some kind of fat, then applying it to the hip where the pain is located, or on the leg or thigh.
Then it is bound on, and left for three hours or as long as the patient feels the burning sensation subside; then he should enter a bath and, if his body becomes moist, he should go into the hot tub - the pain will go away and he will be cured by God's permission. If he does not recover, reapply the poultice after ten days.
He will be cured, God willing. Note that no one should use cauterization with these medications without first purging the body. Dioscorides mentions that goat dung, when used to treat sciatica by cauterization, is beneficial.
Cauterization should be performed as follows: take some wool, soak it in old oil and place it on the deep spot between the thumb of the hand and the forearm (closer to the latter), then take a dry goat dung ball.
Ignite it with fire until it becomes a hot coal, then place it on wool and leave it until it cools down. Take another [coal] and keep doing this repeatedly until the sensation reaches halfway up the arm to the hip, and the pain subsides, by Allah's will. This type of cauterization is called 'ka' al-ba'r'.
Chapter 42.
On cauterizing back pain.
Back pain may result from many causes, such as a fall or blow to the back, excessive vomiting, and so on; it is often due to an excess of cold, moist material. Cauterization in this case applies only to this specific category [of injury].
For pain resulting from an excess of cold material, after inducing vomiting in the patient with stinking beans or similar substances, cauterize their back where it hurts; make three rows across as wide as a table top, marking the area first with ink. In each row, apply five or more cauterizations, depending on how much you think the patient can bear based on their strength and endurance.
Use the "point" cauterizer, or if you prefer, use three or four cauterizations with a medium-sized nail-shaped cauterizer in this pattern.
Chapter 43.
On cauterizing the onset of a hunchback [posture].
This condition often affects small children; the onset is marked by labored breathing when they are standing or moving about, and you can feel that the last vertebrae in their spine has protruded beyond its neighbors.
If you see this and wish to stop it, cauterize it with an iron that is circular in shape. You must apply the cauterization to each side of the vertebra evenly. If you wish, you may cauterize it around the vertebra with an iron point in two or three rows, ensuring that the points are close together. Then treat the area until it heals using the methods we have described.
Be cautious not to use cauterization for the hunch that results from nerve tension.
Chapter Forty-Four.
On the cauterization of gout and joint pains.
If joint pains are caused by cold moisture accumulating in any part of the body, and if these pains occur in the legs specifically, doctors often refer to this as gout.
If gout caused by cold is treated with the methods we have described earlier, and if the pains do not subside, cauterization will help. You should cauterize the affected area around the leg joints extensively using an olive-shaped iron of medium size.
If you need to treat the front of the leg, use a point iron for cauterization. If the pain rises to the knees or other joints, which often happens, cauterize each knee with three or four burns on either side using the same olive-shaped iron.
If you need to go beyond these cauterization methods, proceed with caution and do not deeply penetrate the skin; limit it to the thickness of the skin only. If the pain rises further to the hips or back, refer to our previous discussion on cauterization for those areas.
If the pains are in the hands only, make incisions around both ulnas as two rows, if they remain in the fingers, make an incision on each node and also on the palm of the hand; if the pain goes up after a few days to the elbows or to the shoulders.
Treat them on both sides and the patient will not lack good management and appropriate medicine, for if he takes a good diet and expels phlegm then he will recover with this cauterization, God willing.
Chapter 45.
On the cauterization of hernia.
If a hernia presents in the groin and some of the intestine or omentum descend into the testicle, and if this is an initial occurrence, then you should advise your patient to stop eating for that day, and use laxatives to help evacuate the bowels.
Then have him lie down before you on his back and ask him to strain so as to evert the omentum or intestine, then push it in with your finger; mark with ink beneath the hernia on the pubic bone a sign like half a circle whose tips are directed towards the top of the body.
Then heat an iron that looks like this: [image]
Until it becomes white hot, emitting sparks; then push the intestine or omentum back into his belly, a servant should place their hand on this spot to prevent the protrusion of the bowel while you separate your patient's legs and place a pillow underneath him, another servant should hold his legs still.
While another holds his arms to the chest, then lower the iron onto that same mark and press down with it, keeping your hand upright; hold until you have reached bone or lift up once more if you did not reach bone first time around.
Take care to prevent the intestines from protruding while you cauterize, lest they be burned and this results in either death or a great affliction for the patient. Know that if your cautery does not reach the bone, then your work will not be successful. The iron used for cauterizing children should be suitable for their size; likewise for adults.
Then, three days after the cauterization, you should treat the site with butter to remove the effects of the fire, and then apply other ointments until it heals. The patient should remain lying on their back for forty days until the wound closes.
You should ensure that their diet consists of food that is gentle on the stomach to prevent the intestines from protruding when straining during defecation. When they want to get up after forty days, you should use a tight bandage and keep it on for another forty days. They should also reduce strenuous activity, avoid overeating or overindulging in drink, and refrain from loud shouting.
If this treatment regimen is followed, the patient will heal completely, God willing. I shall mention the treatment of hernias by incision in its proper section, God willing. As for a hernia that occurs elsewhere in the abdomen and is at an early stage, if you want to prevent it from worsening, cauterize the hernia with a circular iron suitable for its size. You should cauterize an area of skin that is about two-thirds the size of the hernia, and then treat it as mentioned previously; it will not worsen, God willing. Some early practitioners have described cauterizing a hernia with a triangular iron shaped like this.
After you have outlined the hernia with ink, place one edge of the triangle across its upper side and the other below it; then cauterize once in the middle with a single iron shaped like a nail. The first method is simpler and better, God willing.
Chapter Forty-Six.
In the key of the document.
If in any of the organs there should be pain from a fall or blow, and if this pain persists for a long time without yielding to medicinal treatment, cauterization of the affected point should then be carried out; and the amount of cautery applied to each organ should depend on its size, smallness, weakness, or strength.
And if the pain and injury have taken firm hold, then should a cure result from the first cauterization; otherwise, repeat the cautery upon him, for it is the habit of such pains to move from one organ to another nearby. You must therefore follow them up with cauterizations until the patient is cured.
Chapter Forty-Seven.
In the cauterization of leprosy.
As for lepers, they may benefit greatly from cauterization; especially the type of leprosy which comes about through putrefaction of phlegm and *melancholia*.
When you wish to cauterize the leper, consider first whether the leprosy is in its initial stages; and if treating it by means mentioned earlier in this section does not arrest or check the progress of the disease; and if you fear that corruption will overrun his entire constitution: then cauterize him on the head with five cauteries. One at the usual place in the middle of the head; a second below it towards the forehead, near where hair ends; two on the corners; and one behind in occiput. Press down your hand with the cautery slightly so as to affect the bone minimally.
Scabs will be cast off, which makes it easier for the emission of thick vapours; cauterize him again in the same way as previously described on his spleen, and if leprosy should continue in the patient with clear appearance: you must then apply those cauteries we mentioned to his head. A cauterization on the edge of the nose, two cauterizations on each cheek, two on the vertebrae of the neck, six on the vertebrae of the back, one large one on the coccyx at the base of the tailbone, and another above it in the same area; and two on the hips, one on each hip. Two [cauteries] on the knees, one on each knee; two on the shoulders and two on the elbows; two on the hollows of his chest, a cautery on every joint of the fingers of his hands and feet; and on each heel of his feet, as well as the forearms.
Take care not to burn the nerves at the back of the heels, and you may cauterize the pubic bone, as well as the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver; know that the more you increase the number of cauterizations, the more beneficial and effective they will be.
Know that the sick person will not feel the pain of cauterization as much as a healthy one, due to their numbness; and you should have cauteries of various sizes, large and small, depending on the body parts and joints, as previously described regarding the qualities of the instruments.
Then treat the cauterized areas with a mixture of wheat flour and honey, and continue with the rest of the treatment until it is healed, God willing.
Chapter 48.
On the cauterization of numbness: when a body part becomes numb and is treated with medicines, ointments, and dressings but does not heal, cauterize the same affected part with multiple cauteries according to the size of the member; make your cautery somewhat thicker than normal at the skin's surface.
Then treat it with ointment until it heals, and cauterize for some numbness that occurs in the hand or foot at the vertebrae of the back where the nerve exits which moves that limb; thus will go away the numbness.
And no one should undertake this except someone who is knowledgeable about the anatomy of organs and the exits of nerves that move the body.
Chapter forty-nine.
On cauterizing leprosy.
If leprosy becomes old and no medical trick works on it, then cauterize it deeply somewhat below the skin thickness until the whiteness goes away and its color changes.
Then treat it with lentil flour, rose oil and the leaves of plantago major, pigeon blood or woodpecker's blood from each one part mixed together; apply them on a rag and keep in place until it heals.
Chapter fifty.
On cauterizing cancerous growths.
If cancer is in its initial stages and you want to stop it, then cauterize around it with a circular iron as it expands; some wise men mentioned that one powerful cauterization in the middle should suffice but I don't share this opinion because I expect an ulceration which indeed happened many times.
So the correct approach is to cauterize around it with a circular iron as mentioned earlier or use multiple cauterizations.
Chapter fifty-one.
On cauterizing abscesses.
If a swelling occurs in any part of the body and its maturation is slow, whether due to an excess of heat within it or because the patient is old with little blood and humours, or even as a result of the season; if you wish to accelerate its maturity, cauterize all around it with many small hot iron touches.
Then leave it, for this will accelerate its maturation. If you wish to soften it by cauterization then heat the iron tool which is shown here.
Lower it into the middle of the swelling until it penetrates the skin. The cauterization should be applied to the part that is lower, so as to facilitate the draining away of pus. Then treat it with whatever is appropriate until it heals.
Chapter Fifty-Two.
On the cauterization of carbuncles.
Carbuncles are a corruption that spreads within the body, devouring it as fire devours dry wood. If you see one in a place where cauterization with fire is possible, then heat many iron nails of different sizes according to what suits this location on which the carbuncle has appeared.
Then cauterize them from every angle, so as to eliminate all corruption and leave nothing behind whatsoever. Then abandon it for three days and apply ground sulphur mixed with oil to the cauterized areas until all crustiness and corruption is removed.
Then treat it with the ointments that promote flesh growth. If, after three days, you see that the flesh is growing properly without any corruption, then leave it be; but if not, repeat the cauterization for whatever areas are still corrupted. Carbuncles may also be treated with caustic medicines.
It serves the purpose of fire more rapidly, proving more beneficial. I have already mentioned its treatment with acute medication in the division; you can find it there whenever needed.
Chapter fifty-three.
In cauterizing inverted and non-inverted nails.
This condition frequently occurs on the soles of the feet, and it is a rough growth that causes pain to the foot. Cauterization can be performed in two ways: either with fire or with sharp water (an instrument).
Cauterization with fire involves using a hollow iron instrument resembling the feathers of an eagle, which is shaped to fit around the nail from all sides and has a thin edge. The instrument is heated and then placed over the nail; the hand holding the instrument should be turned so that it goes deeper into the nail.
It should be left for three days until pus forms, and then it is dressed with a mortar of wild mallows beaten up with salt; the dressing is to remain on overnight, so that the nail comes away from its root. Then treat the wound site with an unguent encouraging flesh growth (to aid healing); if dealing with non-inverted nails.
The condition also often occurs on the surface of the body, especially on hands and legs; in which case a copper or iron tube (or one made from eagle feathers) should be placed over the nail or wart, then fill this tube with a small amount of sharp water.
Hold your hand and turn it slightly, so that the edge of the tube affects the root of the nail; this allows the sharp water to reach deep into the nail's origin. The patient should bear with the burning sensation from the water for an hour.
Then leave it, for the nail will come out with its roots. Thus you do this one by one until all those in the body are removed, and then treat their locations afterward with salves that promote flesh growth.
Chapter 45.
In cauterization of shaking palsy.
If shaking palsy occurs in someone, due to cold affecting the nerves or from quartan fever or anything else, you should cauterize it four or five times on the vertebrae of the back, cauterizing between every vertebra, and once in their chest. And on their stomach, cauterize once with the olive-oil iron; for shaking palsy calms down and speeds up maturation of the cold disease.
Chapter 55.
In cauterization of boils occurring in the body.
Boils that are unsightly may break out in the body, caused by cold, thick, putrid matter. At their first appearance you should cauterize them gently on top of each boil with a stick of cinnamon whose end has been lit with fire, or with the root of long snakeroot, or with a lentil-shaped iron.
Abscesses may also be cauterized at their first outbreak in this manner; it does not increase, the active cause disperses, and the patient recovers from them. However, it should only be done after the patient is purged by venesection.
Chapter 56.
In cauterization of bleeding occurring after severing an artery.
Frequently, bleeding occurs from a severed artery when it is cut by an external wound or when an abscess is opened up or a limb cauterised and such like; then it becomes difficult to stop the bleeding.
So if this should happen to anyone, then quickly take your hand and place it over the mouth of the artery; put your index finger upon it and press firmly until you can control the blood flow under your finger without allowing any blood to escape from it. Then prepare several small and large olive-wood cauteries in a fire, blowing upon them until they become very hot.
Then take one, either small or large depending on the wound and where the artery is exposed, and apply this cautery to the same vein after quickly removing your finger; continue holding the cautery until the blood flow has ceased.
If the blood starts to flow again when you remove your finger from the mouth of the artery, and the cautery has cooled down, then quickly take another one from those which are already prepared in the fire; continue doing this with one after another until bleeding stops.
Be careful not to burn any nerves which may be there and cause further complications for the patient; understand that an artery will bleed profusely if severed, especially a large one, so it cannot be cut without cauterization or amputation unless it has already been severed. If you amputate the artery, its ends will contract and the bleeding stops; it can be tied firmly with threads or appropriate medicines applied, then bandaged tightly.
If anyone attempts to stop the bleeding by tying it with cloth or bandages, applying caustic substances and such like, then this will never work except in rare cases; if someone is confronted with this situation but has no doctor or medicine available, they should quickly place their index finger over the wound as described.
Pull it very tight until the blood is contained and let it flow away from above the wound, over the artery; keep your finger on it with cold water, very cold, always until the blood congeals, thickens, and stops flowing; meanwhile examine what it needs in terms of cauterization or medicine.
Chapter Two.
On incisions, punctures, bloodletting, and similar surgical procedures.
Khalf has said: We have mentioned in the first chapter every illness that can be treated with cauterization by fire and caustic medicines, its causes and reasons, instruments used for it, and shapes of cauteries; we organized this as chapters from head to toe.
I will follow the same structure in this chapter, to make it easier for the student to find what they seek...
Before I begin, you should know, my sons, that this chapter contains more risks than the first one on cauterization...
For this reason, it is important to be more cautious as the procedures in this chapter often involve bloodletting, which can lead to a loss of vitality if an artery is opened during incision, puncturing of a tumor, draining of an abscess, treatment of wounds, extraction of arrows, or incisions for removal of stones; all these procedures carry significant risk and fear, and death occurs frequently.
I advise you to avoid any procedures that may cause doubt, as in this practice you will encounter various people with different illnesses; some may be tired of their ailments and indifferent to death...
Because of the severity of their ailments, and the length of time they have been ill for, some may show signs that indicate imminent death; others will offer you money to enrich yourselves in exchange for health, despite their illness being deadly; it is not appropriate to assist such people at all...
Let your caution be greater than your desire and eagerness, and do not proceed with any of these procedures unless you have certain knowledge that leads you to believe the outcome will be praiseworthy. In all your treatment of patients, use advance knowledge and provide warnings regarding potential outcomes for their safety.
For in that, you will find assistance in gaining praise, glory, remembrance, and gratitude. May God guide you to righteousness, my sons, and not deprive you of wisdom and success; indeed, it is all in His hands, there is no god but He.
I have arranged this chapter in order from the head to the foot, as presented in the previous chapter on cauterization, so that you may easily find what you seek, God willing.
Chapter One.
On the treatment of the buildup of fluid in the heads of infants.
This illness often presents in infants at birth if the midwife applies too much pressure to their head without care, and it may also occur due to an unknown underlying condition.
I have not encountered this illness except in infants, and all those I've seen afflicted with it have passed away quickly. Therefore, I advise against any intervention. Among them was an infant whose head filled with fluid; the head would swell daily. Until the infant could no longer sit up on their own due to the size of their head and the increasing fluid; they eventually passed away.
This fluid may gather between the skin and bone, or beneath the bone on the membrane. If the treatment is performed while the swelling is small and the fluid is situated between the skin and bone, it should be cut open in the middle of the head with one cross-wise incision approximately two inches long to allow the fluid to drain. This is an illustration of the scalpel.
If the moisture is greater and the swelling larger, make two intersecting incisions like this: .".
And if the moisture is beneath the bone, a sign of which is that you see the sutures of the head open on every side and the water sinks when you squeeze it with your hand inwardly, and this should not be hidden from you; then it is necessary to make three incisions in the middle of the head like this.
After the incision, all the moisture comes out; then you stitch the incisions with cloth and bandages, and then cover it from above with a compress and oil until the fifth day. Then you remove the bandage and treat the wound with catgut and ointments, not leaving the head too tight. You should feed the patient dry food that is low in moisture.
Until the limb regains its strength and heals, here is another method of incision: look where the bone of the swelling appears and where the water gathers, for it may be at the back of the head more or in front or to the right or left.
So you intend to make the incision where the swelling and water accumulation appears, making it as small as possible, and take care not to cut an artery causing bleeding which may lead to death of the patient from that bleeding along with the discharge of moisture.
Chapter Two.
The ligation of the two arteries behind the ears known as al-hasaysayn.
Whenever a severe attack affects the eyes or chest and persists without improvement despite drug treatment, the effective cure for that is ligation of these two arteries.
Therefore, if you intend to cut them [the temporal arteries], you should first shave the patient's head with a razor and then rub the area with a coarse cloth to make the artery visible. Next, you should tighten the patient's neck with a piece of their garment, then look for where the pulse beats; the two places are the two low spots behind the ears, which are rarely concealed except in some people.
Then mark them with ink, and cut them with a sharp scalpel all the way to the bone; this should be done across the width of the head. If you wish, you can insert the scalpel beneath the artery and sever it from below by cutting upward; the length of the incision should be about two fingers' width.
If the artery is severed, blood will gush out in pulsating spurts, jumping forward with each pulse. If you cannot feel the artery, you should estimate its location to be three fingers' width from the ear and then mark it with ink; make an incision down to the bone.
You will lose about six ounces of blood on average, and perhaps more or less depending on the patient's strength and the fullness of their arteries; examine the wound and if there is any peritoneum left over the bone, cut it away.
To avoid a hot swelling, you should tightly bind the wound with a linen thread; then treat it with ointments until it heals.
Chapter 3.
On the ligation of the temporal arteries.
If a person suffers from chronic migraine or acute seizures caused by inflammatory fluids and heat in the temporal muscles, or severe persistent headaches of similar nature; and if these conditions do not respond to conventional medical treatments, we have found that ligation or cauterization of the temporal arteries can be effective as described above.
The procedure for treating her droop involves shaving the patient's hair from the temples and targeting the visible artery in the temple, as its pulse will be evident to you, rarely is it hidden except in one person out of a thousand.
Or, if it is very cold and you cannot see the artery, have the patient tighten their neck with a corner of their garment; then wipe or cover the spot with a hot cloth until the artery becomes clearly visible. Then take the scalpel, which looks like this: [image follows] You then carefully peel back the skin with it until you reach the artery, and insert a hook into it before drawing it upwards to extract it from the skin; detach it from any membranes beneath on both sides, if the artery is thin, twist its end around the hook's tip. Cut off a piece of its length, as long as the ends are separated and contracted without any bleeding; indeed, if it is neither severed nor cut off there will be no blood loss whatsoever, then drain between six and three ounces of blood.
If the artery is thick, you should tie it in two places with a strong double thread - preferably made of silk or guitar strings so that decay does not reach it before the wound heals and cause bleeding.
Then cut off the excess between the two ligatures; you can do this either now or later, and if you wish to cauterize it with a spatula-like iron until its ends are severed - which will serve as an alternative to this procedure or even better than what we have described above.
Unless the patient has a fever or is in a bilious condition, because cauterization helps to eliminate humidity and thus makes it more beneficial; after removing both arteries, the place should be filled with old cotton and firm dressings placed on top. After the treatment, one must use dry medicines that grow flesh, and also stitching, until healed if God wills.
If, in the course of your work, bleeding from an artery occurs, you should quickly cut it either by cauterization or filling the place with zinc and tightening your grip until blood stops flowing; if none of these are available, use your finger until the blood clots.
Wash the place with very cold water to reduce inflammation, and then tighten it as required; a less severe method than cutting an artery is cauterizing the vein using this double-bladed instrument after marking both ends with ink.
Place it very hot until reaching the bone, and burn through in two places so that both ends are separated; this cauterization ensures they will never join together again. This is an illustration of the instrument.
The two blades should be sharp, resembling small scissors but much less so than a knife since if they were too sharp they would quickly cool down and fail to cut the flesh swiftly; therefore, some thickness is required in order for heat to remain.
They should cut the flesh quickly, which is better than all other procedures, simpler and less painful; the distance between the blades should be about as thick as a finger.
Chapter Four.
On treating profuse and constant burning tears in both eyes.
If the tears are constant and flow from the vessels on the skull externally, and no benefit is gained from medicinal treatments, and I observe the patient's face has turned red. And they feel a tingling sensation on their forehead, like ants crawling, and their eyes are weak and wet, with eyelashes that have thinned out and eyelids that are sore from the intensity of the tears. In such cases, the only option left for treatment, as per the ancients, is what they call 'treatment by the sword', which involves instructing the patient to shave the hair on their forehead.
Then, make three parallel incisions on the forehead, running along its length. Each incision should be about two finger-lengths long, with the first one in the middle of the forehead and aligned with the nose's length, the second slightly away from the movement of the temple muscle, and the third on the other side.
Be cautious not to cut the two arteries on either side, and keep your hand away from where the jaws connect. Leave a gap of three fingers' width between each incision. Have ready some prepared sponge pieces or many dry cloths to soak up the blood.
Then, insert the double-edged scalpel, which is depicted here:" [image of a sharp, double-edged scalpel] Slide the scalpel into the incision next to the temple, and use it to peel away all the skin between the two incisions, along with the membrane on the bone. Repeat this action from the middle incision to the third one. Finally, remove the scalpel. Another instrument also enters the first incision, which is called a scalpel with a sharp side and a smooth, unsharpened other side. This is its image: .
Its sharp side is placed upwards towards the meat attached to the skin, and its smooth side towards the bone. You push it until you reach the middle incision and cut all vessels descending from the head to the eyes without cutting through to the outer skin.
Then you do the same in the middle incision to the other one; after a moderate amount of blood has flowed out, squeeze the areas where the blood is coagulating. Then move to each incision and place a cotton wick on it, putting over this a compress soaked in wine or vinegar with oil.
So that a hot swelling does not occur, on the third day you untie the bandage and use copious fomentation with tepid water; then treat it with balsam ointment, rose oil, and anything else you would treat wounds with until it is healed, God willing.
Chapter Five.
On treating tears and discharges into the eyes from within the head.
When someone has had many severe, burning, and constant discharges; their eyes are seen to be emaciated and small with weakened vision, the eyelids ulcerated, and eyelashes lost. And there is a severe, painful ache in the depths of the head with constant sneezing; know from these symptoms that those materials and discharges come from many deep vessels. The best treatment for this is to have the patient shave their forehead then make one incision in the middle.
And there is a severe, painful ache in the depths of the head with constant sneezing; know from these symptoms that those materials and discharges come from many deep vessels. The best treatment for this is to have the patient shave their forehead then make one incision in the middle. Lift it slightly across and begin the incision from the left temple to the right, making sure it reaches the bone. Keep your hand away from the moving muscles of the temples during chewing until all the blood is soaked up by the sponge.
Separate the lips of the incision with old cotton or a thread of linen, then tighten it from above with bandages. Moisturize the bandages with alcohol and oil to prevent hot swelling. Once you remove them and see that the hot swelling has been resolved, you should scrape the bone until new flesh grows.
Then treat it with the drying treatment that makes flesh grow, such as taking two parts of wheat flour and four parts of galena and making a salve from them to be used in growing flesh in wounds like these.
Chapter Six.
On treating foreign objects that fall into the ear.
Any foreign object that falls into the ear is one of four types: either a metal stone or something similar to it, such as iron and glass; or vegetable seeds like chickpeas and pits; or a liquid substance like water and vinegar.
And [fourthly] an animal, so when a pebble or something similar falls into the ear and does not grow there, expose the ear to sunlight. If you see the pebble, drip some violet oil or lamp oil on it, then try to remove it by moving your head or sneezing with musk. Close your nostrils when sneezing after placing a cloth or wool collar around the ear and stretching it upwards, as this often helps remove [the object]. If it does not come out, try to extract it gently with forceps like these.
If it comes out with forceps, otherwise attempt to remove it with a fine, flexible blind hook. If that fails, make a copper tube and insert the end of the tube into the ear hole carefully.
Seal the area around the tube with softened pitch mixed with oil, to prevent any escape of air other than through the tube. Then blow strongly and repeatedly into it, often this will dislodge it. If these methods fail, take a small amount of nabatex gum or bird-catching gum, place it on the end of an ear-spoon.
After wrapping some tightly-packed cotton wool around it, gently insert the ear-spoon into the ear canal once you have dried out any moisture. If none of these methods work and before hot swelling or spasm occurs, resort to making an incision.
For the incision, first bleed the patient at the 'qifal' point and remove an appropriate amount of blood depending on their strength. Then have the patient sit between your knees with their ear flipped upwards, make a small incision at the base of the ear where it joins the head, in the lowest part.
Make the incision in a crescent shape until you reach the stone, then remove it using any suitable instruments available to you. Suture the wound quickly and treat it so that it heals.
If the object in the ear is a grain that can swell and grow, try to remove it using the methods mentioned earlier. If not successful, take a fine, delicate scalpel of this design:
Use the scalpel to cut into that type of grain which has fallen into the ear. Only do this if you are certain that the grain has become softened by the moisture of the ear canal, so that it can be easily broken up into many small pieces. Then remove these using a blind hook, fine forceps or suction.
As we mentioned, it can be easily removed, and as for the water that enters the ear, the patient should first use a sneezing powder or kundas, having filled their ear with some old cotton while lying on the side of the affected ear; if this brings it out then so much the better.
If this does not work, take many smooth and flat pebbles the size of your fingers, warm them a little over fire, and have the patient insert one into the hole of their ear; they should hop on their other foot from that side while hitting another stone against the one inside the ear.
The patient should keep doing this with one pebble after the other until all water has been drained, or they could also use a reed or feather; insert its tip into their ear and light the other end on fire so that most of it burns up before reinserting another reed or feather.
Repeat this action several times until all the water has been drained, or else use a tube as described previously for removing the pebble; if an animal is inside the ear and it is small like a flea or similar, treat it as mentioned in the section on categorisation, but if not...
If the animal is large enough to be felt, try removing it with forceps and hooks; this should be easier than dealing with any other foreign object stuck inside the ear. If there are worms present in the ear that were not dealt with by treatment mentioned earlier in the section on irrigation or if your treatment has been ineffective...
Look into the ear in sunlight; if you can see any of the worms, remove them with forceps or small hooks but if not visible then take this tube... (accompanied by an illustration).
Narrow at the bottom and wide at the top; insert the slender end into the ear to whatever extent the patient can tolerate it, then suck strongly with it. Do this several times until all the worms come out. If they do not respond by coming out, seal around the tube with wax as I mentioned for the stone.
If they do not come out as mentioned, use the drops I have described which ancient doctors used to kill worms. You will find that in the article on drops. Pour the oils and medicines into the ear with this tool; here is an illustration of it.
As you can see, make it out of silver or copper, narrow at the bottom with a small hole and wide at the top. If you wish, the funnel inside the tube can be made of tightly fitted brass; if you prefer, take a pencil and wrap some cotton tightly around one end.
Then pour the oil or juice, or whatever medicine you want to use from this group, into the tube while it is in the ear. Next insert the pencil with cotton on the end from above and squeeze gently by hand so that the oil flows into the inner ear.
The patient should be inside [the ear]; make sure that whatever you pour into the ear has been warmed a little over a fire, and take care not to use something very cold or hot in the drops as the ear cannot tolerate it.
Chapter 7.
On the treatment of temporary blockage of the ear.
Some children may be born with their ear canals unperforated.
There might also be presented to some people an obstruction in the ear canal due to a wound or overgrown flesh within it, and this blockage may lie deep inside the ear canal beyond the reach of sight.
It might also present itself slightly outside the hole, where it can be seen by the eye; the one that lies deep inside the ear beyond sight is usually difficult to heal, but if it's visible then you should place the patient's ear in sunlight. Look at it, if you see the obstruction exposed then open it with a delicate scalpel; this is what its shape looks like:
Its tip should have a slight width and be slightly narrowed, while the rest of the scalpel is smooth-sided to avoid harming the ear; if the obstruction stems from overgrown flesh in the ear canal then grasp it with a delicate hook and cut it very gently so as to remove all the tissue.
If the obstruction is deep inside the ear, then take a delicate smooth probe and warm it slightly over fire before inserting it into the ear canal; if you feel the blockage along with the patient's perception of hearing loss then gently rotate its handle.
Be mindful not to injure the ear membrane; then insert into the ear a wick sized according to the width of the hole, having anointed it in Egyptian ointment; do this for several days until you're sure that healing is complete or else take a dry wick and soak it in water before dusting it with powdered green vitriol.
And apply this treatment; if you see the ear swelling with hot inflammation then you should remove the wick and replace it with another, having anointed it in ointment made from tar boiled in rose oil until the hot inflammation subsides; then continue treating until healing is complete.
If there is bleeding, dip a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear; employ other treatments mentioned in the chapter on fluxes to stop this discharge.
Chapter 8.
In the treatment of warts that appear on the eyelids.
These warts that appear on the eyelids can be moist or dry; you should grasp them with a hook or needle and cut them away at their base with a knife, then apply powdered zinc oxide to the area.
If any blood is discharged from them, cauterize them with a mild lenticular iron; cauterization after cutting is best. They often return if some of their roots remain; if you cauterize with fire, these roots will be burnt and they won't recur.
Chapter 9.
In the treatment of a cold affecting the eyelids.
It is often observed on the eyelids something resembling a cold in its severity and hardness.
For this reason, it is called a cold; this is the gathering of thick moisture in both the upper and lower eyelids. If the lesion is prominent on the surface of the eyelid and moves in all directions, it's easily treated by making an incision across it horizontally.
Then gently peel it away on all sides until it's removed completely; suspend it with a hook and cut it off. If you cannot remove it without cutting through the eyelid, this will not harm the patient; if the incision is large, close it with stitches and treat it until it heals.
If it is small, there is no harm to you from it since the ointment will heal and seal it; if the eyelash leans towards the inner surface of the eyelid then turn over the eyelid and use a hook to pull out the eyelash without any need for an incision and cut it off on both sides.
Then, if you have to cut open the eyelid, that won't do any harm; afterward wash out the eye after removing the eyelash with salty water and treat it with something that will seal the wound until healing.
Chapter 10.
The treatment of the sty which presents in the eyelid.
A sty is a lump that forms in the layers of the upper eyelid and boys are more prone to it; it makes their eyes heavy and gives them colds at dawn, so they cannot bear to look into the sunlight. Because tears come quickly to them.
And for that reason, you see them always leaning on their faces and they sleep on them; their eyelids are moist underneath the eyebrows with a swelling caused by wind, and the sty appears to the eye, and whenever you press the area between your fingers, you can feel the sty in-between. The method of treatment is that the patient should place his head in your lap.
You then take a linen cloth and prepare from it a wick, making out of that wick a circle as big as the sty is on every side; you then place this over the sty and press with your fingers on each side to gather up the sty in the middle of the circle.
You then cut into the middle of that moisture with a sharp lancet, cutting across and the incision shouldn't be any bigger than an incision made for bloodletting; as to depth you need to cut through all layers of skin until you reach the sty.
In most cases, the chalazion protrudes from the incision as a piece of white fatty tissue. So grab it with a cloth you've wrapped around your fingers and pull it out, turning your hand right and left until it is removed. Be careful not to enlarge the incision lest the scalpel touches the eye and injures it.
If the chalazion does not appear at first in the incision, you should gently enlarge it a little until the chalazion protrudes and then grab it as we said before. Then dip a cloth in vinegar and water and place it on the site while applying pressure with a bandage. Some people prefer to crush salt.
Put it inside the incision to dissolve any remaining moisture, then treat it until it heals. If a hot swelling occurs in the spot, treat it with soothing dressings until it heals.
Chapter 11.
On the types of eye evisceration.
If abnormal eyelashes grow on the eyelid beneath the natural lashes and become permanent, they harm the eye and cause various diseases such as constant tearing, drooping eyelids, opacity, and thickening to the point of causing blindness.
Eye evisceration is done in four ways: either by cauterization with fire, or with sharp medicine as mentioned earlier in the section on cauterization, or it can be performed by cutting and stitching, or using a probe, which I will describe shortly.
You should place the patient's head in your lap and then turn the eyelid up with your left hand. If it doesn't turn, insert a needle with thread from beneath the eyelid and pierce the needle through the thread from above, close to the eyelashes themselves, and pull the thread upwards along with the eyelid.
Turn it with a spatula, then make an incision on the inside of the eyelid without touching the excess hair using the 'mubda'a al-nashal'. Start from the larger 'maq' to the smaller one and remove the thread. Place under the eyelid a small dressing made of cotton or cloth, then mark the eyelid with ink.
Like the shape of an ace card, but it should be adjusted to the desired amount of eyelid lift, as this can vary among individuals; some may require a significant cut to address eyelid drooping.
Some may need a smaller cut, depending on the degree of eyelid relaxation; adjust accordingly. Incise with the 'mubda'a' along the marked lines, starting from the larger 'maq' to the smaller one, keeping the incision close to the natural hair and matching the thickness of a spatula.
Insert the hook at one corner of the skin and peel it entirely. Suture both lips together using a fine wool thread and needle, clean any blood, then attach any remaining threads to the eyebrows with some sticky material.
If you wish, you can opt to skip suturing and leave it untreated for three or four days; alternatively, you can apply a drying agent to promote wound healing and skin tightening. However, the preferred method is to suture, as this helps lift the eyelid once the wound closes, resulting in better outcomes.
This method of eyelid correction was described by early practitioners, but it may not be suitable for the weak and ill due to its demanding nature; however, it is an effective procedure without significant risks. An alternative approach involves marking the eyelid in a shape resembling an ace card as previously mentioned. Then lift the eyelid with three hooks, which can be separate or together like this:.
Then cut off the remaining part of the eyelid with small scissors like this, cutting moderately:.
If you cannot hold the hooks and they are not stable for you, then take a needle with thread in it and insert it into the middle of the figure. Then, insert another thread near the larger orbit and a third one near the smaller orbit. Gather between your fingers the threads moderately and then lift up the eyelid gently.
Lift the skin marked upon it entirely, as we have described. Then, bring together the lips of the wound with sutures and treat it until it heals. If a hot swelling appears when you cut or incise, then subdue that swelling with cirrhotic ointments and similar anesthetic salves.
The lower eyelid may also turn inward, in which case you should employ what we have mentioned about cutting, suturing, and cauterizing with fire or sharp medication. Cauterization with fire or sharp medication is more effective and less burdensome for the patient than cutting and suturing.
Cauterization with reeds is done in this manner: you turn the eyelid inside out and make an incision from within as described previously. Then, prepare two thin reeds or pieces of wood whose length matches that of the eyelid and whose width is less than that of a scalpel.
You notch both ends of the reeds on either side where the threads are to be tied, then bring them together gently over what remains of the eyelid and tighten the reeds firmly from either side for a few days. The tightened skin will die off, turning black and putrefying.
Until it falls off by itself. If it slows down, then cut it with scissors and treat it until it heals. Once the eyelid fuses together again, it no longer droops onto the eye when lifted. This is an image of two tubes shaped exactly like this in length and width.
Chapter 12.
On removing ingrown eyelashes with a needle.
If it is a single or double eyelash, then take a fine needle and thread a piece of very smooth silk through the eye of the needle. Tie both ends together with a very delicate knot, ensuring that the length of the silk is around one hand's breadth long.
Then, attach another piece of silk to the loop which is shorter than the first one and tie its ends together if you wish. Have your patient place their head in your lap, preferably close to a source of light so that you can see what you are doing as this work requires precision. You then insert the needle with the loop into the follicle of the ingrown eyelash.
You gently push the needle through the eyelid until it emerges on top of the ingrown eyelash, then you pull the silk thread towards yourself over the loop and draw the lash or lashes into the loop without piercing them with the needle point as you do not want to damage any more than is necessary. This will usually be a single lash but may also be two or three but never more than that.
You then draw the lash out of the eyelid using your hand and the loop by pulling it upwards so that you remove the eyelash along with the loop, being careful not to damage any more than is necessary. If the lash does not come free from its follicle when you pull on the loop, you may need to gently tug downwards on the silk thread which holds the loop so as to draw the loop back out of the eyelid through the hole it entered via without damaging the eye itself or any other eyelashes.
Then reinsert the hair and pull them out, do this until it rises to the upper hole and you can see it clearly; at that point loosen the noose, remove the thread, take both of them out and tighten the eye (of the patient), leaving it tightened for two or three days until the hair settles into its place and flesh grows over it.
If the hair is short, either add a longer natural hair to it so that they rise together or leave it until after some time when it grows longer and then lift it up.
Chapter thirteen.
On the treatment of strabismus that occurs in the upper eyelid of the eye.
This strabismus, which is exposed to this condition, is called "Arnabeya", and it is either natural or incidental. The incidental kind results from the healing of a wound, incision, cauterization, or similar.
The procedure to treat it is to incise that healing and separate its lips, then put a wick of linen between them and tie it until it heals. It is not appropriate to use anything that dries or constricts in the treatment.
If you do that, the strabismus will return worse than it was before. Rather, use things that relax, such as fenugreek and poultices with water in which mallow and flax seeds have been boiled, along with a small amount of liniment. Treat it by applying this mixture to the wick.
The key to its treatment is that you should try every possible means so it does not heal in the same manner as before. The method we described is just a part of the strabismus correction process, and by no means will it restore the original state of the place.
Chapter Fourteen.
In the treatment of strabismus which is in the lower eyelid.
This strabismus which is from below is what is truly called strabismus and it can be natural or accidental. The accidental kind results from a wound, a cut, burning, or something similar.
The way to treat it is to take a needle with a doubled thread and pierce the flesh, going through from the left orbit to the right one until you have passed the thread through both ends of the flesh then pull the flesh upwards with the needle and cut it with a broad lancet.
If the shape of the eyelid returns to normal, then leave it as such; but if not, take a rod and place it on the wound site and turn over the eyelid, make two incisions in the inner side of the eyelid with the incision ends from the angles of the cut you made until they meet so there is an angle formed. When they come together, their shape will be similar to this: [Drawing of eyelid with two incisions meeting at an angle]
It is similar to the Greek letter lambda, then you remove that flesh leaving as much of its sharp edge below what follows after the eyelid; then you bring together the separated parts with two stitches using wool thread and treat it with the relaxing medicines and twisting we mentioned until it heals.
If the strabismus is due to a wound, stitch or burn then you should make an easy incision without touching the eyelashes also as mentioned before and separate the lips with twisting as we said above.
In summary, the treatment for strabismus, whether it is upward or downward, involves performing the procedure according to how you perceive the condition to be, as it can present in various forms. The experienced surgeon manages this by using whatever method seems feasible.
Until the affected part returns to its natural shape or resembles it, and the condition itself will guide you towards the appropriate procedure and tools in most cases.
Chapter 15.
Regarding the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or cornea.
This adhesion can cause issues for many individuals, as the upper eyelid may adhere to the white part of the eye, hindering its movement and impeding its natural functions. In such cases, you should insert the tip of a rod underneath the eyelid.
You lift it upwards or extend it with a hook, then carefully cut the adhesion using a delicate scalpel that is not too sharp to avoid alarming the patient during the procedure and causing the scalpel to slip and injure the eye with its edge. Your incision should resemble a gentle peeling motion.
You can expect that, if the eyelid returns to its natural position and the adhesion heals completely, you then rinse the eye with saltwater or instill a solution of zinc sulfate into it using eyedrops. Afterward, separate the eyelid from the eye using a piece of cotton wool.
Apply above the eye a piece of woolen cloth soaked in egg white, and after three days, use demulcent eyedrops until it heals.
Chapter Sixteen.
[On the excision of pterygium and the protruding flesh of the eyelids.]
Pterygium is of two types: one is nervous, like a thin hard membrane, and the other is non-nervous, resembling hard white moisture that, when touched by an iron instrument or caught with a hook, tears easily.
And if a hook does not catch [the pterygium], both types begin in the larger eyelid until they gradually cover the pupil and prevent light and eye movement. The procedure for cutting them is to place the patient's head on your lap.
Then the patient opens their eyes, and you lift the eyelid with your hand; then grasp the pterygium with a slightly bent hook, stretching it upwards before taking a needle and inserting into it a single horsehair or cowhair along with strong thread, bending the end of the needle slightly and stitching through the centre of the pterygium.
Pierce through it with the needle and tie off the thread around the pterygium, stretching it upwards; then strip away from the pupil side of the pterygium with the hair, as if you are shaving it off with the hair until reaching its end before cutting off the remainder at its origin in the eyelid with a fine scalpel or small scissors, leaving intact the natural flesh of the eyelid.
To avoid the risk of permanent tearing after its excision, you may stretch the pterygium with the hook alone or with thread as mentioned earlier and then strip away from the side with a smooth scalpel such as this one: [image of a scalpel]
Ensure that the scalpel does not touch the corneal membrane, lest a rupture occur and cause the pupil to protrude; then after excision, place some powdered salt or rusted shavings into the eye and leave it so until the following day before treating it as appropriate until healing is complete.
If the chalazion is non-neural and you cannot insert a needle into it or fix a hook in it, this type of chalazion often responds well to medicinal treatment and heals as described in the classification. If you wish to excise it, open the patient's eye.
Take a delicate, smooth-edged scalpel like this: [image]. Use the scalpel to gently scrape away at the chalazion from above, scraping it lightly. If you find that it loosens and crumbles upon scraping, apply some zincum metabolicum or rubrum metallicum or powdered salt into the eye immediately after scraping. Then bind the eye shut until the following day.
Then, continue to work on it until all of it is gone unless you encounter a warm swelling in the eye; if so, leave it be and treat the warm swelling until healed before returning to scrape away at the chalazion once more until it is also gone. As for fleshy bumps on the conjunctiva...
If the bump is causing excessive harm to the eye, hook it with a surgical hook and excise some of its tissue but do not go too deep lest you cause tear ducts to leak. Then apply rubrum metallicum or zincum metabolicum into the eyes until they are healed.
Chapter XVII.
On the excision of pterygium, or excessive fleshy growth in the eye.
In the eyes of some people, excessive red tissue may grow to cover or approach the cornea, or even overflow onto the eyelids; and perhaps the eyelids become everted so that they turn outwards resembling rose petals.
The procedure involves the patient placing their head in your lap and then opening their eyes, after which you extract that red flesh using appropriate forceps.
Or you grasp it with a hook or curette and then cut away the flesh, one piece at a time, until all of it is removed by cutting, taking care to protect the eye so as not to harm it during the procedure; your cuts should be made either with the scalpel we described for removing a callus or with small scissors. Such as those used to grab threads, which will be illustrated in the next chapter.
Once you have completed the cutting and all of the fleshy growth is gone, fill the eye with crushed salt or instill into it red oxide and similar caustic medicines; then apply to the outside of the eye a poultice of cotton with egg white to prevent hot swelling.
If any of the fleshy growth remains and you find that there is excessive bleeding or that hot swelling may occur, then leave the eye alone for a while and treat it with remedies to calm the swelling; later return to the procedure until healing occurs. Do likewise in cases where excess flesh appears in the eye of this type.
However, you should avoid treating any weak eye either by nature or as a result of disease through the use of iron instruments; do not involve yourself in any of these procedures until you are certain that such an organ can withstand it.
Chapter 18.
On extracting threads from the eye.
Threads are red veins that form on the eye and obstruct vision, weakening it over time. Therefore, you should first examine whether the affected eye is strong aside from the presence of threads and has no other diseases.
Then proceed to ligature, which is when you order the patient to lay their head in your lap. Then suspend those veins with one or two hooks, depending on your skill and dexterity. The hooks should be thin and flexible, resembling this image: [image of hook].
Or they could be two hooks joined together in one body, like this image: [image of dual hook].
Then ligate those veins with a thin pair of scissors, gently and carefully, wiping away the blood as you go until the eye is free from those vessels and all the blood has drained. Take care not to damage or harm the eye with the tips of the scissors. Your work should be performed in the middle of the day, facing the sun.
Be very careful and precise in your work, ensuring you do not cut any other vessels. Once finished, drop some green or red alum into the eye to eat away at any remaining vessels with its sharpness. If you are unable to ligate all of them at that time, bandage the eye to soothe any pain.
Leave it for a few days until the pain subsides and any hot swelling has gone down. Then repeat this operation in exactly the same way, until the eye is healed. This is an image of the scissors used: [image of scissors].
And leave [the patient's head should be in the apprentice's lap, while another dries the tears and carefully examines the front and back of the eye; you] are the master of this operation, holding open the eye with fixed or triangular forceps held by an apprentice.
Precise and with the patient's head in the apprentice's lap, another dries the tears and carefully examines the front and back of the eye; you have a choice to begin ligating from above or below the eye, but it is preferable to use two hooks on the upper side: one at the far edge and one nearer to the crown.
Grasp it between the middle and index fingers, then attach hooks beneath them opposite each other. Then hold it between your ring and little finger and lift your hand slightly until you see all the sinews have been raised; cut from the smaller western lobe if you wish with scissors or a sharp knife.
Insert the needle into the tendon, probing until all the sinews are fully raised and the muscle swells up against the wound. Do not cut during this process; if you do so before it has dried, blood and pus will become liquid and be difficult to manage.
Then cut with scissors the excess above and below the crown so that no portion is left embedded in the cornea, for if you can lift it from the cornea, remove it by peeling away with the needle; this method is preferable but may not always be feasible.
And if you cut it, the pain will persist for some days; alleviate this with an astringent and treat any hot inflammation before re-attempting the procedure.
Chapter 19.
On the resetting of the nasal cartilage.
Physicians call the nasal cartilage 'nasal' [sic] if you treat it with cauterization or caustic medication as previously described, but it does not heal; then there is no recourse other than to lance the boil when it has matured and drain all the moisture or pus that is within.
Until the bone is exposed; if, upon its exposure, you see it to be decayed or blackened, then scrape away this tissue with an instrument of the following form:
This is called 'rough-headed'; it is made of Indian iron, its head round like a button and grooved as finely as a rasp or file; place it on the affected area of bone and rotate between your fingers while you hold them somewhat tightly until you are sure that all necrotic tissue has been removed.
You do that several times and then treat the wound with drying, astringent medicines; if the wound closes over, grows flesh, stops suppurating, remains unchanged for forty days without inflammation or relapse.
Know then that it has healed; if not, there is no help for it but to restore the fistula to the nostril in this manner: you must open the bone again with an iron instrument or with a sharp medicine. When the bone is laid bare, take a probe of this form:.
The end of the iron is triangular and its shaft conical, rounded at the extremity as you see; then apply it to the bone itself close to the canthus, but keep your hand a little way from the eye; next turn the handle of the probe round until it pierces through the bone and reaches the fistula.
When the patient feels a discharge of air issuing from it if he hold his hand over his nose, then treat the part with astringent and desiccating medicines as I have told you; when flesh grows in and the spot hardens, the matter which used to flow out will be conveyed back into the nose. This will be less troublesome for the patient, please God.
Chapter Twenty.
In the treatment of protrusion of the eye.
If the whole eye has protruded and there is neither lesion nor defect of vision, it should be possible to reduce it by cupping over the orbit; then take a cupping-glass without making an incision in the occiput and suck gently with it.
After that, apply to the eye a poultice composed of althea, gum tragacanth, frankincense and solomon's seal; then bandage over the eye with many pads, which are made thus: take soft linen cloth in great quantity and fold each piece four times lengthwise.
You place one over the other according to what the eye needs, then you bind it tightly with a sturdy cloth, pulling hard. You repeat the suction with the cup without making any incisions; then you remove the cup and leave the eye bound for a day and a night.
If the binding loosens during this time, you should tighten it again. Then remove the binding after a day and night as we said; if you see that the eye has returned to its original state, otherwise, repeat the bandage, compresses, tightening, and cups until it returns.
Chapter 21.
On excision of the iris.
If an iris rupture occurs and the tissue protrudes through the eyelids, resembling a pupil, and disfigures the person's appearance to the point where you wish to excise it, then proceed with the procedure as I describe.
You should insert a needle into the base of the iris, from below to above; then you insert another needle with doubled thread through it on the side of the orbit, and pass it through; leave the first needle as is.
Then you cut the doubled thread and tie some of the iris around the needle, pulling it tight; then remove the needle and place a wool pad soaked in egg white onto the eye until the threads fall out along with the iris. You should treat the eye with remedies to strengthen it afterward.
Until the wound heals, you may tighten the iris from every direction with a circle of cloth to make the eye protrude more; then you should cauterize it with a delicate scalpel that reaches deep into the eye so as to drain any excess aqueous humor and let the eye heal in this position. You should then pull on the eye until it heals fully.
Chapter twenty-two.
In the treatment of coma.
This illness, which is called coma, is a condition where fluid accumulates in the eyes, resembling tears but not actually being tears. The treatment involves sitting the patient upright in a chair and then holding their head with both hands on either side.
You move the patient's head until you see the fluid drain downwards from their eye, and it stays there without disappearing. Then light is released and the patient can see things as they used to be able to. If the fluid does not drain downwards, we know that it is water. If the fluid cannot be drained using the aforementioned method...
If not, then seat the patient between your hands and take a thin scalpel to make an incision above the cornea, slightly at the point where the conjunctiva meets the cornea in the limbus, so that the fluid can be drained out.
Once the fluid is drained, you should drip warm water mixed with honey or water boiled with fenugreek and honey into the eye, then continue with further treatment until the patient recovers.
Chapter twenty-three.
We have discussed the different types of fluids in the eye and which are suitable for drainage, as explained previously. So when you are ready to proceed with the treatment, you should sit the patient down facing the light near a window.
You should then tie up the patient's healthy eye and secure it tightly, before lifting the eyelid of their affected eye with your left hand if it is the left eye or right hand if it is the right eye.
Then place the end of the probe near the cornea with a thickness like that of an eye-pencil in the white part of the eye towards the smaller angle; then push the probe forcefully while turning it in your hand until it penetrates into the white part of the eye and you feel the probe has reached something empty.
The depth to which the probe goes should be equal to the distance from the boy to the outer edge of the black part, which is the cornea of the eye; for you will see the copper in the same view as the eye due to the clarity of the corneal membrane, then push the probe upwards towards the place where the water is.
Then compress it downwards once after another; if the water flows out immediately, then the patient will see with his vision cleared while the probe is still in his eye; he should rest a little, and if the water rises again, drain it a second time without removing the probe.
If it settles and does not rise further, remove the probe gently while twisting your hand around it little by little; then dissolve some pure Andranian salt in the water and wash the interior of the eye with it; finally, apply a compress or moist wool to the outside of the entire eye.
With rose oil and egg white, bind it with the healthy eye; as for us and those of our time, we put ground cumin with egg white on it; if the probe does not comply to enter the eye due to its hardness, since some people have very hard eyes. You should take the knife called 'al-bard', which has this picture:" [Insert image caption here]
Make a small puncture with it in the conjunctiva only, without deepening the hole; this is done by lightly tapping the probe into place, then insert the probe as mentioned before. Once your work is complete, prepare for the patient a secure resting place where he can lie down and sleep on his back in a dark room.
He is prevented from all movement and coughing, and his diet should consist of foods that soften his nature. He must not move his head to the right or left at all, and the bandage remains in place until the third day. Then it is removed in that dark room, and his vision is tested.
You show him objects, then reapply the bandage until the seventh day. This should not be done during treatment or soon after surgery; rather, it is best avoided before that time when the water quickly rises due to intense gaze.
If a hot swelling appears, the eye dressing should be removed before the seventh day and treated to alleviate the swelling. Once it subsides, one may release his vision and place a veil over their face, training their sight from beneath it for several days while still in that dark room.
The patient is gradually introduced to the outside, engaging in their usual activities. Be aware that a student of this art cannot rely solely on theory; practical observation is essential. When you have observed enough, then proceed with action. I've heard from some Iraqis that they create a special device there for suctioning water.
I have neither seen anyone in our country create such a device nor read about it in any ancient texts. It is possible that this method is a recent innovation. Here are some illustrations of different types of suction devices for those unfamiliar with them.
They are crafted specifically from copper, with the ends shaped like this particular illustration: a sharp, triangular point.
Chapter 24.
On treating flesh growths within the nose.
Various fleshy growths may develop in the nose, some resembling a many-legged scorpion and others appearing as hard, discolored cancerous meat. There are also those which present as soft flesh of a non-discolored color.
If the growth is soft, not malignant or cancerous, you should position the patient facing the sun and open their nostril before inserting a hook into this flesh. Then, pull it out and cut what you can reach with a sharp, delicate scalpel in one direction.
Continue until you know all the flesh is gone; if there's any left that can't be cut, scrape it gently with a delicate instrument so as to leave no trace behind. If blood loss becomes an issue or if hot swelling occurs...
Then treat it accordingly; if the swelling is malignant, act swiftly and cauterize until blood flow stops and all flesh falls away. Afterwards, pour vinegar or water into the nose - even some alcohol will do - so that moisture flows through it towards your throat.
If moisture flows as it should, know that healing has taken place; but if not, be aware of fleshy growth still present inside the upper part of fragile bones, beyond the reach of your instruments. You must then take a somewhat thick linen thread...
Tie many knots in it, leaving a space of one finger's length or less between each; the patient should then insert one end into their nose using an applicator - or whatever means they can - once you've shaped it like a button and coated it with some attractive scent so that it reaches all the way up to the nostril.
They pull it out again through their throat, often done by boys at school - an easy enough procedure for anyone to perform; then bring together both ends of the thread: one that came out and the other remaining inside the nose.
You then use the suturing of flesh with the knots in the thread, doing so until you know that the flesh has been cut by the thread's knot. Then take out the thread and place in the nose after clearing away the blood a wick soaked in Egyptian ointment; do this three days or longer.
Until the ointment has eaten away all that is left of the flesh, and then in time you will see the final thing in the nose is a leaden tube for days until it heals; if further treatment to dry up is needed, employ this.
This image is captioned: "The instrument for instilling oils and medicines into the nose.
It is made of silver or brass, resembling a small open-topped lamp with an open spout as well.
And if you wish, the tube may be made closed like a reed, and the spout of the instilling instrument flattened.
It has a handle at the other end, as you can see; it is held by this if the oil or whatever juices or fluids are heated in it.
Chapter 25.
On warts that grow at the tip of the nose.
It is often the case that a wart grows at the tip of the nose, growing larger and more unsightly with time.
For this reason, one should cut it off as soon as it appears and remove the whole of it; then apply either cauterization or a burning medicine to take its place. If you miss cutting it before it becomes larger: examine whether it has become hard and stony with little sensation.
Do not treat it with iron, for it is a cancerous tumor, and I have often seen that cutting this tumor results in great harm to the patient. Even if the tumor feels soft to the touch and its color is not darkened, I still believe that complete removal is possible. Empty the patient's bowels, cut it without hesitation or concern, and treat the area with something that dries and constricts until it heals.
Chapter Twenty-Six
On sewing the nose, lip, and ear. If any of these structures become disconnected due to a wound or the like, know that when such disconnection occurs in one of these cartilage segments, treatment rarely works unless it is for certain individuals.
When anyone experiences such an issue, examine if the wound is fresh and bloody; in that case, you should bring together the lips of the wound with sutures, then treat it until healing occurs. However, if the disconnection has caused a separation between the lips so each side becomes its own distinct section, you must peel off skin from both sides to a depth matching their outer layer until bleeding results.
Next, bring the lips together using sutures and pull them taut; sprinkle myrrh and frankincense powder on top. Apply an oak-gal ointment or other adhesive balm over this sprinkled area, leaving it tight for two to three days before releasing.
Change the medication and leave it until the threads fall off on their own, then treat it with ointment until healing occurs. The suturing technique involves bringing together disconnected parts either by needles as described in abdominal suturing or by thread as mentioned previously.
Chapter Twenty-Seven.
On the removal of cysts that occur on the lips.
Many people have small, hard tumors inside their lips that resemble goose pimples or are even smaller and larger. You should turn the lip outwards, make an incision over each cyst, and hook it with a snare.
Then you cut it from every side, pack the wound with powdered alum to stem the bleeding, and have them rinse their mouth out with vinegar or salt water; treat the site by applying astringent medicines until the wounds heal.
Chapter Twenty-Eight.
On excision of excess flesh in the gums.
Often, excess flesh grows on the gums which ancient physicians called aphthae; you should hook it with a snare or grasp it with forceps and cut it off at its base allowing serum or blood to discharge from the wound then apply powdered alum to the site.
Or use one of the dried astringent ointments; if that flesh returns after treatment, it often does so; cut it off again and cauterize it for it will not return after cautery.
Chapter Twenty-Nine.
On scraping the teeth with iron [instruments].
A build-up of rough deposits can form on the inner and outer surfaces of teeth, between the gums; these may blacken or turn yellow or green and even damage the gums and discolour the teeth.
You should have the patient sit between your hands with their head in your lap, and remove the tooth or molar which has become coated with a crust-like substance and what resembles sand until nothing remains of it. Do likewise for blackness, greenness, yellowness, and so on, until you have purified it.
If what is inside is removed with the first scraping, and otherwise you repeat the process on another day, a second time, then a third until your goal is reached in what you wish to do, and know that the molar requires different kinds of scrapers, many shapes according to how work presents itself.
The scraper which scrapes inside the molar is different from that which scrapes outside, and what you use to scrape between molars takes yet another form. You should have ready a set of many such scraper types.
Chapter 30.
On extracting teeth.
You should treat the molar for its pain by any means and hesitate to extract it, as there is no replacement if removed since it is a noble substance; even so, if there is no other choice but to remove it.
When the patient insists on extracting it, you should confirm that the painful molar is indeed the correct one. For often the patient is deceived by pain, thinking it originates in a healthy molar and extracting it, but finds that the pain persists until they remove the diseased one. We have seen this happen many times at barbers' hands.
Once you have identified the exact painful molar, you should make an incision around its base with a relatively strong scalpel in order to loosen the gum tissue from all sides; then move it with your fingers or light forceps at first gently until it becomes loose.
Then firmly grasp it with both hands and the patient's head is between your knees, steadying him so that he does not move. Then extract the tooth in a straight line lest you break it; if this fails, take one of those instruments, insert it gently from either side under the tooth and rock it as before.
If the tooth has a cavity or caries, you must fill this hole with a piece of cloth and pack it well using the end of a thin mallet so that it does not crumble when you grasp it with forceps; and you should investigate thoroughly all around the gum.
Be careful not to break it, for if any part remains, this will cause more harm than the original pain; and avoid doing what ignorant barbers do in extracting teeth without using our described method.
For they often cause great harm to people, the least being that a tooth breaks and its roots remain wholly or in part. Or it may be extracted with some of the jawbone, as we have seen many times; and after extraction he should rinse his mouth with wine or vinegar and salt; if there is any bleeding from the wound, which often happens, then crush some vitriol and stuff it into the wound.
Or else cauterize it if the vitriol is of no use; the design of the delicate forceps used to move the tooth initially should have long ends and a short handle, thick enough so that they do not bend when you grasp the tooth with them. Here is an illustration of the larger forceps:
As you can see, they should have thick handles so that when grasped, they do not bend or give way; the ends are short and made of Indian iron or steel, with well-tempered sides and teeth at their ends which interlock to provide a firm and tight grip.
And limbs can be made in the shape of a file, which will also provide strong fixation.
Chapter Thirty-One.
On the extraction of molar roots and the removal of broken jawbones.
If, when extracting a molar, a root remains because it has broken off, you should place some grease-soaked cotton on the site for one or two days until the area relaxes; then you may introduce the forceps or pincers. [Image caption]: These are the forceps, whose tips resemble the beak of a bird called a "blergia".
They should be manufactured like a file, either from the inside or as an excalfactory tool. If this does not succeed in extracting it with these forceps, you must dig into the root and expose all of the flesh with your scalpel, then insert the instrument which resembles a small lever; [Image of instrument].
It should be short in length, with a slightly thick handle and not too moist, otherwise it may break. If the root is extracted this way, all is well; but if not, then use these other instruments: [Image of first instrument], which has a triangular tip and some thickness.
[Image of second instrument]: A fine, more delicate triangle-shaped tool.
We may also employ this two-pronged instrument; [Image of third instrument].
And with other instruments, such as irons whose descriptions have been provided in the section on molars. We may also use this instrument, which resembles a large hook; [Image of fourth instrument].
It has a bent, triangular tip with some thickness to prevent it from breaking; it should be dry rather than moist. Note that the instruments for molars are many and varied, just like all other surgical tools - so numerous they cannot be counted! A skillful, experienced craftsperson may invent new instruments as needed by observation of practice and disease itself.
For some diseases, the ancients did not mention specific instruments due to their varied types. If a bone in the jaw or one of the mouth's bones is broken or becomes gangrenous, search for it at its location with an appropriate instrument from among these tools and forceps mentioned for extracting roots.
And we use this type of forceps, as shown in the picture:
It should be slightly thicker so it can hold the bone firmly and not let go until the bone is extracted, then we treat the area with suitable medicines. If there's minor gangrene in the bone, remove its gangrene and blackness until it's clean, then treat it until it heals.
Chapter thirty-two.
On extracting teeth growing on top of others.
Teeth that grow out of their natural alignment ruin the appearance, especially if this occurs in women and slaves. Thus, it is necessary to examine whether a tooth has grown from behind another.
If it cannot be extracted by forceps or lever, and if it is attached to another tooth, cut it with this instrument, as shown in the picture:
It resembles a small beak, and it should be made of very sharp Indian steel. Cut it over many days due to the tooth's hardness and so as not to shake other teeth. If it protrudes and is firmly embedded, grind it with a file from India, which looks like this:
It is entirely made of Indian steel, and its surface has very fine etchings like those on a needle file. Use it to grind the tooth little by little over many days gently so as not to shake or loosen the tooth; then smoothen it with an abrasive tool and scrape it with some scrapers.
If a molar has broken and is bothering the tongue when speaking, it should be filed down too until its roughness caused by that break disappears, it evens out and becomes smooth, not hurting the tongue or spoiling speech.
Chapter 33.
Fixing loose teeth with silver wires or gold threads.
If the front teeth become loose and mobile due to a blow or fall, and the patient is unable to bite on anything edible for fear of them falling out; if you treat them with astringent medications but the treatment is ineffective...
The trick here is to tighten them with a gold or silver wire; gold is better because silver tarnishes and rots after a few days, whereas gold remains unchanged forever without suffering such damage. The wire should be of medium thickness, appropriate for the space between the teeth.
The procedure for fixing is as follows: take the wire and insert one end between two healthy teeth, then weave the ends of the wire through any loose teeth (one or more), until you reach another healthy tooth on the other side.
Then you weave back to the side where you started, tightening gently and carefully so as not to dislodge anything at all; tighten around the base of the teeth to prevent slippage. Finally, cut off the excess wire with scissors, twist it with pliers (if necessary), then hide the ends between a healthy tooth and a loose one.
To avoid harming the tongue, you should leave it tightened like this for as long as necessary. If it loosens or breaks, tighten with another wire. In this way, the patient can enjoy them forever; this is what the teeth look like and how they are fixed when there are two healthy teeth and two loose ones, as shown here: [image follows].
If one or two teeth have fallen out, they may be replaced and fixed into position as described earlier. This is performed by a skilled artisan who carves the tooth from cattle bone, shaping it to resemble an incisor before placing it in the gap left by the missing tooth. It is then secured as previously described, remaining firmly fixed so that it may be used.
Chapter thirty-four.
On the excision of the ligament that sometimes grows under the tongue, thereby hindering speech.
This ligament that grows under the tongue, hindering speech, may be either natural - present at birth - or accidental as a result of an injury which has healed over.
To treat this, open the patient's mouth and have them rest their head in your lap. Lift their tongue and then cut through that neural ligament horizontally so as to release the tongue from its restraint. Should there be some rigidity or complexity present, indicating an injury which has healed over, insert a hook into it and slice across until the ligament is severed and the knots are untied.
Take care not to slice too deeply into the flesh, for you may sever an artery there and cause bleeding. Have them rinse their mouth after the operation with either rose water or a mixture of vinegar and cold water. Then place under the tongue some cotton wool, which the patient should hold in their mouth each night.
This should prevent it from healing over a second time, but if bleeding occurs then apply powdered green vitriol to the area; failing that, cauterize the wound with an iron shaped like a lens which serves this purpose. Then treat him with all other remedies until he is healed.
Chapter thirty-five.
On the removal of the frog under the tongue.
A small frog-like tumor may occur under the tongue, hindering its normal function and even filling the mouth with bone. To treat this, you should open the patient's mouth facing the sun and observe from which side the tumor originates.
If it appears dark or black, hard and insensitive to the patient, then do not disturb it as it is cancerous. However, if it leans more towards white with some moisture, pierce it with a hook, cut it gently with a scalpel and remove it from every angle.
If the bleeding becomes excessive while you are operating, place some powdered botargate on it to stem the flow and then return to your work until you have completely removed it. After this, the patient should gargle with a mixture of vinegar and salt.
Then treat it with all other appropriate remedies until the patient is healed.
Chapter thirty-six.
On the treatment of tonsillar tumors.
Tumors that develop in the throat may include glands inside it resembling those outside, called tonsils. If you treat them as mentioned earlier and they do not heal...
If the tumor is hard, dark in color and insensitive, then do not treat it with a blade. If it is red and its base thick, also avoid the use of blades due to the risk of heavy bleeding. Instead, leave it until it matures; at this point you can either apply poultices or wait for it to burst on its own.
If it is white in color, round and has a thin base, this is the one that should be cut out. Before operating, check if its hot swelling has completely subsided or diminished to some extent.
Then you should sit the patient facing the sun, with his head in your lap. Open his mouth and take a servant between your hands to press his tongue down with this tool: [an image follows].
It is made of silver or copper, thin like a knife. When you press the tongue down with it and see the swelling, take a hook and insert it into the tonsil, pulling it outward as much as possible without also pulling any membranes.
Then cut it with this tool, which resembles scissors but has curved ends with very sharp edges. It is made of Indian iron or Damascus steel: [an image follows].
If you don't have this tool, cut it with a scalpel instead: [an image follows].
It is sharp on one side and dull on the other. After cutting out one tonsil, cut the other in the same manner. Following the operation, rinse the patient's mouth with cold water or a vinegar solution.
If bleeding occurs, rinse with water boiled with pomegranate rind, myrtle leaves, or similar astringents until the bleeding stops. Then treat the patient until they recover. Other swellings may appear in the throat besides the tonsils and should be cut out as described for the tonsils.
I treated a woman with a swelling that had grown inside her throat, close to the epiglottis, and was barely sensitive. It almost completely blocked her airway, and she could only breathe through a narrow passage. It had prevented her from eating or drinking water.
She was close to death if she had remained one or two days more, as the abscess had developed two branches that emerged from her nostrils. So I acted quickly and inserted a hook into one of them, then pulled it out, extracting a good-sized piece.
I then cut it where I reached from the nostril hole, and did the same with what protruded from the other nostril hole. Then I opened her mouth and pressed down on her tongue before inserting the hook into the abscess again to cut off some more, but only a small amount of blood came out.
The woman's throat was now free, and she immediately drank water and ate some food. We continued to cut away at the abscess repeatedly over a long period of time, but it kept replacing what had been removed until this whole process became tedious.
I devised a plan to cauterize the abscess inside her throat, which stopped it from growing further. I then left that area and traveled away, so I don't know what became of her after that.
Chapter 37.
On the removal of uvula abscesses.
If the uvula abscess, known as 'grape', descends into the uvula and becomes swollen, appearing white and elongated like a column or pillar, then it is called a 'column'. If its bottom is thick and rounded, then it is referred to as a 'grape'. If treated with what we have mentioned in this section but without success.
When you see that the hot abscess has subsided from her and she is now thin, then it becomes necessary to cut away the uvula. But if it remains in a cluster as a rounded mass without any length and appears red or blue-black in color or is numb, then its removal should be avoided.
It contains poison for the patient, so if you see it with the characteristics mentioned: its whiteness and length, you should make the patient sit facing the sun, press down their tongue with the instrument described previously, then insert the hook into the ulcer.
Pull it downwards and cut it with one of the two instruments I mentioned for cutting tonsils; you should only remove what has grown beyond its natural state, no more than that, for if you were to cut any further, you would damage their voice and speech.
After cutting, use the same method as described for tonsils and treat it until it heals. If the patient is hesitant to undergo the procedure, you should employ a trick to cauterize it without fear or hesitation. The site of cautery is with sharp medications; place the patient's head in your lap.
Then, press down their tongue with the previously mentioned instrument; take some sharp liquid described in the cautery chapter and mix it with non-extinguished lime to make a paste that is neither too thick nor thin. Fill the hollow part of this tool with the mixture; here is an illustration:
The end of the tool that holds the medication has a hollowed-out shape, similar to a syringe spoon; place the medicinal tool on the soft palate with the patient lying on their side so saliva can drain from inside their mouth and throat to prevent any medicine from dripping down and causing harm.
Hold your hand with the medication and squeeze it onto the soft palate for around half an hour until you see that it has turned black and the sting of the medicine has subsided; alternatively, you can take a cotton swab, wrap it around a syringe tip, dip the cotton in the medicine.
Insert the sounder with the cotton into the tube from above until you adhere the cotton to the uvula; do this repeatedly until you achieve what you want of cauterizing the tonsil, then leave it and it will wither and fall off after three or four days; if you need to repeat the treatment, then do so.
After cauterization, wipe around the tonsil with cotton soaked in butter and dry it off; then have them rinse their mouth with cold water and treat externally with compresses and internally with gargles until healed. This type of treatment is safer than excision and reduces the risk of complications.
The uvula can also be treated with a gentler method than cauterization or excision, it can be treated by fumigation as follows: take club moss, hyssop, thyme, rue, wormwood, chamomile and Southernwood among other herbs; gather them all together or some of them in a pot and cover with vinegar.
Bring to a boil with the pot sealed with clay and make a hole in its lid; mount this apparatus which is hollow, made of silver or copper:
Insert the end with the pomegranate seed into the patient's mouth so that the steam rises to reach the uvula via the tube until it swells considerably; then repeat this several times until it withers, and be sure not to perform this treatment at the onset of inflammation.
This often exacerbates the inflammation; instead, you should do this when its hot swelling subsides; if you don't have access to this apparatus, take a reed and attach an eggshell to one end so that it doesn't burn the patient's mouth.
For the eggshell prevents the hot vapor from burning the mouth and this is a good method of treatment without harm.
Chapter 38.
Concerning the extraction of splinters and other objects which stick in the throat.
It often happens that a bone or fish-bone, or something similar becomes stuck in the throat; you should extract whatever is visible and can be seen after depressing the tongue with an instrument toward the gullet.
In order for you to see what is in the throat; and if this remains unseen, hidden inside the throat, then the patient should be made to vomit before his food has been digested in the stomach; perhaps by vomiting the stuck object might come out, or else let the patient swallow a piece of turnip, or lettuce root.
Or else let the patient swallow a morsel of dry bread, or take a piece of soft sea sponge and tie it to a thread before swallowing it; when it reaches where the fishbone is, pull on the thread quickly. Repeat this several times.
Often the fishbone or bone will adhere to it and come out. If they do not come out as mentioned above, then use an instrument of lead shaped like this:
It is slightly thicker than a pencil lead, and at its end it has a hook which the patient should insert gently into his throat while keeping his head raised upwards; he must be careful not to touch his larynx for fear of causing coughing. With this tool, push out the bone or fishbone. Or else the physician can use his own hand to do so.
It is preferable for the patient to insert it himself, since he knows where the stuck object is located; then he can push downwards or else pull his hand upwards with the instrumenteither way, as much as seems convenient until it comes out.
Chapter thirty-nine.
On the removal of leeches stuck in the throat.
If you treat the leech with the remedies we mentioned in the previous section on medicinal treatments and it does not work, then look at the patient's throat under sunlight after pressing their tongue down using the tool described to you.
If you can see the leech, then grab it with a small hook or a gentle, sturdy forceps. If this does not work, take a hollow tube and insert it into the patient's throat until it is close to the leech, then put a red-hot iron inside the tube.
Do this multiple times, and the patient should refrain from drinking water all day. Then, they should take a basin filled with cold water, open their mouth in it, rinse their mouth with the water without swallowing any of it, and move the water around with their hand from time to time.
The leech will fall off if it senses the water. If these methods fail, steam the throat with urine and asafetida using the tool described for cauterizing the uvula. Do this multiple times, and the leech should fall off.
The procedure for fumigation is as follows: Take a vessel with hot embers, cover it with a lid that has a hole in the middle, and attach the end of the tool to this hole. Then, add the incense and have the patient put their mouth on the other end of the tube, sealing it so that no smoke escapes until they feel that the smoke has reached their throat.
The leech will fall off if this method is used. If it does not, repeat the fumigation several times and have the patient abstain from drinking water while consuming salty foods and garlic. They should inevitably expel the leech with these measures. [Image caption] This is an illustration of a tool to extract the leech from the throat if you can see it.
It resembles tongs as you see, except that it has this hook which enters the throat and its ends are like a bird's beak; they have the roughness of a file. When it grips something, it does not let go.
Another instrument is used to compress the tongue. It is a wide iron ring, large enough to fit in the mouth over the tongue. It is inserted upright on its side, leaving the mouth open regardless of the patient's will, and they are unable to remove it until it is taken away.
Description of the instrument used to open the mouth in this precise manner.
Chapter Forty.
In this chapter, we shall speak of the treatment of swellings by incision and draining.
There are many types of swellings, varied and diverse, which will be described one by one in this book. They differ in their treatment through incision and draining due to two factors: firstly, the type of swelling itself; secondly, the fluids it contains.
The second factor is the location of the swelling on the body, for a swelling that occurs in the head differs from one occurring in the buttocks; and a swelling in a fleshy area differs from one in a joint. Each has its own treatment protocol.
There are swellings that should not be drained until the pus within them has matured and reached fullness; there are others which must be drained before this process is complete, such as those near joints.
If a swelling occurs near a joint and is left untreated until it becomes gangrenous, it may damage the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing permanent disability in that limb; or if the swelling is near a vital organ.
For if you delay until it is cooked, you will damage the main organ or it may be close to the anus so you eviscerate it raw. It is necessary that you eviscerate the tumor raw and not fully cooked which is near the anus lest the hole putrefies and penetrates inside the anus becoming a fistula.
And it becomes to an extent that does not heal, and you should know the time for eviscerating tumors which have fully matured is when the pain of the tumor subsides, fever goes away, redness and inflammation decrease, the head of the tumor sinks in, and all other signs appear.
And you should aim for the evisceration to be at the lowest point of the tumor, if possible, so that it is easier for the discharge to flow downwards or at the thinnest point of the tumor and the most protruding, and let the evisceration go in line with the body if the tumors are towards the hands and legs.
The areas of muscles, tendons, nerves and arteries and in general all flat surfaces without any bends, but for those that bend you should eviscerate according to the position of the tumor. If the tumor is on fleshy parts it is best not to eviscerate.
Until it is fully cooked as we have said, for if you eviscerate before then the pus discharge will be prolonged and with much dirt and filth and possibly the lips of the wound and its cavity harden. Some tumors can be eviscerated across the body when necessary or according to what the organ needs.
You should use one evisceration for small tumors and a wide one or many incisions for large ones according to the size of the tumor, and there are some tumors that require you to scoop out the skin and cut it if it has become like cloth.
It became like a dead end as is often the case with many abscesses and hiding places, some of which are incised with three corners, while others are cut like an ivy leaf or armpit tumor.
Some use the circular incision, the crescent-shaped one, and similar incisions; for those without a head, such as smooth, flat tumors, a simple incision should be made. If the tumor is large and has been accumulating pus for a long time, you shouldn't rush to drain all the pus at once.
Instead, remove some of it [the pus], then squeeze the tumor on another day and drain some more pus as well. Repeat this process gradually until all the pus is drained.
Especially if the patient is weak, or a pregnant woman, a small child, or an elderly person; the animal spirit often dissipates with the sudden release of pus, and the patient may die without you realizing it. So be very cautious in this matter.
After incising these tumors, you should clean the wound and examine it. If the tumor wound is small or the incision simple, use a bandage made of old linen or cotton. But if the tumor is large and has multiple incision sites,
You should insert a wick into each incision, ensuring they reach each other. If you've cut away some of the skin or scooped out part of the tumor, it should be packed with old cotton or linen floss without any moisture and then tightly bound until the third day.
Then remove the packing and treat it with the appropriate ointments until it heals. If there's any bleeding during treatment, use cold water and vinegar after soaking a linen cloth in them; apply this compress to the bleeding site repeatedly.
If the bleeding persists, you should employ the management and treatment methods, as well as the necessities that we have described in various parts of this book and its divisions. If it is winter time and the site of the swelling has many nerves, then the dressings ought to be moistened with a warm mixture of wine and oil.
You place it on the site, and if you are in summer and the sites are fleshy, then the dressings should be soaked with water and oil or wine and oil; all of that cold. When the third day arrives as we have said, then the swelling ought to be unwrapped and wiped.
And you should employ in its treatment what resembles it until it heals, for this is all that you need to know about treating swellings generally. As for the detailed approach, I have mentioned each swelling and how best to treat it in a categorized summary.
Chapter forty-one.
On incisions made in swellings that occur on the scalp.
Small swellings occur on the scalp, which are a type of tumor encapsulated by membranes like a chicken egg; there are many varieties. Some are fatty in nature and some contain moisture resembling mud.
Some contain moisture resembling bran and soup, while others are hard and stony. All of them pose no risk in incising and removing unless you encounter an artery during the procedure.
The procedure for incising them is to first probe them with an instrument, which will be illustrated later and called a "madis," so that you may know what they contain. If it contains moisture, then make the incision lengthwise in a simple manner as shown below: [image follows]
Begin the incision from line ~B~ to line ~C~. Once the moisture has evaporated, peel off and cut the entire sac that contained this moisture; leave no part of it at all because it often recurs if any remains.
Then soak some cotton in gall-nut ointment, if available; otherwise use brine water and fill the wound with it. Leave it for another day as it will eat away what remains of the sac. Then apply the cotton with Egyptian balm again, a second time and even a third if necessary.
Until you are certain that no part of the sac remains, treat the wound with ointments until it heals. If the swelling contains fatty tissue, then cut it open in this way:
A tough, cross-grained incision; hook the forceps into each lip of the wound and peel it away from every side, doing your utmost to extract the fascia containing this tissue. If you encounter an artery, then do as I have described previously for that situation. Similarly, proceed in this manner if the swelling is hardened after incising.
The treatment is as mentioned before. Incision of the hardened swelling is simpler because it has little blood and moisture. Some swellings in the head may have no fluid at all; for instance, I once incised a swelling on.
On the head of an old woman I found a swelling as hard and coarse as rock, white in color; it could not be broken, even if thrown by someone. Other swellings occurring on the head are unlike this; for example, those that occur on boys' heads.
At the roots of the ears, make a simple incision through them all and let their lining be at their lower edges so that the discharge flows downwards easily; then treat it with whatever treatment is appropriate.
Chapter forty-two.
Regarding the incision on the glands that often appear in the neck, these tumours frequently occur in the neck, under the armpits and in the groins; they may also occur anywhere else in the body. Sometimes there is only one gland in the neck; sometimes several; some of which develop from others.
Each of these glands has its own distinct membrane, just as in scirrhous growths and tumours of the head which we have described; there are many types of this gland - some hard and stony, others full of moisture and some malignant that do not respond to treatment.
Those that I have seen in good condition, upon feeling them were soft to the touch and appeared close in colour to the skin; they could move freely in all directions and were not attached to any nerves of the neck, nor to veins or arteries - neither were they depressed. It is therefore necessary to make a simple incision on top, down towards the body in this direction from line 'J' to line 'B': .
Remove the skin on all sides, stretching the lips of the skin with a hook or two hooks or many as needed, as we said for tumours in the head; take it out slowly and carefully so as not to cut an artery or nerve and let the knife not be too sharp.
So that you do not cut anything further with your hand or disturb the patient and sever what needs to be severed, for if you cut an artery or vein and it prevents you from continuing then put some powdered alum or other astringent powder into the wound which will stem the bleeding.
Tighten the wound and leave it until the swelling subsides, the wound relaxes, and it begins to show signs of festering. At this point, the bleeding will cease, so return to your work and complete it. Then use your index finger to check for any remaining small clots; remove them and clean the area.
If there is a large vein in the root of the clot, you should not cut it off completely but rather tie it with a thick, double thread and leave it to fall off on its own without causing any harm. Then pack the wound with old cotton that has been dipped in Egyptian ointment and treat it accordingly.
And if you cut the entire clot, it is necessary to bring together the edges of the wound and stitch it immediately after ensuring that no remnants remain. If you notice any remaining fragments attached to the large vein...
You should proceed by cutting it off at the root and base, employing sutures as mentioned earlier. For clots containing moisture, apply gentle compression to reveal the mature portion; ensure the compression is applied from below, as previously instructed.
Subsequently, after the compression, employ ointments and similar substances to eliminate any remaining corruption. Once you observe that the wound is cleansed, treat it with flesh-promoting ointments until complete healing is achieved.
Chapter 43.
On the incision of the larynx to treat an internal swelling in the throat.
The ancients mentioned this laryngeal incision for the treatment of throat swellings, but I have not witnessed anyone in our country perform it; such is the tradition of their discourse. However, those afflicted with dysphagia should avoid this laryngeal incision as they will derive no benefit from it.
In order that all the veins and lungs are weak, and for those with a hot tumor in the mouth or throat or tonsils - if there is no ailment in the trachea - then it is necessary to use laryngotomy to escape from harm caused by suffocation.
Therefore, if we desire this, we should make an incision in the larynx below three or four circles of the trachea, making a small transverse incision between two circles, just as one would make an incision in the peritoneum but not in the cartilage. This is a suitable place for the incision.
Since it has no flesh and the blood vessels are distant, if the operator is timid they should lift up the skin of the throat with a hook, then make an incision in the skin until they reach the trachea; avoiding the blood vessels if any can be seen.
Then the peritoneum should be incised as described, and one can determine that the trachea has been pierced by observing mucus coming out of it along with any air being expelled, and from noticing loss of voice. The wound should then be left open for a time; eventually if the risk of suffocation is past, bring together the edges of the skin around the wound.
Its configuration is such that it consists solely of the cartilage, without any flesh around it; then one should apply medicaments to promote growth of flesh until healing occurs. The author of this book says: 'The meaning of all these things we have described is as follows: if the patient's throat is blocked by one of the tumors mentioned above.
When the patient is near death and their soul seems about to depart, one should go ahead and perform laryngotomy so that the patient can breathe at least somewhat through the wound and thus escape from dying; though they advise leaving the wound open until the crisis of the disease has passed - its crisis being around three days or thereabouts.
Then, they were ordered to stitch and treat the wound until it healed. I personally witnessed a servant take a knife and use it on her throat, cutting part of the lung's rib. When called upon to treat her, I found her collapsing as one would collapse after being slaughtered. So I uncovered the wound.
I found that the blood coming from the wound was minimal, so I realized she had not cut an artery or a jugular vein, and air was escaping through the wound. So I quickly stitched the wound and treated it until it healed. The servant only suffered from hoarseness in her voice; there were no other complications.
She returned to her best state after some days, which shows that there is no danger in incising the throat.
Chapter forty-four.
On incising the swelling that appears in the throat from outside, which is called pharyngitis.
This swelling, called pharyngitis, is a large tumor matching the body's color and occurs frequently in women; it has two types.
The natural type has no cure, while the secondary type is of two kinds: one resembling fatty tumors and the other similar to the tumor resulting from arterial entanglement, which carries risk when incised. You should never use iron on it unless it is small; if you examine and inspect it with the probe, finding it similar to fatty tumors and not attached to any vessels, then incise it as you would a tumor. Extract it with all that is within the sac if there is one, and otherwise remove them all; then treat the area as appropriate.
Chapter 54.
Regarding the incision on different types of tumors.
Tumors come in many varieties, and all of their types have been detailed in the classification. It is necessary to clarify here the difference between a tumor and an abscess, as it can be confusing: An abscess comes with heat, fever, and alarming pains until the inflammation subsides. And pus continues to form until the fever and severity abate. Tumors do not present with heat, fever, or painful symptoms; they are enclosed in a serous sac that serves as their specific covering, matching the body's color. They start off the size of a chickpea and can grow larger or smaller, resembling an egg.
They fall into two categories: either fatty or containing moisture, with many different colors of moisture as described in the classification. When treating a tumor, it is important to first probe and examine it using the tool called "al-mads," as illustrated in the next chapter.
Gauging the size of the tumor, remove the probe and observe what comes out in its wake. If moisture of any color flows out, make a simple incision as described for other tumors. But if no moisture follows the probe, know that it is fatty.
Make an incision with a cross shape as I instructed, using this image as a guide. Suspend it with hooks and carefully peel back the skin on all sides, taking care to preserve the sac if you can manage to remove it whole along with the tumor.
If the sac tears during the procedure and you cannot remove it intact, this often occurs. So remove it piece by piece until nothing remains, for if any part is left, whether small or large, the condition will return with greater severity.
If it proves difficult and only a small part remains, irritate the wound upon finishing with some sharp, corrosive grains and tighten the wound, placing over it something to ease the hot swelling. Treat it with other remedies until it heals. If the condition is large, mark its edges and treat it with that which will seal [the wound].
If you encounter a major or minor vein that is bleeding, promptly irritate the site with powdered zinc oxide and leave it tight for two or three days until the wound becomes gangrenous and the blood stops boiling. Then return to removing what remains of the condition.
Chapter 46.
Images of the instruments.
The various forms of instruments, those that are used for incision and dissection. These include probes which come in three types; large, medium, and small.
Image caption: A large probe.
Image caption: A medium-sized probe.
Image caption: A small probe.
These are made of steel, with square ends that are carefully sharpened to ease entry into the tumors. Here follow images of probes, also known as scalpel blades, which come in three types: large, medium and small.
Figure showing a sounder in its central position.
Image of a small sounder.
This instrument is useful for examining tumors, wounds, fistulas, and hidden places to determine the presence of bones or other objects within. It should be made rounded, smooth, and polished, like a spindle, from brass, spelter, copper, iron, or silver; those made from spelter are the best.
Sounders can also be made from black lead and are useful for examining fistulas with curved passages, as their pliability allows them to navigate these curves. These sounders come in three types: long, medium, and short.
The length of the sounder should be chosen according to the depth required for each fistula, and their thickness should correspond to the width and narrowness of the fistula. Image of a large lead sounder:
Image of a medium-sized lead sounder.
Image of a small lead sounder.
Figures of hooks, which are of many types: there are simple hooks with a single barb, which come in three sizes - large, medium, and small; there are also blind hooks, which also come in three sizes; there are hooks with two barbs, again in three sizes; and there are curved hooks with two barbs. Hooks with three barbs also come in three sizes, and each type is suitable for its particular use. Figure of a large simple hook: Image of a medium-sized simple hook. Image: A simple small hook.
Image: A large blind hook. Image: A medium-sized blind hook.
Image: A small blind hook.
Image: A large double-hooked hook. Image: A medium-sized double-hooked hook. Image: A small double-hooked hook.
Image: A large triple-pronged hook.
Image: A medium-sized triple-pronged hook. Image: A small triple-pronged hook.
Image: A large scalpel.
Image: A medium-sized scalpel.
Image: A small scalpel.
The blades, which are used for incising, should be sharp and limited in size, while the other end is blunt. This design allows for careful removal of growths to avoid cutting blood vessels or nerves. It also provides some comfort to the patient, reducing the burning sensation experienced during the procedure.
Image: A large surgical knife.
It is made of copper, like the rod used for applying eye medicine, with one end resembling a broad spoon-like structure consisting of two layers. Within its head is a concealed blade similar to that of a bird's tongue, which can be extended and retracted at will as you see fit.
Figures of blades that are held between the fingers when incising tumors, which the patient will not feel. They come in three types: large, medium, and small. Figure: A Large Blade.
Figures of cauteries used to stop bleeding, which come in three types: large, medium, and small. Figure: A Large Cautery.
These cauteries are made of copper or porcelain, slightly elongated and thin. It is essential to have these cauteries in various sizes, large and small, to quickly stop bleeding when necessary or if medicine is not available.
However, these cauteries are not to be used for bleeding in every part of the body but rather in fleshy areas such as the calf and thigh muscles, arm muscles, breasts, abdomen, groin, and other similar soft tissues.
They can also be made into small instruments resembling pistachio shells, as shown in this figure:
It is used to stop bleeding when blood escapes from the venesection site or when a vein or artery is cut, and it can be made round like this:
Chapter 47.
In the treatment of men's breast diseases.
When the breast of some people swells at puberty to resemble that of women, remaining large and unsightly, whoever dislikes this should make an incsion on the breast in the shape of a crescent moon like so:
From line B to line C: Then remove all the fat, then fill the wound with healing medication, then bring together the lips of the wound by sewing them and treat it until it heals; if the breast sags downwards and becomes slack due to its bones, as happens in women.
You should make two incisions on its upper sides, resembling a crescent moon shape, each connected to the other at their ends so that the larger line surrounds the smaller one like this: From line B to line C, then remove the skin between the incisions and strip away the fat, using what we have mentioned of sewing and medications as required for treatment until it heals.
If you are unable to excise what needs to be excised due to the patient's anxiety or due to bleeding, you should pack the wound with cotton saturated in caustic ointment and leave it until it consumes what remains of the fat; then treat it until it heals.
Chapter forty-eight.
In excision of tumours that occur under the arm.
Tumours that occur under the arm are of a hard, solid type resembling wens and contained in sacs; some contain fluids or other moist matter. Any such tumour should be opened by an incision shaped like this crescent moon.
From line B to line C: if all the matter within the tumour has been discharged, pack it with old cotton wool and leave it until the following day; then remove the cotton wool.
Treat it with the appropriate ointment until healed; if the tumour is of a type resembling wens, make an incision as described for such types; should the wound remain open and pus continue to discharge, use cauterization in the manner already mentioned previously.
Chapter forty-nine.
In excision of tumours that occur on an aneurysm, whether arterial or venous.
If the artery is lacerated, and the skin over it adheres following healing, this type of tumour often occurs; likewise, when an aneurysm affects a vein, distension and swelling can occur there also.
The signs by which an aneurysmal tumour and swelling are determined to be arterial or venous: if of arterial origin, the tumour is oblong, deeper in the body, and firmer; when pressed with a finger it feels as though grating.
If the origin is venous, the tumour is more round on the surface of the body; incision in these cases carries greater risk and should be avoided, especially where large aneurysms occur beneath the arms, or at the groins or necks, or other vulnerable parts of the body.
Those that are also located in the limbs or head should be avoided, and if they are swollen at the mouth of an artery, then make a lengthwise incision over it through the skin, open up this cut with hooks, strip off the membrane covering the arteries, and free them from the surrounding tissues.
Until it is exposed, then insert a needle underneath and pass it to the other side, drawing the artery with a doubled thread in two places as I have already explained to you when extracting the temporal arteries; afterwards, make an incision between the two ligaments until all the blood inside comes out.
The swelling will then subside, after which you should apply a treatment that produces pus until the ligaments drop off; treat it with appropriate ointments until it is healed.
If the swelling is caused by an incision in a vein, then you should grasp as much of it with your hand along with the skin; insert a needle below at a point underneath where you held it and pass through one containing a doubled thread until you extract it from the other side. Then tie the swelling firmly, as I have explained to you in the case of the grape; do so on both sides with the ends of the thread; if there is any risk that the threads may slip, insert another needle containing a different thread underneath the entire swelling where it crosses the first one.
Draw tight the threads at four points; then make an incision down its middle, and when everything inside has been discharged, cut off the redundant skin but keep that which was bound up; put on it a dressing which you have dipped in wine and oil. Then use the treatment that involves twisting and ointments until it is healed.
Chapter Fifty.
The swelling that occurs from the twisting of the nerve.
Just as swelling occurs in the artery and vein, so too does it occur in the nerve if it is struck or if there is excessive fatigue or the like. This is most often seen in the areas of the wrists and heels.
In every position where the joints move, it is a hard swelling resembling the rest of the body's color and in most cases is painless. If pressed firmly, the patient will feel something like numbness. The swelling is not deep within the body.
It is beneath the skin and moves in every direction, neither forwards nor backwards. Those that occur at the joints should not be treated with iron as it may cause further harm. This also applies to those on the head or forehead.
Make an incision in the skin with a scalpel, then grasp the small swelling with forceps and cut it off at its root. For larger swellings, use a hook to lift them up and then peel them away before removing them. Suture the wound and treat it until it heals.
Chapter Fifty-One.
On the removal of warts that appear on the abdomen.
Many people get warts, which are known as fungal warts due to their resemblance to fungi. They have a thin base and a thick head with rolled-up edges, some small and others very large.
I once saw a man with two warts on his belly, resembling fungi in appearance and colour, with thin bases and rolled-up edges that were cracked, constantly oozing moisture. I removed them; one weighed around eighteen ounces while the other was around six.
The procedure for removing warts: First, examine them; if the patient is moist and the wart's colour is white, soft and thin-skinned, then cut it with a broad scalpel. Keep cautery irons ready over the fire, as often much blood is discharged upon removal.
If blood prevails, cauterize it quickly; if you find the patient timid and afraid of cutting with iron, take a tight-knit lead thread and bind it around the wart described above, leaving it for two days before binding more tightly again with the lead. Continue to tighten the lead.
Whenever the thread affects it, the wart will fall off on its own without further intervention; if the wart is thick-skinned, then there is some fear and risk in removing it, especially those found inside the abdomen, but one may cut half or part of it.
Then cauterize it to prevent recurrence and treat the wound until it heals; beware of removing a wart with discoloured skin, sensitive but unappealing in appearance as this is a form of cancerous tumour, which we shall cover after this.
Chapter Fifty-Two.
Treatment of umbilical hernia.
An umbilical hernia arises from various causes, such as a split in the abdominal fascia, causing omentum or intestine to emerge like other hernias; or from bleeding of a vein or artery as previously mentioned; or from gas becoming trapped within.
If caused by a split in the abdominal fascia and omentum emergence, the tumour appears flesh-toned, soft without pain, and differs from its surroundings. If it is before the protrusion of the intestines, then its treatment would be vastly different from what we have described. When you press it with your fingers, it disappears and then returns; there may also be rumbling sounds, and it greatly increases in size upon entering a bath or with severe exertion. If it originates from moisture, however, then it is soft.
It does not disappear when pressed by hand, nor does it increase or decrease in size. If it is due to blood, then with these signs the swelling appears black; if it arises from overgrown flesh, however, then the swelling is hard and firm and remains at a constant size.
If it is due to wind, then its touch is soft. The procedure in this case is as follows: if the navel protrusion results from arterial or venous blood or wind, you should refrain from treating it; there is danger and risk involved, just as I have informed you in the chapter where I discussed tumors arising from arteries and veins.
If the navel protrusion is caused by intestines or omentum, then you should instruct the patient to control their defecation and stand erect; next, mark the entire navel with ink. Then have the patient lie down on their back in front of you; next, make an incision with a broad lancet around the navel at the place where it was marked with ink; then stretch the center of the tumor upward using a large hook; finally, tie the area of the incision securely with strong thread or silk suture.
The knot should be a noose; then open the center of the stretched tumor above the ligature and insert your index finger, seeking the intestines; if you find that they have been caught by the suture, loosen it and push them back into the abdomen; if it is omentum instead, hook it with the instrument.
Cut the excess flesh, and if you encounter an artery or vein, tie it off well and return to your work. Take two needles, insert strong threads through them, and introduce the needles into the incision around the tumor, crossing each other. Then tighten the wound in four places using the needles.
If you wish, remove the needles and leave the area until the tightened flesh putrefies and falls off by itself or cut it away when it becomes soft and rotten, then treat it with appropriate ointments until it heals. If it is an umbilical hernia consisting of fleshy tissue that has grown there.
Or if it is caused by moisture, you should make an incision into the tumor as mentioned before and drain out any blood or fluid that you find there, then treat it with something that will seal the wound.
Chapter 53.
On the treatment of cancer.
We have mentioned in the classification the types of cancer and how to treat it with medication, while warning against treating it with iron lest it becomes ulcerated. We also discussed the cancer that forms in the womb and warned against its treatment.
The ancients have stated that when cancer is in a location where it can be entirely removed, such as cancer in the breast or thigh and similar accessible areas of the body, especially if it is in its early stages and small, then it should be excised entirely. However, if the cancer has advanced and become large, one must refrain from approaching or treating it.
I have never been able to cure anyone of it, nor have I seen anyone else achieve such a feat before me. The treatment for this cancer, if it is accessible as mentioned earlier, involves repeatedly purging the patient with black hellebore until the veins become visibly full.
Then the patient is placed in a position where they can move freely, and then you place hooks inside the anal cancer that fit it well. Then coring out from every direction with skin intact thoroughly until none of its roots remain. Let the blood flow; do not stop it quickly.
Compress the area and let out all thick blood with your hand or any instrument you can find, if during work heavy bleeding from an artery or vein occurs, then tie it until bleeding stops; then treat with other treatments until it heals.
Chapter forty-five.
Treatment of ascites.
We have previously explained the types of ascites and how fluid accumulates, along with signs for each type and their respective medical treatments. Only the serous (zighi) type can be treated by cauterization; never treat the tense or fleshy types with this method.
If that is the case, then it could be fatal! If you have treated this serous type of ascites with medications but treatment fails; examine the patient for severe weakness or other diseases like...
Like cough, diarrhea or other such illnesses; avoid treating with cauterization because it is risky! If the patient has strength and no illness but ascites alone nor child or elderly then direct treatment by making them stand before you. With a helper behind him, compressing his abdomen with both hands to push fluid downward towards the pubic area. Then take a lancet shaped like this:
Sharpened on both edges with a long, tapering point like a lancet but slightly bulbous at the tip to avoid injury during operation should it enter intestine then inspect whether ascites was caused by intestines.
The incision should be made three fingers' width away from the navel, pointing downwards and along it to above the pubic bone. If the ascites is caused by a liver disease, then your incision should be made three fingers to the left of the navel. However, if the cause is spleen disease, make the incision on the right side, also measuring three fingers' width.
Nor should the incision be made on the side that the patient wishes to lie upon, lest the waste discharge flows towards that weak spot. Then pierce the skin entirely with your instrument and insert it into this incision while raising your hand.
With a scalpel, you should separate the skin from the peritoneum as if you were skinning it; the amount of skin separated should be similar to that of a fingernail or so. Then pierce the peritoneum until your instrument reaches an empty space - where the water [ascites] is located - and extract it before inserting this second instrument into this perforation.
It is an instrument similar to a thin reed tube and is made of silver, copper or smooth, polished steel; at its base there is a small hole while on the sides it has three holes, two on one side and one on another.
The end of the instrument may be sharpened like the nib of a pen, as illustrated below:
At the top end of this instrument, there is a ring: once it reaches where the water [ascites] is located, you will immediately notice that it begins to flow down onto the instrument and from there, drain out an appropriate amount at any one time because if too much is drained in quick succession then perhaps the patient could die as their animal spirit dissolves.
When the patient is close to fainting and approaching death, you must induce vomiting as much as his strength can endure it; also observe for indications of improvement such as a stronger pulse rate and better skin color; then remove the instrument and stop the water from flowing since urine will be retained immediately thereafter.
Due to the skin adhering around the perforation of the peritoneum, which I instructed you to cover in that manner; then re-insert the instrument on another day if you observe that the patient can tolerate it.
Remove a small amount of water, doing this for several days while keeping him warm and taking care to avoid errors so that only a minimal quantity of water remains; if you fear harm to the patient due to leaving too much liquid then treat with burial in hot sand.
Excessive sweating in the bath and sun, denying him water, treating with drying medications until recovery occurs; cauterize over stomach, liver and spleen following removal of liquid as previously described,.
Chapter 55.
On the treatment of children born with urinary orifices which are unperforated, narrow or misplaced.
Some male infants may be born with their urethral meatus unperforated, in which case it is imperative to perform an immediate perforation once they are delivered.
Using a very thin scalpel as follows: [diagram of the procedure].
Then insert a thin lead pin into the perforation, tying it in place and leaving for three to four days; whenever he needs to urinate remove it, then replace afterwards; if you do not use lead then urine flowing through may prevent closure.
As for those with a narrow orifice, it is treated with lead as we mentioned for many days until it widens. There are also those whose orifice is not in the correct position; this occurs when some are born with the orifice located near the end of the pubic bone, preventing them from urinating forward.
Until the urethra is lifted by hand upwards, and they cannot have children from the front because the semen is unable to reach the womb directly; this is a very serious condition. The treatment involves having the patient lie on their back.
Then you extend their pubic bone with your left hand vigorously, and incise the head of the urethra with a blade or a sharp scalpel as large as a pencil, almost like carving something to make its center protrude resembling a pubic bone, ensuring that the orifice is in the middle as it should be.
Be cautious of bleeding during the procedure, as it often occurs. Address this with a substance that stops the blood flow and treat the wound until it heals.
Chapter 56.
Regarding the blisters that occur on the foreskin, pubic bone, scrotum, and testicles, as well as the adhesion of the foreskin to the pubic bone.
This type of blister often appears on the urethra; it is a repulsive, fleshy protuberance and can be either malignant or benign. For the benign one, you should suspend it with a delicate hook.
Then you cut it off entirely until it is cleansed, after which you apply a cotton ball soaked in Egyptian ointment to it. Subsequently, treat it with palm ointment until it heals. However, if the blister is malignant and has an unpleasant color, you should use cauterization after cutting and stripping it.
If the boil is in the prepuce of an uncircumcised man, and part of the boil is inside the prepuce while some is outside, then you should extract first the portion that is inside; when this has healed up, only then treat what is outside.
For if you treat both at once, you cannot be sure that the prepuce will not become perforated; also a similar condition of blackness and putrefaction may occur in the vagina or the prepuce, then all parts which have turned black and are about to undergo decomposition, or have already decomposed, must be scooped out.
Then spread over it afterwards honey mixed with pounded and sieved rinds of pomegranates, together with [a powder made from] carthamnus; then treat it by all the rest of the treatment until it heals. If any bleeding should occur, use cauterization with a crescent-shaped cautery like this:.
For cauterization is beneficial for both conditions, I mean bleeding and gangrenous wound; if the glans be entirely eaten away at any time, you must introduce into the urethra a leaden tube for the patient to micturate through; but when the prepuce adheres to the glans.
This adhesion only occurs in those whose prepuce is sound and who need not be circumcised; but it may also arise from an injury or swelling, then you must separate it with a blunt knife until the ligament dissolves and the glans becomes free on every side.
If, after thorough investigation, you find it difficult to tell them apart, then you must cut away a portion of the glans and of the prepuce; for the prepuce is thin, so it may be easily perforated on account of its thinness; then separate the prepuce from the glans with a piece of fine linen cloth which has been wetted in cold water to prevent adhesion again.
Then he should be treated with astringent beverages until it is healed.
Chapter 57.
In the cleansing of boys and treating their mistakes.
Circumcision is nothing but the separation of contact like any other surgery, except that since it is done at our will and used specifically for boys, we must define the best practice in this procedure.
The easiest and safest way is to say that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books because it was not practiced in their laws, but rather it is something we have adopted.
Through experience, for I have found that the majority of craftsmen and barbers use razors and scissors for cleansing, and they use clamps, threads, and nail clippers for tying and cutting. I have tried all these methods myself.
I found that the best method is cleansing with scissors and tying with thread, as using a razor often results in damaging the foreskin due to its double-layered structure, where one layer might be cut while the other remains intact.
This necessitates a second cut and further pain. Cleansing with a clamp is not safe as it may result in cutting the urethra, since it could get caught in its hole. As for using nail clippers, the foreskin might slip and your work will be ruined, especially if the boy's foreskin is naturally short.
Many boys are born without a need for cleansing, which I have observed myself. The advantage of using scissors and thread is that the cut is uniform because both blades work in sync. My experience has revealed this to me.
When you squeeze your hand according to the alignment of the blades, cut in one measure and at the same time so that the thread loop becomes like a wall for the urethral skin on all sides without any error whatsoever, and first of all, let the boy know what will be done.
Especially if he is one who understands a little, let him know that you are merely tying the thread around his urethra and will leave it until another day; then cheer and delight him in every way possible for this; afterwards, explain to him as best you can, and have him stand before you upright.
Do not have him seated; hide the scissors in your sleeve or underfoot so that the boy cannot see them nor any of the other instruments; then insert your hand into his urethra, blow up the skin and lift it upwards until the head of the urethra emerges.
Clean out any filth that has gathered there; then tie the marked spot with a doubled thread and, just below it, make a second ligature; next, hold the lower ligature firmly between your thumb and forefinger and cut between the two. Lift the skin upwards quickly and expose the head of the urethra; let some blood flow for a little while as this is better and lessens the swelling of the urethra; then dry it with a damp cloth, and sprinkle on powdered dried pumpkin ash  this has been found to be most effective  or wheat flour, which is also excellent.
Lift the skin upwards quickly and expose the head of the urethra; let some blood flow for a little while as this is better and lessens the swelling of the urethra; then dry it with a damp cloth, and sprinkle on powdered dried pumpkin ash  this has been found to be most effective  or wheat flour, which is also excellent. Cover the sprinkled area with a cloth wrung out in a mixture of the white of an egg boiled in rosewater and beaten with fresh fragrant rose oil; leave this on until the next day, then continue treating him as before until he is healed.
This is an illustration of the scissors suitable for cleaning wounds.
It should be blunt-nosed, cutting, with no bends, and the blade must be fully riveted; both blades and handles should be of equal length. The common mistake in this operation is that the inner skin may be wholly or partially turned inside out during the incision, therefore you have to pull it back immediately with your fingernail before the wound swells.
You then cut it evenly; if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, pull it with a hook and cut it off. If after three days the swelling underneath the head of the urethra remains inflamed and swollen, leave it until the hot inflammation subsides and gently peel it away.
You then cut it as it suits you, being careful to avoid the head of the urethra; if any part is torn from the urethral head, this will not cause harm; treat it with one of the powders we have described in the chapter on 'powders' which heal wounds.
If too much skin is cut off and the edges contract upwards, this also will not cause serious harm; treat it with what we have mentioned until healing occurs.
Chapter 58.
Treatment of Urine Retention in the Bladder.
Urine retention in the bladder can be caused by an obstruction such as a stone, clotted blood, pus or tissue growth and so on; if you treat this with any of the methods we have described for treatment under these categories.
If the urine fails to flow and you observe that this is due to a stone impacted in the neck of the bladder, then have the patient kneel on their knees bent forward; another person should ride upon his back and push down with both hands onto his abdomen towards his spine as much as possible.
The neck of the bladder is then forced to push the stone backwards, and the urine is released. If this does not work as mentioned, and the patient's condition becomes severe, it is necessary to use an instrument called a catheter for removal, which has this appearance: [image caption]
It is made of silver, thin, smooth, hollow like a bird's feather in thinness and long about a cubit and a half with a small funnel at its head; the face that attracts urine has a thread folded over itself, to which you tie a piece of cotton wool or lint very tightly.
You insert the thread's end into the catheter's bottom, and cut with scissors any cotton wool left over so that it can enter the tube as a stopper; then you grease the catheter with oil or butter or egg white, and seat the patient on a chair.
His bladder and urethra are moistened with wet ointments or warm oil and water; then the catheter is gently inserted into the urethra until it reaches its origin, then you bend the urethra upwards towards the navel, and push the catheter inside.
When the urethra is bent, you push the catheter in until it nears the anus; then tilt the penis downwards with the catheter inside, and push it further until it reaches the bladder; at which point the patient will feel that it has reached something empty.
It is constructed in this manner because the passage through which urine flows has a bend; you then pull on the thread with the wool slightly, for urine follows wool; then remove it and pour out the urine, and reinsert the catheter.
Continue to do this until the bladder is emptied and the patient finds relief.
Chapter 59.
How to irrigate the bladder with a syringe.
And pictures of instruments suitable for this are made of silver or ivory, hollow with a long slender tube like a leech. If you want to drip in water and medicines, do so by means of an instrument called a syringe. This is its picture:.
They are made of silver or ivory, hollow with a long tube as slender as a leech. It is hollow throughout except for the tip which is solid and has three holes: two on one side and one on the other, as you can see.
And the hollow part that contains the nozzle should be large enough to seal it without excess, so that when you suck in some of the moisture, it is sucked in, and when you push, it is pushed out like a siphon used to throw oil in naval warfare.
So, if you want to introduce moisture into the bladder, insert the tip of the syringe into the moisture and suck upwards with the piston, drawing the moisture into the hollow body of the syringe. Then, insert its tip into the urethra as described for catheters, and push the moisture out with the piston.
Then that moisture reaches the bladder and remains there until the patient feels it. This is a picture of another fine syringe also used to irrigate the bladder:
It is made of silver or esparto grass, its upper part resembling a small funnel with a groove underneath in which the ligature sits. You then take a camel's bladder and fill it with the moisture you wish to inject into the patient's bladder; tie this securely between the grooves with a double thread.
Warm that moisture a little over the fire, then insert the tip of the syringe into the urethra; next, grasp your hand firmly around the bladder with the moisture until the patient feels that this moisture has reached the bladder.
If you do not have a bladder, take a piece of thin leather and make it into a circle; perforate it all around its circumference, then pass through the hole a strong thread as it is wound round; next gather up the circle like a napkin after putting in it whatever moisture, ointments or liquids you desire.
Then tie it to the instrument, doing with it what you did with the bladder by squeezing your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter Sixty.
On the Extraction of Stone.
We have already mentioned in the introduction the types of stones and their treatment with medication; I indicated the difference between a stone that is formed in the kidney compared to one formed in the bladder, along with all the symptoms; likewise, I made mention of those stones which require manual work or incision.
This concerns the stone that is formed in the bladder specifically, and one which becomes lodged in the urethra; I will describe this with a clear explanation and concisely.
I state that the stone which is formed in the bladder most commonly afflicts boys; one of its symptoms is that urine comes out of the bladder resembling water with respect to its thinness.
In this condition, sand is visible; the penis itches and the patient fidgets with it often hanging down; next, it spreads out and the anus protrudes in many cases. Boys recover easily from it up until the age of fourteen years; whereas in older men, recovery becomes difficult; young men fall somewhere between those two extremes.
The larger the stone, the easier its treatment; for smaller ones it is just the opposite. When we proceed to treat it, we should first inject the patient with an enema that expels all stool from their intestines since this could prevent finding the stones during inspection.
Then the patient is taken by their legs, shaken and vibrated downwards to move the stone down towards the neck of the bladder or they are made to jump from a high place several times; then they are seated upright between your hands with their hands under their thighs so that the bladder is entirely slanted downwards. Then you should inspect them.
Palpate them externally, and if you feel the stone in the space, proceed immediately to cut it open. If it is not felt at all under your touch then you should lubricate the index finger with oil from the left hand if the patient is a boy or with the middle finger.
If it is a fully grown boy, you insert your finger into his anus and inspect for the stone until if falls under your finger; then you move it gradually towards the neck of the bladder. Then you press on it with your finger and push it outwards in the direction where you wish to cut.
You instruct a servant to squeeze the bladder with their hand, and you command another servant to raise both thumbs with his right hand while stretching with his other hand the skin under the thumbs away from the place where the incision will be made. Then you take up the curved knife which is depicted like this:
You make the incision between the anus and the scrotum, not in the middle but towards the left buttock; this should be done right over the stone while your finger is inside the anus pressing it outwards so that you can twist it to make the external opening wide and internal one narrow as much as possible for the stone to pass through.
Do not push too hard, for the finger might press against the stone in the anal orifice during the incision and it may come out without difficulty; know that there are stones which have corners and edges so their exit is difficult.
There are some stones that are smooth, like acorns and rounded so they easily come out; but as for those which have corners and edges, make the incision a little bigger, if it does not then exit in this way you should devise another means to extract it either by firmly clamping onto it with forceps whose end is like a file.
to grip the stone so it does not escape, or else insert a delicate instrument underneath with a bent end; if you are unable to do this widen the incision slightly and in case some blood escapes then seal it off using zinc oxide.
If there is more than one, first push the large stone towards the bladder's opening and then make an incision on it; subsequently push in the small ones as well, and if there are more than two you may do likewise; but should a very large stone be present, know that it is not advisable to make an extremely wide incision because this exposes the patient to one of two complications.
Either he dies or else permanent urinary incontinence ensues since the wound never heals; nevertheless, try to push it out until you succeed or devise a means of breaking it into pieces using forceps so that they may be removed.
Once you have completed your work, apply incense, myrrh and cubeb to the wound and bind it tightly; place over it a cloth moistened with oil and wine or rosewater and cold water so as to reduce any hot swelling then let the patient lie on his back without loosening the bandage until the third day.
If it dissolves, wash the area with water and a lot of oil then treat it with nux vomica ointment and balsam ointment until it heals. If there is an excessive hot swelling in the wound, inflammation or something similar such as clotted blood forming in the bladder which prevents urination, this can be recognised by the presence of blood when urinating.
Insert your finger into the wound and remove that blood, for if it remains, it will lead to corruption and infection of the bladder. Then wash the wound with vinegar, water and salt, treating each type [of injury] with its corresponding treatment until it heals.
Throughout the treatment, it is necessary to bind and gather the thighs together in order to keep the medications applied to the area fixed in place. If the stone is small and has reached the urethra where it becomes stuck and prevents urine from exiting, treat this issue with what I am about to describe before it reaches the perineum.
With this treatment, one often avoids the need for cutting. I have tried it myself and can vouch for its effectiveness. Take a steel catheter that looks like this [image of the tool follows].
It has a triangular tip that is sharp and embedded in a rod. Then take a thread and tie it around the penis underneath where the stone is located, to ensure that it does not slip back into the bladder. Next insert the steel catheter gently into the urethra until the triangular end reaches the same location as the stone.
Rotate the triangular end with your hand around the stone, gradually trying to puncture it until you have passed through from one side to the other. At that point urine will begin to flow freely once more. Now squeeze what remains of the stone from outside the penis and it should crumble away, exiting along with the urine as the patient heals.
If you are unable to perform this treatment due to any obstacle, tie a thread under the stone and another above it. Then make an incision on the stone in the same shaft between the two ties, and remove it.
Then you untie the ligature and clean the clotted blood that has formed in the wound. It is necessary to tie a thread under the stone so that it does not return to the bladder, while the other ligature is tied from above, because when the thread is unfastened after removing the stone, the skin will return to its place covering the wound.
Therefore, when tying the upper thread, you should lift the skin upwards so that it returns and covers the wound as we mentioned.
Chapter 61.
On the extraction of bladder stones in women.
Stones rarely form in women, and if one does occur it is difficult to treat for many reasons; firstly because the woman may be a virgin, and secondly that you will not find a woman who allows herself to be examined by a doctor.
If she is chaste or related to the patient, thirdly because you will not find a woman skilled in this procedure and especially working with her hands, and fourthly because the location of the incision for the stone in women is far from the site of the stone itself so that it requires an incision deep into the body.
In such a case there is danger, and if necessity calls for it you should employ a female doctor with good skill; however she rarely exists, therefore if not available then seek an experienced male doctor who is chaste and gentle or bring in a skilled midwife to treat the woman's condition or even a woman who has some knowledge about this procedure.
You prepare her and order her to do all that you command, first searching for the stone; this is done by inserting a finger into her anus and probing for the stone, which should then be grasped beneath the fingertip.
Then you order her to make an incision on it; if she is not a virgin but rather a married woman, then instruct the midwife to insert their finger into the patient's vagina and probe for the stone after placing their left hand over the bladder and squeezing it well.
If you find it, then attempt to guide the stone from the bladder's opening downward as far as possible until you reach its base at the root of the thigh; make an incision for it in the direction opposite the vulva, towards the root of the thigh on whichever side presents access and where you feel the stone.
Ensure their finger remains on the stone, pressing down underneath; initially make a small incision and then insert the probe into this small incision, feeling for the stone until you determine how large an incision is required to remove it; be aware that stones come in many different varieties.
Some are small, some large; some smooth, others rough; some long and cylindrical while others are round or branched in shape; recognize these different varieties so that you can understand what is required of each one; should the blood become excessive, then sprinkle powdered alum onto the wound site and leave it there for a moment until the bleeding ceases before returning to your work.
Continue until the stone is removed; prepare all the necessary tools and instruments that have been described for removing stones from men so that you can use them in your work; should bleeding overwhelm you, knowing it comes from an arterial pulse, then apply styptic powder to the area.
Securely tie it with bandages and leave it, do not re-open it and leave the stone alone; do not extract it, for you might kill the patient. Then treat the wound; if after a few days bleeding stops and putrefaction sets in at the site of the operation, return to your work until you remove the stone.
Chapter sixty-two.
In the incision on the water duct.
The water duct is the collection of moisture in the white membrane that lies beneath the skin of the scrotum surrounding the testis, which is called the scrotum; it may be in a special membrane prepared by nature on one side of the testicle.
So that it is thought to be another testicle, and this is between the skin of the scrotum and the white membrane which we have mentioned; but this happens rarely. This water duct forms due to a weakness in the testes, causing this matter to accumulate there. It may also result from a blow to the testes.
This moisture can take on many colors; it may be yellowish, bloody red, dark green, or most commonly, colorless like water. These are the signs by which this condition is recognized.
Where the water accumulates, if it is in the white membrane we mentioned, then the swelling will be somewhat round and elongated like an egg; the testicle cannot be seen as moisture surrounds it from all sides.
If the moisture is in a special membrane of its own, then the swelling will be round on one side of the testicle.
Thus, one may think it is another egg; if the moisture were between the scrotum and the white membrane, then its presence would be palpable. If you wish to determine the color of the moisture, probe the tumor with a square instrument, which has been described previously, and whatever comes out after probing, judge as being similar to that within.
Once we proceed to treatment with iron, you should instruct the patient to undergo venesection if it is possible for him and his body allows it; he must lie on his back on something slightly elevated, with several cloths underneath him; then you sit at his left side.
Instruct a servant to sit at his right side, stretching the penis towards one side of the scrotum and in the direction of the abdomen; you then take up a broad scalpel, slicing through the scrotal skin from the middle along its length almost down to the pubis.
The incision should run parallel to the line which divides the scrotal skin into two equal parts, until it reaches the white membrane enclosing the testicle; you then peel off this membrane taking care not to incise it, and ensuring that your peeling begins on the side nearest the egg; you must be as thorough as possible in your peeling.
Then you should open the membrane, which is filled with fluid, as wide as possible and extract all of this liquid; next separate the edges of the incision using hooks, stretching the membrane upward without touching the scrotal skin covering it, then cut this membrane either entirely or in pieces, whichever seems easiest.
Especially if it is the thin side of the membrane, for if you fail to cut through completely then you cannot be sure that all fluid has been removed; but should either egg protrude from its covering during this procedure, once you have finished cutting the membrane, press each one back into place before drawing together the edges of scrotal skin with sutures.
Treat it like any other wound until it heals, but if the testicle has been damaged by another disease then the vessels in the spermatic cord should be tied to prevent bleeding before cutting off the testicle and removing the egg. Then treat him as mentioned above.
If the swelling is on both sides, know that they are both testicles and make an incision in the other side as you did with the first one, ensuring equal treatment of both sides if it suits you to do so. Then wipe away any blood.
Insert some cotton wool, previously soaked in oil or rose-scented ointment, into the incisions and place another piece of cotton wool, soaked in a mixture of wine and oil, over the testicles and the lower abdomen. Cover this with several layers of cloth, known as bandages. Secure it all with the six-ended ligature, shown below: [image of ligature].
Two pieces of cloth are sewn together and filled with fluffy cotton wool, as shown below [image]. The ends that will be used to secure the bandage are made from wet cotton or wool, tied tightly around the patient's undergarments, with one end secured over the buttocks at the back.
The second end is taken towards the pubic area, with the other two ends running down the thighs and the remaining two ends over the groins. All the tension is gathered together in the undergarments belt. This procedure can also be performed by cauterisation rather than incision.
Or you can use a small, pointed iron to make an incision through the scrotum's skin while it is hot. Incise until the white membrane enclosing the testicle is revealed and then take another iron [image of second iron].
It resembles the Greek eye, then spread that peritoneum while it is hot until all moisture is expelled; then stretch out the peritoneum with forceps and peel off the containing layer with an iron spatula, cut through it as best you can so as to remove it completely, taking care not to touch the testicle with the fire.
And know that this procedure is safer and more remote from the risk of bleeding, and better than operating with an incision; if you encounter during the incision or while cauterizing a hot swelling or blood flow or something else, it should be treated as best as possible using treatment appropriate to it as previously explained.
If the patient is cowardly and cannot endure this procedure because of its ugliness, then let him use cautery as I will describe it; when you have verified his health by the signs we presented earlier.
If the hydrocele is watery, you should have the patient sit on a high chair; spread out the swelling at its bottom with a broad scalpel, and arrange the cautery along the body, making the incision wide so that all the water may drain away; then place cotton on the spot and bind it.
Leave it to drain the remaining water, then treat it until the wound heals; if there is still water flowing when you spread it and this happens because of the white membrane which obstructs at the mouth of the wound preventing water from leaving.
Then you should insert into the wound a goose feather or the instrument with which water is drawn from melons, as pictured earlier; or increase slightly the size of the incision.
And know that the water may return and gather again after about six months; if it does so, then spread it out in the same manner as before, and have the patient resist for a few days.
Chapter sixty-three.
The incision on the fleshy part, and its treatment.
Know that the incision on this part is a dangerous act leading to destruction in most cases, therefore it is best to leave it and be safe from its repercussions. I will discuss the procedure and types of swelling.
Many swellings can occur in the bodies from which the testicles are composed, and this is due to many causes, either from an excess of inflammatory material that flows into the testicles or from a blow. The color of the swelling matches that of the body, and no fluid exists within it.
The swelling is hard, and it might be petrified, of a dark color with no sensation. It could be due to the entanglement and distention of arteries as mentioned previously or due to the distension of veins. What originates from arterial distention can be known by the dispersion of the swelling.
If you press it with your fingers, it should not be exposed to anything at all. As for the type that is due to venous distension, nothing of it will disperse when pressed by the fingers. This type can possibly be incised as well as other fleshy parts.
This is done by incising the scrotal skin, then lifting the testicle upwards and removing it from under the white serous coat, separating the spermatic cord from its vessels, tying off these vessels, and cutting through the spermatic cord after freeing it from every side of the testicle. If the testicle has adhered to those growing parts,
Then the testicle should be removed and cut out. If the adhesion is between parts of the serous coat or among the vessels, then all that adhesed part should be separated and excised in a circular fashion.
If the flesh has grown in the area of adhesion behind it, then you should cut all of it and extract the egg as we have said. Once your work is done, wash the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine, and then treat it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
Chapter 64.
In the treatment of hydrocele associated with varicocele.
Varicocele is a twisted mass with some twisting, resembling a bunch of grapes, and accompanied by relaxation of the scrotum, causing difficulty for the patient in movement, exercise, and walking. The treatment of this condition is close to what has already been mentioned above.
One should sit the patient on a high chair, then pull down the scrotum and hold the skin of the testicle with your fingers together with the vessels that are close to the penis.
An assistant should hold it while you stretch it out severely, then make a slanted incision with a sharp wide scalpel alongside the vessels until they are revealed; then peel them off from each side as I mentioned to you in the removal of the arteries in the gums. Thereafter insert a needle threaded with double thread into them.
You should tie it in the first place where the varicocele appeared, and also at its end, then make a vertical incision through its middle along the length of the body, and drain out all the accumulated turbid foul fluid.
Then treat the wound with a treatment suitable for all wounds for a period until the vessels nourishing one of the testicles drop off; this is not harmful. If varicocele affects all the vessels, then you should remove one of the testicles together with its vessels lest the epididymis loses nourishment. Before cutting the vessels, they wither and are no longer useful.
Chapter 56.
In the treatment of haemorrhoids.
This haemorrhoidal disease occurs from a hernia that appears in the membrane extending over the abdomen near the inguinal regions, and thus the intestine is protruding through this rupture into one of the scrotum.
This hernia is caused either by a rupture of the membrane or its extension, and these two types occur for many reasons such as blows, jumps, shouts, lifting heavy objects, etc., and if it was due to the extension of the membrane, then it happens gradually over a long period.
It does not happen suddenly, and the swelling is flat near the surface because the membrane compresses the intestine; however, if it was due to a rupture of the membrane, then it causes severe pain right away and has an evident bulge appearing just below the skin.
That is due to the intestine protruding along with the omentum, and thus this haemorrhoid is named intestinal and omental; however, it could be accompanied by gas, and sometimes faeces pass through the intestine and get trapped there, which can lead to the patient's death.
This is because it causes severe pain and rumbling, especially if the intestine gets compressed; however, treating this disease with cauterization is dangerous, thus one should avoid doing so at all costs. The treatment protocol involves asking the patient to push the intestine back inside their body using their hand if possible.
Then the patient should lay on their back between your hands and lift their legs, after which you stretch the skin near the inguinal region upwards, then cut open the scrotum along its length, and finally insert hooks into both sides of this incision to hold it open.
Make the incision as wide as necessary to extract an egg, then peel away the membranes beneath the skin of the testicle until you expose the white hard peritoneum on all sides. At that point insert your index finger behind the testicle.
Separate the white peritoneum beneath the testicular skin from the second membrane, releasing any adhesions behind the testicle. Then fold it inwards with your right hand towards the testicular skin while you extend the white peritoneum upwards with your left hand and lift the testicle together with the peritoneum towards the incision.
Instruct the assistant to lift the testicle upwards, and then completely release all adhesions behind it. Carefully inspect with your finger to ensure there is no part of the twisted intestine left in the hard white peritoneum; if you find any, push it back down into the abdominal cavity.
Take a needle with thick thread, made by twisting ten threads together, and pass it into the peritoneum just beneath the testicular skin near the incision site. Then trim off the ends of the thread loop so that four strands remain. Overlap the threads to form a rigid cross-shape, and use them to tie down the peritoneum tightly on two sides beneath the testicular skin as described earlier. Then also twist and tie the thread ends together securely so that none of the vessels which supply it can reach [the incision]. To prevent any resulting hot swelling from that, and also to create a second ligature outside the first one, at least an inch away but less than two inches apart. After these two ligatures, leave behind some peritoneum beneath the testicular skin equivalent in size to the thickness of a finger.
To prevent any resulting hot swelling from that, and also to create a second ligature outside the first one, at least an inch away but less than two inches apart. After these two ligatures, leave behind some peritoneum beneath the testicular skin equivalent in size to the thickness of a finger. You cut away all of the remaining part in a circular manner and remove it with the testicle, then make an incision at the base of the scrotum to drain out blood and pus as described above, after which you should use oily wool to pack into the wound and apply the binding we have previously described.
And cauterize the white peritoneum that we have mentioned after cutting it, being careful of blood loss which often occurs; leave the binding until it falls off by itself and if this takes too long then soak in hot water and apply something to induce sweating until it does fall off.
After that, treat the wound using all standard treatment for wounds until it is healed.
Chapter sixty-six.
With this windy hydrocele, I have never seen anyone dare to treat it with iron; the ancients mentioned that one should proceed as described for a hydrocele associated with a varicocele, such that you bind the vessels after making an incision over them gently below.
Then make an incision in the middle and treat the swelling with whatever opens it up until the vessels drop out, after which you should treat the wound as we have mentioned until it is healed.
Chapter sixty-seven.
For the hernia that occurs in the groin.
The hernia in the groin, as we have mentioned, may occur without anything protruding from the intestines and descending into the scrotum; if it does descend then this is only mild and can be pushed back at any time.
But if this goes on for long then the incision in the peritoneum will grow wider such that intestines and omentum descend into the scrotum; this happens due to stretching of the peritoneum at the groin as we have mentioned. For it extends to the peritoneum, then relaxes and swells, and the site becomes painful. The treatment is cauterization as previously described.
It can also be treated with the iron in this manner: have the patient lie on their back between your hands, then cut across the swollen hernia site to a depth of three fingers and remove all peritoneum beneath the skin.
Until the white peritoneum beneath is exposed, then take a rod and place it on the protruding peritoneum, pushing it down into the abdomen; then suture the two edges of the wound over the rod with adhesive plaster.
Then remove the end of the rod, but do not cut the peritoneum at all or touch the testicle or anything else as I have instructed you in the treatment of intestinal hernia; then treat it with standard surgical procedures.
If the sutures come apart, cleanse them and treat the wound until it heals; for then the peritoneum will contract and the hernia will not increase.
Cauterization is better in this place because it is closer to safety.
Chapter 68.
On the relaxation of the testicular skin.
The skin of the testis often relaxes in some people without the internal tissues relaxing, causing an unsightly appearance. For those wishing to treat this condition, have the patient lie on their back.
Cut away all the relaxed skin down to the tough inner layer, then bring together the edges of the wound and suture them if you wish; first sew up any excess skin with three or four sutures to ensure it is secure before cutting between them.
Then treat it with the treatment for other surgical wounds until it heals and the stitches fall out.
Chapter Ninety-Nine.
In castration.
Castration is forbidden in our religion.
For this reason, I should not have mentioned it in this book of mine; however, I included it for two reasons. The first is so that the physician may be aware of it if asked and know how to treat such a case. The second is that we often need to castrate some animals for our benefit.
Such as lambs, goats, and cats; thus, I say that castration can be of two types: either by crushing or by incision and cutting. For the type done by crushing, one sits the animal in hot water until its testicles relax, soften, and drop.
Then crush them with your hand until they dissolve and can no longer be felt. As for castration by incision, one should hold the animal down and squeeze its testicles with their left hand; next, pull back the scrotum and make a single cut over each testicle.
Once the testicles emerge, cut them off after you have peeled them and left nothing but the thin membrane covering the blood vessels. This type of castration is better than that done by crushing.
Because crushing may leave some of the testicles, causing the animal to still feel desire for mating. Then treat the wound until it heals.
Chapter Seventy.
Treatment of hermaphrodites.
Hermaphrodites are of two types among men; one is that a form like a woman's vagina appears below the space or on the scrotum between the testicles, with hair, and sometimes urine may flow from what is on the scrotum.
And in women, there is one type; it is above the vagina on the pubic bone and is like small male genitalia protruding outwards. One of them appears to be like a man's penis, while both are like female genitalia. The treatment for all three types.
The two types in men and the one type in women should have their excess flesh cut away until its effect is relieved, then treat it with the treatment for other surgeries until it heals. As for the second type in men from which urine flows, from what is on the scrotum, there is no action to be taken and there is never healing.
Chapter Seventy-One.
On the excision of the clitoris and flesh protruding from women's vaginas.
The clitoris may increase in size beyond what is normal until it protrudes and becomes unsightly. In some women, it can become so large that it resembles a penis, leading to sexual intercourse.
You should grasp the excess of the clitoris with your hand or with forceps and cut it off, but do not cut deeply into the root, especially if there is a risk of excessive bleeding.
Then treat it with the treatment for other surgeries until it heals. As for the protruding flesh, it is a type of flesh that grows inside the womb's mouth until it fills it up.
And perhaps it extends outwards like a tail. Therefore, some of the ancients call it 'tail disease'. It should be cut off like clitoridectomy and treated until cured.
Chapter seventy-two.
Treatment of fistulas.
A fistula is when a woman's vagina is not perforated or the hole is small, either naturally present at birth or acquired as a result of some disease. The acquired type can be due to excessive growth of flesh.
It may also be thin or thick peritoneum, either deep in the uterus or on its sides, top, or bottom, and prevents intercourse, pregnancy, and childbirth; it may even stop menstruation. It is recognized by midwives through observation.
If the blockage is visible and close, but if not, you should explore it with your fingers or a rod. If the obstruction is caused by thin peritoneum and near the labia, then quickly rupture it; this involves placing something similar to pads on both labia before putting your thumbs from each hand...
The woman lies on her back with her legs apart, and then you pull the labia hard until the thin peritoneum ruptures and the blockage opens. Then you take some wool which has been soaked in oil, place it over the site, and have intercourse with the woman every day to prevent the wound from healing.
If it is thick peritoneum, you should cut it with a broad scalpel shaped like the leaf of a bay tree. If the blockage is caused by excessive growth of flesh, hang it on hooks and cut it off; have medications ready to stop bleeding without cauterization such as aloe, gallnuts, and frankincense mixed with egg white.
Then you should use a wide lead pipe so that the wound does not heal too quickly, hold it for several days and use dry linen thread, then treat it with all other healing methods until it is cured; sometimes another piece of flesh may grow in the womb, therefore it should be cut according to this method.
Unless it is a cancerous tumor, the malignant tumor that forms in the womb should never be treated with iron.
Chapter 73.
On the treatment of haemorrhoids, warts, and red blisters that appear in women's private parts.
As for haemorrhoids, it is the swelling of the vein openings until a lot of blood flows from them constantly. If untreated, they become warts. I have already mentioned their types and signs in the classification; here we will recall them.
Those that can be treated and those that cannot: I say that haemorrhoids and warts, if they are deep inside the womb and cannot be felt, then there is no treatment with iron for them. But those that are on the mouth of the womb and can be felt, they are the ones that can be treated.
The woman should enter a cold house, then pull the warts with a hook or rough cloth and cut them from their roots; when blood flows, sprinkle on it one of the substances that stop bleeding without burning.
For example, use alcaradia, gall nuts, myrrh, and the like; then raise her legs against the wall for an hour, then dip them in cold water. If bleeding persists, seat her in a decoction of sumac, pomegranate skins, oak galls, and similar substances; then take barley flour, knead it with honey and vinegar.
Bind it on her back; if the bleeding stops, otherwise use hard leeches and cupping on the breasts without incision, then take a piece of wool, dip it in nettle juice or common tongue juice or raspberry branch juice with tannin wine, and apply to the site.
When the swelling subsides, treat the area with ointment until it heals. As for the red blister, resembling heads of grain and rough in appearance, you should cut away what is visible as mentioned for warts, equally treating it until it heals.
Chapter 74.
On draining an abscess that occurs in the womb.
There are many types of tumors that can occur in the womb, such as cancer, calcified tumor, ulcers, abscesses, gangrene, fistulas, hemorrhoids, fissures, warts, and hot swelling. I have previously mentioned all these diseases, their types, and symptoms in another section.
We should mention in this article the hot swelling that occurs in the womb, especially if it is among those tumors with a prolonged course; how to drain it using an iron instrument will be described. You need first to observe whether there is sharp pain at the beginning of its development accompanied by throbbing, inflammation and fever.
If you see that it is red and sensitive to touch, do not hasten to drain it but treat it with what helps ripening; once these symptoms subside, the woman should sit on a chair with two feet resting her back against its support.
She brings her legs together towards the lower abdomen, separates her thighs, puts her arms under her knees and ties them with a suitable bandage.
So the midwife then sits on the right side and uses the instrument with which to open the mouth of the womb, as shown later; and you should be careful when using this tool not to insert more than the depth of the woman's uterus.
If the instrument is longer than the depth, it will harm the patient; thus you should place pads on the lip of the cervix to prevent the whole instrument from going too deep into the uterus. The spiral that runs through the instrument should be on the upper side.
While holding the instrument, the assistant should turn the spiral to open the cervix. If you see the abscess and can feel it with your hand, being soft and delicate, then you must cut into its head with a wide scalpel; once all the pus has drained out...
A soft wick should be inserted into the wound, soaked in rose oil or green oil with astringent properties; the wick should stick out of the incision on the cervix. Outside the uterus and pubic area, pure wool soaked in water boiled with galbanum root should be placed.
Then after two days, you must treat it with an appropriate ointment until the wound is healed.
The uterus and wound can be washed by injecting a mixture of water and honey, followed by water boiled with licorice root or black bryony. Return to using the ointment; if the abscess is hidden deeper inside the uterus...
One must avoid treating it with iron; instead, use the methods mentioned in the previous section.
Chapter seventy-five.
In midwifery instruction, how female infants should be treated if they are born in an unnatural position.
The midwife should first know the natural shape of childbirth. Among its signs are when you see the woman move downwards and yearn to breathe the air, finding relief in what she is experiencing during childbirth.
If the birth occurs quickly, you should know that this delivery takes place in a natural shape, and the infant's exit is via its head, with the placenta alongside it or suspended from its navel. If you see these signs, you should squeeze her abdomen to expedite the baby's arrival.
When the baby descends headfirst, so does the placenta, and those impurities are thoroughly cleaned from it. Any birth apart from this one is unnatural and deplorable because the infant might emerge on its legs or extend its hands before its head and legs.
It could emerge with one hand or leg, head and hand, folded up, on its back, or in any other such deplorable shapes. The midwife must be adept at handling all these situations carefully and avoid mistakes.
I have explained each form and the strategies involved, so you can rely on this knowledge to understand and address these situations. If the baby emerges headfirst in the natural manner but strains the woman, making childbirth difficult for her, and you observe that her strength is waning, seat her on a chair and direct some women to support her.
Apply a poultice of cooked fenugreek and moist ointments to her uterus, then insert a small scalpel between the midwife's fingers and slice open the placenta or cut it with her nail until its moisture flows out. Squeeze the woman's abdomen to bring down the infant.
If it does not come out, the woman should be given an enema with fenugreek saliva and sesame oil. Afterwards, she must be ordered to lie on her back and be made to sneeze using musk, while her mouth and nose are held shut. Then the fetus will emerge immediately; if its hands come out first, they must gently be pushed back, little by little.
If it does not work, place the woman on a pulpit and raise her legs above; then shake the pulpit on the ground while the woman holds herself from falling during shaking. If the hands do not enter [the birth canal] and the fetus dies, cut them off and extract the rest of the fetus.
Or tie its hands with a piece of cloth and pull them gently, it will come out; the fetus comes out on its feet. When the fetus is born on its feet, push [its] legs upwards then turn the fetus little by little until you straighten it, then take one leg and extend it gradually.
If they emerge down to the thighs, order her to lie on her back and make her sneeze with musk; it will come out. If it does not come out as described earlier, turn the fetus gradually until you restore its natural shape, then it should exit smoothly. If all these methods fail...
Take some saliva of the chthami, fenugreek saliva, sesame oil, and dissolved gum; pound them all together in a mortar well then apply it to the woman's vagina and lower belly, then seat her in lukewarm water up to her ribs.
If you see that her lower body has softened, make a pessary from myrobalan and insert it; if the pessary stays in for an hour, seat her on a chair then make her sneeze while blocking her mouth and nose, then gently squeeze her lower belly until the fetus emerges. The fetus comes out on its knees and hands...
If it comes out in this manner, proceed to insert your hands gradually. Then have the woman lie on her back and lower her legs downward while she is lying on a bed. She should clasp her hands together, then press gently upon her abdomen. Remove the cushions from under her feet so that they are extended downwards. If the fetus does not emerge, take both legs and move them vigorously. Then press gently upon the uterine veins until the fetus rises upwards. The midwife should then insert her hand and guide the fetus.
Instruct the woman to roll over onto her side until the fetus is expelled. If the fetus emerges with one arm extended downwards, proceed to retract its arm. If you are unable to do so, have the woman rise and walk. If she cannot walk, let her lie down.
Place her back on the bed and shake her legs vigorously. Apply the ointment I have described using saliva. If labor begins, seat her in a chair and proceed to retract the arm and guide the fetus into its natural position. Make the woman sneeze and instruct her to roll over onto her side until it emerges.
If the fetus emerges on its back with arms outstretched and its face towards its mother's back, the midwife should grasp the infant's hand then gently turn it over until it is properly aligned. Once this is achieved, apply the ointment we described made from fat and saliva to its front.
Instruct her to move gently. Once she has done so, seat her in a chair and tell her to lean towards her right side. Then instruct her to roll over and make her sneeze using incense powder. The fetus will emerge upright on its side.
If it descends into the mouth of the womb with the placenta, split the placenta with your fingernail until it is free from moisture. If [the placenta] becomes attached to the face and neck of the fetus, cut it off at the navel so that it does not choke and die. Then push the fetus inside until it is in the proper position.
Instruct the woman to exert herself multiple times, for it will make delivery easier, like that of twins or many fetuses. Know that twins are often born and even three or four may be born alive; this is rare however. As for five, it is something beyond nature and they do not survive at all.
They are surrounded by a single placenta, even if there are many [fetuses], and they are separated by a membrane barrier between them that is attached to the navel of each one. They may be delivered as a single fetus would be, with an easy natural birth; or they may be born in the difficult manner we have described.
If some of the fetuses become difficult to deliver at birth and assume the unnatural shapes we described, treat them as instructed. Let the midwife be gentle and act with care and slowness, using whatever ingenuity comes to her that will lead to safety.
One may conceive in the womb one, two, three, four, five, six, seven or even more than ten fetuses. It has been reported to me that a woman miscarried seven and another fifteen, all conceived at once.
All of this should be known to the midwife, for she may one day encounter such a situation and must know how to proceed accordingly.
Chapter seventy-six.
In the extraction of the dead fetus.
If you treat the dead fetus with what I mentioned in that section of treatment and it does not come out, and you are forced to act manually, then you should examine whether the woman is healthy and strong and has no symptoms that may cause damage, in which case she must lie on her back on a bed.
Her head should be tilted downwards, her legs raised, and a servant should hold her on both sides or she should be tied to the bed so that her body does not pull away when you extract the fetus.
The vagina should be lubricated with moist ointments, mixed with saliva of the rhino's horn, fenugreek and linseed, then the midwife should grease her hands with this mixture before gently inserting them into the womb to seek a place where she can grasp the forceps onto the fetus at suitable locations.
If the fetus is in a position to be extracted head-first, insert the forceps into its eyes or the back of its neck or into its mouth, palate, under the chin or its collarbone or at locations close to the ribs and diaphragm.
If the fetus is to be extracted feet-first, grasp the forceps with your right hand and place its curve between the fingers of your left hand. Then gently insert your hands into the womb and use the forceps to secure one of those locations that we have mentioned earlier.
Until you reach an empty space, secure another or third forceps opposite the first one (or two), to ensure that the extraction is even and does not pull towards any side. Then extract the fetus in a level motion, moving it slightly from side to side as well as straight ahead.
It is easy to remove it, as with a tooth when it is extracted. The cord should be loosened in the middle. If one end of it remains inside, the midwife should grease some of her fingers and insert them from that side so as to rotate what was retained. If part of the fetus comes out then the forceps are moved to other places.
She must do this gently until the fetus is completely out, and if one arm comes first before anything else and cannot be retracted because of its compression then it should have a cloth wrapped around it so that it can be pulled; when all has come out, it may be cut.
This must be done either at the wrist joint or the elbow, and thus it should also be performed on the other hand and legs. If the baby's head is large and faces difficulty when exiting, or if there is fluid accumulation in its skull, then a pointed scalpel should be inserted between the fingers.
The head is then split open with it to release the fluid, or crushed using an instrument called a cranioclast which can be seen in the diagrams of all instruments included after this chapter.
In this way, if the fetus has an unusually large head then the skull should be split or crushed with a cranioclast as previously described and its bones removed using forceps. If only its head emerges but becomes stuck at the collarbone then it must be cut open to allow fluid from within the chest to escape.
The chest will then contract, and if it does not contract or cannot exit then cut where possible. If the lower abdomen is swollen or there are signs of ascites, then an incision should be made to allow fluid to drain from within.
If the fetus is on its legs, it can be easily pulled and guided towards the cervix of the uterus; however, if it becomes trapped at the abdomen or chest, you must pull it with a cloth that has been wrapped around your hand and make an incision in the abdomen or chest until their contents spill out.
If all the organs have been removed and only the head is left, which has retreated back inside, then let the midwife insert her left hand; if the cervix of the uterus is open, she must reach in with her hand up to the cervix, grasp the head between her fingers and draw it towards the mouth of the womb. Then she should put a hook or two hooks into the mouth of the womb and use them to pull on the head.
If the mouth of the womb has closed due to a hot swelling, it is not advisable to be forceful; instead, one should then use injections with moist and oily substances and employ dressings, while sitting in water that relaxes and moistens.
If the fetus is lying on its side, and if it can be straightened, one should use what we have mentioned for a live fetus; but if this cannot be done, then it must be cut up into pieces and taken out. It is important not to leave any part of the placenta inside at all. Once you are finished with your treatment, employ what we have mentioned regarding the treatment of hot swellings that may occur in the womb.
Should there be bleeding, the woman should immerse herself in astringent waters and apply all other treatments. I once saw a woman who became pregnant; her fetus died inside her, and then she became pregnant again soon after.
Then the second fetus also died, and after a long time she developed a swelling in her perineum which became inflamed until it opened up and began to discharge pus. I was called upon to treat her, and so I treated her for quite some time but the wound did not heal; therefore, I applied one of the more powerful drawing ointments onto it.
Bone emerged from the site, and after some days another bone came out. I was amazed by this as the abdomen is a place where there are no bones. So I considered that they must be the bones of the dead fetus, and when I examined the wound I extracted many bones from the skull of the fetus.
I continued to do this until I had removed a great many bones, and the woman remained in good health; she lived for some time longer, with very little discharge from the site of the operation. This is the rare case that I have described here.
For in it there is knowledge and assistance for what the practicing physician tries to do with his hand as treatment.
Chapter Seventy-Seven.
It contains images of the tools required for extracting the fetus.
An image of a spiral used to open the mouth of the womb.
This is the binder used to assemble books; it has two spirals at either end of the wooden pieces, but this spiral should be finer than that of a binder and made from ebony or boxwood, with each piece measuring about twice as thick as a finger.
The two wooden pieces are aligned towards each other by about a finger's length, with a total length of one and a half spans. In the centre of the wooden pieces there are two guides made from the same wood, bound together; their length is around half a span or slightly more, and their width approximately that of two fingers or slightly wider. These guides...
These guides are the ones which must be inserted into the mouth of the womb to open it, using your manipulation of the two spirals. Another image follows showing a different tool for this purpose, finer and lighter in weight.
Hooks are made of ebony or boxwood, shaped like tongs, with two prongs at the end as you can see, each one about a span long and two fingers wide; if you want to open the womb with them,..
Have the woman sit on a bed, with her legs hanging down and spread apart; then insert these two prongs, held together, into the mouth of the womb while holding the end of the instrument below between her thighs; then open your hand with the instrument as you would do with tongs to whatever extent you wish to open the womb. So that the midwife may do as she wishes; here is an image of another instrument mentioned by previous authorities: [image]
An image of the catapult which propels the fetus: [image]
The image of the crusher used to crush the head of the fetus: [image]
It is similar to scissors, with teeth at the end as you can see; it may be made rectangular like tongs in this fashion, as you can see it has teeth like a saw that cut and abrade:..
Another image of the catapult: [image]
The image of the hook: [image]
This hook is slightly thicker so it does not break when extracting the fetus with it; an image of a two-pronged hook: [image]
An image of a pair of large scalpels for cutting the fetus: [image]
All these instruments, the more types you have and are prepared by the artisan, the faster your work will be and the higher esteem it holds with people for its quality; so do not consider any of them unworthy to have at hand as they are all necessary in due course,.
Chapter Seventy-Eight.
In the extraction of the placenta.
If the placenta is retained after childbirth, you should tell the patient to hold her breath and then make her sneeze with musk; press your hand over her mouth and nostrils. If it comes out in this manner, well and good; otherwise, take a bowl [of hot water]...
Make a hole in the lid and place in it herbs that open the mouth of the womb, such as fennel, rue, dill, chamomile, wormwood, groundsel, and centaury; all these medicines or some of them are to be immersed in water, then put on the fire. Place a silver tube over the hole in the lid with one end inside the mouth of the uterus.
You are to hold it until the vapour reaches the bottom of the uterus, then sneeze as mentioned before; the placenta will come out quickly. But if even this treatment leaves it in place and it doesn't come out, tell the midwife to immerse her left hand in whale oil or slobber from a rhinoceros' trunk...
...then insert it into the vagina and search for the placenta with her hand; once she has grasped hold of it, pull on it gently until you extract it. If it is stuck deep inside the uterus, put your hand in as described earlier: when you find the placenta, grab hold of it and pull lightly so that you don't damage anything...
...lest the uterus should fall out from too much pulling; instead, you need to move it gently side-to-side to loosen it before increasing the amount of pull on it: by this means it will soon come free and be extracted without being stuck in place. If the mouth of the womb is closed up, we have already described treatment using sneezing, the bowl with herbs...
If you cannot extract everything as described, avoid violent pulling and instead use a gentle traction technique. You should secure the protruding parts back into the cervical os, then tie them to the woman's thigh; after that, inject it with the quadrangular ointment, which will cause necrosis in a few days.
It will dissolve and come out, but if it gets infected a foul smell arises that affects the stomach and head; this distresses the patient, so you must use the appropriate millet.
Therefore, some of the ancients experimented with millet and dried figs; this is an illustration of a device used to vaporize women when menstruation or placental retention occurs.
It can be crafted from lead in the shape of a funnel, or made of copper with the narrow end placed inside the vagina and the wide end over fire; incense is placed on hot coals that are held until it has evaporated fully and then replaced.
Chapter 79.
The treatment of fistulae without perforation.
Many boys are born with their anus not perforated and sealed shut by a thin membrane; the midwife should perforate this membrane using her finger, or if she is unable to then use a sharp scalpel but take care to avoid damaging any muscles underneath.
Then she should cover it with a woolen pad soaked in wine and oil, then treat the area with ointment until healing occurs; if there is concern that it might become blocked again, insert into the anus a lead tube for many days to keep it open, remove when the child needs to defecate.
The blockage of the anus may also occur due to healing of a wound or a tumor, and so that healed area should be split open and then treated as we have mentioned in terms of treatment and fixation.
Chapter Eighty.
In treating fistulas that occur in the lower region.
Fistulas that occur in the lower region are a complication and thickening that happens near the anus, externally or internally on one side, and they can be single or multiple.
If this complication persists and opens, it will discharge a watery white fluid or thin pus. Some of these fistulas may penetrate to the rectum and intestine, while others do not. The penetrating ones can be recognized by the stool and gas that exit with defecation.
Sometimes worms may exit from them, and there are also fistulas that penetrate from the intestine to the bladder or to the urethra. Some of these may even extend into the hip joint and tailbone area. The penetrating fistula towards the anus can be distinguished from those that do not penetrate.
Insert your index finger into the anus and a thin probe made of copper or iron into the fistula. If there is no curvature in the fistula, but if there is, then use a thin lead probe or a horsehair.
Until you feel the probe or hair on your finger, and if nothing comes out of the fistula - no stool, gas, or worms as mentioned before - then know that it is not penetrating, and proceed with treatment promptly.
If the fistula opens into the bladder or the urethra, it is indicated by urine exiting from it and its resistance to healing with medication. However, if it opens into the hip joint or the tailbone, its sign is the probe reaching that spot.
If there is no curvature towards the bone, and the pain is not constant on one side, with pus always discharging from it, and if treatment does not work nor does it heal with ointment, then these penetrating fistulas cannot be cured at all.
Treatment of the former is a useless effort for those ignorant physicians who would operate on it, but for those fistulas that are not penetrating and not chronic, we hope for healing with an iron instrument which I shall describe and have experimented with. You should place the patient between your hands on his back.
Lift his legs upwards and tilt his thighs towards his belly, then insert a copper or lead probe into the fistula until you determine where the end of the probe is felt by the patient. If he feels it in his buttocks, you must insert your index finger into the rectum.
If you feel with your finger that the probe has passed through naturally without feeling any peritoneum or flesh between your finger and it, then know for certain that this is a penetrating fistula, so do not waste effort on it as we have said there is no cure.
They say that it may heal in some rare cases, and one treatment which is hoped to be beneficial is as follows: heat a thin cauterizer according to the size of the fistula as previously described, then insert it hot into the fistula until you reach near the rectum, then return it two or three times.
Until you learn that all of the excess, coagulated flesh resembling a bird's quill has been burned away and then treat it with twisted wool moistened in suet until those parts which have been burnt are removed; thereafter treating them with emollient ointments until healed.
Otherwise, it will never heal with any other treatment; but if you insert the probe and it does not reach your finger in the anus, and there is a thick covering of flesh or peritoneum between them, and you see the fistula following the surface of the skin, then make an incision through the skin from the beginning of the fistula. As you pass the probe through the incision and into the fistula until you reach with the incision to where the end of the probe is, and remove the probe by extracting it, then clean those coagulated fleshes which resemble a quill, leaving none of them.
Then treat it with emollient ointments until healed; if bleeding overpowers you and hinders your work of cutting those fleshes, then the best and most expedient thing to do is cauterize them by fire or caustic medicine because cauterization by fire achieves two good results: burning away that excess flesh.
And severing the blood, as well as drying up moisture; then treat it with twisted wool moistened in suet or sulfur powdered in oil until the wound festers and ejects that burnt flesh within pus; thereafter treating the wound with emollient ointments which sprout firm flesh.
Which are the medicines which have an astringent effect and dry up moisture; for when it is healed, then there will be no need for any packing. If the fistula ends deep in the rectum, far from the surface of the body, insert your finger into the anus and feel around with it.
If you feel the probe and there is a layer of peritoneum or flesh between it and the wound, and it is close to penetrating [the wound], then the only way to proceed is with ambition and hope. You have three options: either cauterize it as we said.
Or you could make an incision to reach the bottom [of the wound] so that you can insert the thread and treatment from close by. Do not extend the incision lest you cut the muscle surrounding the rectum, causing the patient to lose control over their bowel movements. Then treat it as we mentioned, and perhaps they will recover as we said.
Or you could penetrate and pierce that layer, having made an incision close to the rectum as we said, either with a probe or another sharp instrument. Then clean all the congealed flesh in the wound thoroughly.
Then suture the entire wound, including the incision and the upper opening, so that it closes while keeping the fistula open inside the rectum, which will be less burdensome for the patient. The fistula may heal in this manner.
If you insert the probe into the fistula and it is located towards the body's surface on one side of the rectum, with skin and the rectal sphincter surrounding it, then take a probe perforated at the end like a cobbler's needle in this fashion:
Insert a twisted thread of five threads or so into it, then insert the probe with the thread into the fistula until you reach its bottom. If it has penetrated through to the inner edge of the rectum nearby,
Then extract the thread through that hole by inserting your finger into the rectum and pulling out one end of the thread, gathering both ends together and drawing them tight. Leave it like this for a day or two; each time the thread is cut in the flesh, tighten it well until all the flesh between the thread's ends drops off. Then treat the wound so that it heals.
If the fistula's mouth is not pierced, pierce it however you can without going in too deep; otherwise, you would cut through the muscle, and then treat it as we mentioned until it heals.
The image depicts a spinal lancet used for incising fistulas; one side of the instrument is very sharp, while the other side is not as much so that it may be used to cut only what is needed.
Chapter 81.
On hemorrhoids that bleed, their excision, and the treatment of anal fissures.
Hemorrhoids come in two types: they may be inside the anus, looking like red blisters or grapes, and some are small while others large; blood usually flows from them continuously.
They may be singular or numerous, and they occur outside of the anus as well as at its edges; however, those that are external tend to be mostly dry with a yellow fluid flowing from them continuously or only some blood, matching one's skin tone.
For those that are inside the anus, instruct the patient to defecate and strain so you can see the hemorrhoids; then quickly grab them with a hook or your nail before cutting them at their base. If the hooks do not catch because they are too wet and relaxed, try another method.
Scrape them with a rough cloth or use a piece of coarse bread, or simply pull them out by hand before cutting; afterward sprinkle some sharp powder over the wound so that it may serve as cauterization, or apply caustic ointments as explained in Chapter "Cauterization.
Treat it with all other treatments until it heals. If the abscess does not respond and allow the pus to exit, then inject the patient with an injection that has a slight stinging sensation in order to wash out what is inside the abscess and help it come out quickly when the patient strains. The warts that appear on the abscess are simple and easy to treat.
You can take them with your fingernail or hook them with a needle and cut them off, then treat them as mentioned until they heal. For those who dislike cutting with an iron instrument, you should use this method of piercing: Take some twisted thread and insert it into a needle.
Then pull the wart upwards and pierce it with the needle at its base from the other side. Twist the ends of the thread under the needle as it lies across, pulling the wart tightly. Tie a knot in the thread and remove the needle. Do this for all the warts except leave one untouched without piercing it.
To drain out any excess blood, place over the abscess a cloth soaked in rose oil or storax and put it on the abscess, telling the patient to remain still. Leave it until the warts fall off. Once they have fallen, treat with ointments and other treatments until healed.
As for the treatment of fissures, they often occur due to dryness from faeces and constipation. If it becomes chronic and does not respond to medication, then you should remove the skin with a scalpel blade or your fingernail until it becomes moist and the top layer of skin that prevents healing is removed.
Then treat it until it heals properly. If it does not heal, repeat the process with more vigorous scraping than the first time until it bleeds profusely and becomes raw. Then treat it; it will heal.
Chapter Eighty-Two.
In the treatment of inverted and non-inverted warts, dry warts, and moles.
A wart is a round knot on the color of the body, resembling the head of a nail, which can appear all over the body but most commonly on the soles of the feet and fingers, causing pain when walking.
You should cut around the wart, grasp it with forceps or a hook, and remove it from its root; then treat it. If you wish, cauterize it as mentioned previously in its section. As for dry warts, each one is a small, rough, dense, round elevation on the surface of the body.
Dry warts often appear on the hands of boys. To treat them, you can stretch and cut the wart or pierce it with a silk thread or hair until it falls off. If you wish, you can cauterize it as mentioned earlier using fire or sharp medication.
Inverted and non-inverted warts can be removed with the same tool I mentioned for treating moles. As for a mole, it is also a small dense bump on the surface of the body that extends deep inside; if exposed to cold, one may feel a sensation similar to an ant sting in it.
It [the mole] can appear all over the body, most frequently on the hands. To treat it, take a tube made from a goose feather or a strong eagle feather and place this tube around the mole so that the circle of the tube surrounds it from all sides; then rotate your hand with the tube to cut around the mole.
Insert it [the tube] deep into the flesh, then remove the mole from its root. Alternatively, you can do this using a copper or iron pipe in a similar manner:
The top of the tube should be solid and twisted so that it is easy for fingers to adjust and twist, and if you wish, cauterize the mole as explained previously in the section on cauterizing warts in the chapter on cauterization.
Chapter eighty-three.
Images of the instruments used for injection in cases of piles, diarrhea, and colic.
The syringe may be made of silver, porcelain, or hollow or solid copper, and small or large versions of this instrument can be made depending on the user. Those used for treating young boys should be small, with fine needles, especially if the anus is narrow or sore. Picture of a large syringe:
The upper funnel to which the bladder is attached should be wide, with a barrier at this point where the bladder is tied as you see; and its lower end, which enters the anus, should be very smooth and solid, narrow at one side where there are two holes, and on the other side, one hole.
The size of the hole should be equal to or slightly larger than that of the rod; and the bladder in which the medicine is placed may be made from an animal's bladder, or from a lamb's gut, shaped like a small sack, with a diameter of one palm span.
A number of holes are made, evenly spaced around it with the distance between each hole equal to the width of a finger; then thread the bladder through these holes using strong, tightly woven yarn folded into ten or so threads and gather the bladder together like a small sack. When the medicine has been placed inside, pull the bladder taut at the top of the syringe between two stones and then inject. This is a picture of the circle of the bladder and holes:
And the method of its cupping is to fill the rhytina or bladder with medicine, which has been heated to a degree that the patient can bear; take care that it is not very hot or very cold. Then let the patient lie on his back and raise his legs upwards.
A board or a blanket is placed beneath him, then the end of the clyster is anointed with oil, or with white of egg, or with saliva of fenugreek, or something similar; next it is introduced gently into the anus, and then the attendant takes the bag in both hands and presses it forcibly until all that is in the clyster has passed into the bowel.
Then the clyster is withdrawn, and the patient raises his legs to the wall; if the medicine stimulates him to evacuate, let him restrain himself as far as possible: and if he sleeps all night it will be more beneficial. If this is done in cases of diarrhoea and there is haste for evacuation, let the clyster be repeated until a cure is effected.
If there are haemorrhoids or painful tumours in the anus, let the clyster be very soft and smooth, like those used for children; this is a drawing of a gentle clyster with its skin stretched on it:
Chapter eighty-four.
On the treatment of wounds.
I have already mentioned in the introduction the treatment of wounds similar to cauterization, and I am now going to speak of their treatment by the hand and by medicines, completely and perfectly; so I say that wounds differ according to the object with which they are inflicted, and also according to the part on which they occur.
For the things which necessitate surgery are manifold, such as a blow from a stone or cut from a sword or knife, or a stab by a spear, stake, arrow, and so forth among many others.
And as for wounds according to their locations on the body, they are like those that occur on the head or neck, chest, abdomen, liver and so forth among other organs.
And I describe the treatment of some wounds as a measure and rule for all other wounds, beginning with simple head injuries in particular because complex ones will be mentioned in the third chapter of this book.
So I say, when a simple wound occurs on the head without a broken bone, observe it and if it is from a blow by a stone or similar object, having split the skin only, but with a large wound where you fear the patient may develop hot swelling, then proceed to open the abscess immediately at the affected site. And do not delay this, extract from him an amount of blood proportionate to his strength if there is no obstacle preventing phlebotomy, especially if the amount of blood exiting the wound is little; and let the venesection be performed opposite the wounded side.
Warn the patient against excessive eating and drinking, particularly heavy foods; if there is an obstacle preventing phlebotomy, then reduce food intake, avoid meat and drinks, and apply to any hot swelling that occurs on the wound a cotton pad soaked in rose oil alone or combined with an astringent.
If you are not concerned about hot swelling and the wound is fresh, still containing its blood which has been protected from air exposure as described shortly, then apply to it the powdered medication I will describe; but if the air has altered [the appearance of] the wound, then treat with one of the ointments.
Until the pus flows, then treat it until it heals. If the wound is large and caused by a sword cut or the like, and its lips do not come together with dressings, bring them together with sutures as I will describe in the section on suturing abdominal wounds.
If the skin is removed and the bone is exposed, and its attachment remains only in a small piece, cut it off and then treat the wound with medications that will promote the growth of solid flesh to replace the skin. Advise the patient to nourish themselves with foods that provide strength, such as heads, purees, and similar dishes.
If the skin becomes gangrenous and does not adhere to the bone, cut away all the gangrenous tissue and discard it. Then treat the wound. If there is an artery or a vein that bleeds and the bleeding cannot be stopped with medication, search for the artery.
If you find the artery and compression does not stop it, sever it with a scalpel and tie it off. If that is not effective, cauterize it until the bleeding stops. For minor, superficial wounds, treatment is simple and straightforward; simply apply these powders to the wound while it is still bleeding.
Before the air reaches it, prepare the powder by taking one part frankincense, two parts galbanum, and three parts quicklime or unslaked lime; grind and sift all of them together. Fill the wound with this mixture and bandage it tightly so that it adheres well.
The mixture will clot with the blood and then you should bandage it from above, leaving it undisturbed to prevent swelling. Keep the medication in place until healing occurs, as it will not come away until the wound is fully healed. Lime alone can achieve this if you do not have frankincense or galbanum available.
This action may also be done with two pieces of cloth in many major surgeries if the placement is precise, and it is tightened well. This should be done while the wounds are still fresh with blood before air exposure changes them; especially when this occurs during summer time.
There is no effective treatment for the placement of this poultice, so address it with what we mentioned: apply some ointments that mature it or apply a porridge made from barley flour with water and honey to draw out the pus. Then treat it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
If there is a fracture associated with the wound, and it is minor, reduce the fracture using forceps. I have mentioned the treatment of skull fractures earlier in the chapter on neck surgery. If the wound occurs in the neck, there is no difference in treatment compared to a simple head wound.
If a nerve in the neck has been cut, there is no remedy other than avoiding treatment that causes severe constriction such as zinc vitriol and lead salts, for they harm the nerve and cause it to spasm.
Never apply anything cold to the wound, for the essence of the nerve is cold and it connects to the brain which is the most noble organ. Instead, treat it with soft medicines like washed slaked lime moistened with oil or rose water, or alum.
If the wound is large, use sutures or bring its lips together with bandages and then treat it until it heals.
If the wound is deep and there is a hidden cavity at its bottom where pus has gathered, pack it with a dressing in the lowest point. If an artery has been severed and you see blood gushing out, then ligate it or cauterize it if necessary.
If the wound has cut through some or all of the rings of the trachea and the arteries are undamaged, gather together the edges of skin with stitches around the trachea but do not touch it; smooth it out and return it to its natural shape then tie it firmly and leave it for several days.
Then treat it with astringent and drying ointments until it heals, but if the wound has affected bone then investigate this: if there are fragments of bone present remove all that you can; as for what cannot be removed leave it until the wound becomes gangrenous and heals making their removal easier.
But if the wound is still fresh then sprinkle upon it the powder which we have described; if bone becomes gangrenous in the wound and a fistula forms, treat this as will be explained later under Surgery of the Chest and Region Between the Shoulders.
If the wound is a thrust from a spear or knife and you see that it is deep, then check to see if air emerges from it when the patient breathes: if this is so, know that it is fatal; but if there is no depth to it and it remains fresh with blood, do not sprinkle powder on it at first nor bind it tight lest the blood be prevented from flowing out.
For this will rebound to the heart killing the patient; but apply an attractive ointment, dissolving it twice daily; if no such ointment is available, put old cotton wool in the mouth of the wound to absorb any moisture issuing from it and have the patient sleep on his wound.
If after three or more days the patient has not suffered a spasm, rapid pulse, dyspnea nor other symptoms and his overall condition remains good then know that the wound is safe; treat it with bandages and suchlike remedies until it heals.
If healing is impossible and the swelling persists, then know that it has become a fistula. Treat it from its opening, let the patient sit on the wound to drain any accumulation of pus. If the wound is in the chest or back, treat it with the suturing method described earlier.
Whether it is large or small, and whether it has affected the bone, breaking off fragments, search the wound and promptly extract those fragments if they are detached. If they are not detached, leave them until later.
If the wound becomes gangrenous, it will be easier to remove [the fragments]. As for other wounds that occur in various body parts, their treatment follows the same principles we have mentioned.
Chapter 85.
On abdominal wounds, the protruding intestines, and their suturing.
A rupture in the abdomen can be large, small, or of medium size. A large one may result in the protrusion of intestines or multiple intestines, making their retraction and suturing more challenging and difficult.
A small rupture can also present difficulties in another way, requiring an even more careful retraction of the intestines. If they are not promptly returned to their position, the intestines will swell and become thicker, making their reinsertion more difficult. Therefore, among these types of ruptures, the moderate one is preferable because it does not pose as much difficulty in retracting the intestines as the other two types.
Note that there are four types of suturing techniques for the abdomen: two are general and can be used for suturing the abdomen or other body parts, while the other two are more specialized and applicable to various wounds but are particularly useful for abdominal suturing.
And I shall describe each of them to you, one by one, with an explanation and elucidation: I say that if the wound is small and something protrudes from it which is intestinal material, and its retraction is difficult, then this may be for two reasons; either due to the small size of the tear as we have mentioned previously, or because the intestine has become swollen by exposure to cold air.
If this is the case, it is necessary that you warm [the intestine] by immersing a damp sponge or cloth in lukewarm water alone or perhaps you cook sweet flag, goat's rue and pine with soapwort and apply it to the intestine until the swelling subsides.
This may also be achieved by the use of a potion containing an astringent, which is better than water alone for reducing swelling; if you see that the swelling has subsided, then wet the intestine with water in which *Althaea officinalis* or *Peganum harmala* has been cooked, and it will thereby become more supple to allow its easier reinsertion.
If, after this treatment, its reinsertion is impossible, make an incision in the tear with a small scalpel of the kind used for making fistulas; if the first method succeeds then it is better than cutting. However, if the need arises and one has no choice but to cut open [the intestine], so be it. This is what the instrument looks like:
One side [of the scalpel] is curved and blunt, while the other side is sharp; the narrow end should not be as thin as a lancet but rather a little wider; it resembles what you see in this image of a small probe. If the wound has widened such that the intestine slips into it then one must ensure its reinsertion occurs according to its natural shape.
The intestine should be returned to its original position, if at all possible; this is preferable. If the tear [in the abdomen] is large and located in the lower region of the belly then the patient must lie on his back with his legs raised higher than his head; however, if it occurs in the upper part of the stomach then one should raise their head and chest to be higher than their waist.
Also, if the tear is in one of the sides of the abdomen, always aim and intend to raise that side where surgery is performed above the other side, and thus it should be used for both major and minor surgeries.
For minor surgeries, you can place it as is convenient for you; then have a gentle assistant hold the wound with their hands and gather their lips together before revealing to the suturing practitioner part by part.
This is the description of a single common suture, where you take one or several needles according to the size of the wound; then leave an area on either side of the wound as thick as your little finger and insert a needle without thread into both edges of the skin. On the two edges of the peritoneum below the skin on the inside until you pass through it from that side and gather both edges of the skin together with those of the peritoneum, forming four ends; then pull a doubled thread around the needle several times on both sides so that the lips of the wound meet firmly.
Then leave an area as thick as your index finger and insert another needle, threading it as you did with the first needle; continue doing this with as many needles as needed until all of the wound is sutured, making sure that the needles are neither too thick nor too thin.
As very thin needles tend to cut the flesh, and thick ones are difficult to insert into the skin; therefore, they should be of medium thickness. The needle should not be inserted too close to the edge of the skin.
To avoid the flesh breaking away quickly and for the wound to remain open before it heals, also do not pull too tightly with the stitches in case the wound refuses to heal; then cut off the ends of the needles so as not to hurt the patient when they sleep, and provide them with pads made from linen rags on all sides to hold down the ends of the needles.
Leave them until you know the wound has healed, and this type of needle-stitching is more suitable for minor surgeries as it can be done with just one or two needles or so.
As for the description of common stitching, you gather together in one go all four edges - that is to say both sides of the skin and both sides of the membrane - with a needle bearing a thread of moderate thickness; then once this has pierced these four edges, turn the needle back from where it began.
So that the thread is interwoven above the wound, with the stitching similar to that of a sack used for tying up goods; you should leave between each stitch and the next as wide a gap as your little finger, and this method of stitching will be familiar to everyone.
With this method of stitching, I have sewn up a wound in a man's belly; he had been stabbed with a knife and the gash was more than a handspan wide, while around two palms' length of his small intestine protruded from it; the wound was located at the centre of his abdomen.
I replaced his intestine after it had remained outside the wound for twenty-four hours, then the wound healed in around fifteen days and I treated him until he recovered; afterwards he lived for many years more, managing all of life's affairs as before, when physicians had considered his recovery impossible.
It is strange that I did not treat it with ointment, for I was in a place where there were no medicines, so I applied old cotton to the wound twice a day and made sure to wash it with honey water until it healed.
As for one type of special suturing, I mention it in Galen's words: start the stitching from the skin and insert the needle from outside to inside; when you have pierced through the skin and into the muscle going straight along the entire length of the abdomen.
Leaving the peritoneum edge on the side where you inserted the needle, pierce the other edge from inside to outside at the other rim of the ribcage; when you have pierced through it, then pierce it again in that same rim of the ribcage from outside to inside.
Let the peritoneum edge on this side be, and pierce the other edge from inside to outside; as you are piercing through it, also pierce the ribcage rim in its vicinity until you have pierced right through it entirely.
Then begin again from this same side and stitch along the peritoneum edge on the other side; take the needle out of the skin nearby, then put it back in that skin and follow the peritoneum edge on the other side with this rim of the ribcage.
Take it out of the skin on its side, and do that again; do it once more after once, until you have stitched the entire wound in that way. The general description of this suturing is that it is like saddlers' stitching for saddles.
By sewing the peritoneum once from one side with the skin edge and leaving it on the other until finished, and as for the second type of specialized suture which Galen also mentioned this is his exact words.
And this is done by sewing it like the way some healers sew it, gathering each part to its counterpart according to nature; they bring together one edge of the peritoneum with another and one edge of the ribs with another, which will be as I describe to you.
You should insert the needle into the rib edge closest to you from outside and pass it through to inside, leaving both peritoneum edges; then withdraw the needle, inserting it again from outside to inside at both peritoneal edges.
Pass it through from inside to outside the other rib edge on the opposite side; this type of suture is better than the simple and easy suture previously mentioned, here again are Galen's exact words: 'The abdominal wound may be sutured with two needles.' This is achieved by passing a single thread through both needles; you begin inserting the first needle from your side, executing it to the other side and inserting the second needle from its opposite side, sewing them through as shoemakers do.
Be aware that a wound in the middle of the abdomen is more difficult to suture than other abdominal areas; as for treating this wound, it is like any other wound: if you reach it while still fresh and bloody before the air changes it, return the intestine, sew it carefully and tightly and then apply an adhesive ointment.
If the wound has been affected by exposure to air, then apply some of the ointments you have prepared until it becomes inflamed and the stitches fall out, and the abdominal wall and pleura heal together. Then treat it as you would any other wound until it is healed.
If you do not have medicines available, apply some old cotton wool as soon as it starts to become inflamed and change it twice a day as I have instructed you until it is healed. In most cases, if the wounds are simple, you will not need any other treatment. However, if you fear that the wound may affect vital organs, then you must take care.
You should soak a soft piece of wool in moderately warm oil or rosewater and place it around the areas between the groin and armpit. If they feel pain or putrefaction in their intestines, this often occurs, so you must inject them with a tepid black astringent beverage.
Especially if the putrefaction has reached their intestines and became a penetrating wound inside it. Note that any part of the intestine that is thick will heal faster, whereas thinner parts will take longer to heal.
As for the part of the intestine known as the 'jejunum', it will not heal from any surgery that affects it, due to its many large veins and delicate structure, which are close to the nerves. However, if what protrudes from the wound is the omentum and you find it soft, then return it in the same way as you would return the intestine.
If some time has passed and it has turned green or black, you should tie it with a thread above the part that has turned black to prevent any bleeding, as there are veins and arteries in the omentum. Then cut off anything below that binding.
You make the ends of the thread hanging from beneath the incision, coming out of it so that it is easy for you to draw and remove it when the omentum falls and the wound suppurates; [this is] about a wound appearing in the intestine. As for if there appears a perforation in the intestine which is small...
it may heal in some people for I have seen a man who was wounded in the abdomen by a spear thrust, and the wound was on the right side of the stomach; it became chronic and turned into a fistula from which faeces and wind emerged. So I treated him although I did not expect healing. I kept treating him gently until he healed and the wound closed. When I saw that the spot had healed, I was afraid for the patient in case something bad happened inside his abdomen, but nothing bad ever did happen to him at all and he remained in the best of health. He was eating, drinking, having intercourse, going to the bathroom and exercising in his service; some people with experience have said that if there is a small wound in the intestine it should be sutured in this manner.
This is done by taking large-headed ants, then bringing together the lips of the wound and placing one of these ants with its mouth open on the lips of the wound; when it grasps onto it and tightens its jaws, its head is cut off because this causes an adhesion which does not come undone. Then another ant is placed next to the first.
You continue to do this with several ants according to the size of the wound, then you return it and suture the wound; those heads will remain stuck in the intestine until it heals and there is no recurrence whatsoever for the patient. It may also be possible to suture the intestine with fine thread.
The procedure for separating the animal gut attached to its adhering membrane after it has been inserted into a needle is as follows: Take one end of this thread from the gut and separate it carefully, then tie to its end some fine twisted linen thread; next insert that thread through the eye of the needle. When there is a gut thread, it is used to suture the bowel and then returned into the abdominal cavity; this type of suturing with ants and guts is done with greed and hope in mind.
But if the wound is large and wide, especially in one of the thin intestines, there is no remedy for it nor any hope of recovery whatsoever.
Chapter 86.
On the treatment of colds and fistulas.
Know that any wound or swelling, if it becomes chronic and long-standing, turns into an ulcer that does not heal, and constantly produces pus without ceasing to do so; this is called generally a fistula in any organ of the body, though we call it a cold fistula.
It is, in truth, a hardened, solid, white, painless mass with an interior cavity like the hollow of a bird's feather.
This is why some have called it a 'feather'. At times, this mass can be moist and always exuding pus; sometimes the moisture may cease for brief periods of time. This moisture can vary in amount  from abundant to scarce; and in consistency - thick or thin.
As I mentioned earlier in the classification of wounds, every ulcer that does not heal and fails to grow new flesh can be attributed to one of nine causes: lack of blood in the body; poor quality blood; or because there is hardened flesh inside it or on its lips which prevents the growth of healthy tissue. If it is not clean and well cared for, either because of excessive dirt and grime or because the ulcer itself is putrid and the matter that sustains it is of poor quality, or because the treatment is unsuitable, or due to an outbreak of a disease similar to the plague in the town, or simply because of some peculiarity specific to the town.
If it is not clean and well cared for, either because of excessive dirt and grime or because the ulcer itself is putrid and the matter that sustains it is of poor quality, or because the treatment is unsuitable, or due to an outbreak of a disease similar to the plague in the town, or simply because of some peculiarity specific to the town. As is the case in Saragossa, where diseases find it difficult to mature and wounds heal slowly by nature; or because there is one bone or several bones involved; I have outlined all these causes, their signs and treatments with medicines in this division.
Here, I should acquaint you with the treatment of fistulae and colds that can be treated by manual surgery; know that fistulae may occur in all parts of the body: some terminate into large veins or arteries, others into nerves.
Or into the peritoneum, intestines, bladder, ribs, vertebrae of the back or complex joints like those in the hand and foot; some fistulae may lead to important organs nearby, etc.,
Those fistulae that terminate in the locations mentioned are among the most difficult to heal and cannot be treated; if there are some that do not reach these places, then you may hope for their treatment and apply yourself diligently.
If you wish to know more about this, take a copper or iron probe; if the fistula is straight, then examine it with that; but if there are bends in the fistula, use a thin lead probe as lead conforms easily to its shape.
When the probe enters and turns towards the bend, if the fistula has many openings which you cannot detect with the probe, then inject one of its mouths; for the moisture with which you fill it will pass to the other openings and flow out.
Then proceed to thoroughly examine it in any way possible, so as to determine whether there is bone or sinew present, or if the bed of the fistula is deep or shallow, or even if a single fistula has numerous openings; establish all these facts by means of your utmost effort and from questioning the patient and judging the severity of his pain when you press the area with your hand.
Consider, too, all other symptoms and causes for the swelling; once you have established these facts to your satisfaction, proceed with confidence towards treatment by examining whether...
If the fistula is clearly visible, shallow or in a healthy site far from any joint, nerve, artery, vein or one of the sites mentioned to you previously; then open it as described above and remove all hardened material, dead tissue and superfluous flesh.
Also remove any new growths, such as flesh or warts which may have formed within it and treat the fistula until it heals; if the bed of the fistula is deep and straight then you should open it deeply to the extent that you can, and clean out all dead tissue.
Then use the sharp, twisted probe to apply a caustic medicine and insert it as far into the fistula bed as you can reach with your instrument; do this repeatedly until the caustic medicine completely destroys all remaining unhealthy tissue at the base of the fistula.
Next, apply ointments that promote healthy tissue growth until it heals; if this does not heal the fistula then repeat cauterization as previously described. If you have confirmed that bone is causing the fistula, probe and open it as I have told you unless something prevents you from doing so.
Whether it is a vein, nerve or major organ, as we said; if the bone is exposed and there is some corruption and blackness, then scrape it until its decay is gone and treat it with something that will glue it together so it may heal. If it does not heal and continues to emit pus, do as was described before.
Know that you have not reached the full extent of decay, so uncover all that is upon it again and do your utmost to scrape and purify it; then force it closed. If it heals, well done, but if not, know that this corruption lies deep within and uncover all that is upon it once more.
Do your utmost to scrape and purify it, using all your effort; if the corrupt bone is small and can be extracted, then do so with the delicate clamps suitable for this purpose.
If there are many bones, make every effort to extract them all and leave none behind; if any of the ligaments get in your way and cutting them would not be dangerous, then cut those ligaments and flesh if necessary, and free the bones.
If you cannot extract the bones at this time, then apply something to the wound that will cause it to putrefy and leave it for several days until all the flesh and ligaments around those bones have decayed; ensure the wound does not heal so that the incision you made during your work remains open.
Alternatively, if you fear this, place upon it a piece of cotton soaked in powdered sulfur and oil, or cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment or one of the green ointments; when those ligaments have decayed and the bones are free, their extraction will be made much easier.
If it is a single, large bone such as the shin or thigh and only its surface has become corrupt, then do scrape it thoroughly until that blackness and corruption are gone; then force the wound closed. But if a large part of it is corrupted and the decay has reached into the marrow, then there is no choice but to saw through it.
Remove all of it up to where the decay ends, and then treat it until it heals. I will tell you about a cold that afflicted a man's leg so that you may consider it an example and aid for your treatment. This man was young in age.
Around thirty years of age, he experienced pain in his leg due to internal movement from within the body until the matter reached the leg and caused a large swelling; there was no external cause. Over time, with the mistakes of physicians, the swelling opened.
Much matter flowed from it, and it was treated poorly until the leg became gangrenous with many openings that all discharged pus and bodily fluids. A group of physicians treated him for nearly two years but none were skilled in manual practice.
Until he came to me; I saw his leg with matter flowing greatly from those openings and the man's body was emaciated, his color yellowed. So I inserted a probe into one of those openings which reached bone, then I examined all the openings.
Finding that they opened into each other from all sides of the leg, I applied a seton to one of those openings until I exposed some bone which I found rotten, eaten away, blackened, and putrefied with holes penetrating down to the marrow; so I excised what was revealed.
I removed all the decayed bone thinking there was no more corruption than what I had already cut away and excised; then I treated the wound with healing medicines for a long time but it did not heal, so I uncovered the bone again beyond my previous discovery.
I found the corruption connected to the bone, so I removed what appeared to me as well from that corruption and then tried to force it together but it did not mend or fuse. Then I examined it again, and I kept cutting away the bone piece by piece trying to repair it but it would not heal until I had cut about a span's worth of bone.
I removed it with its brain and then healed it with medicines, so it fused quickly and recovered. This repetition in the operation and incision was necessary due to the patient's weak condition, his low tolerance, and my fear of his death because he would constantly faint from excessive purging; however, he fully recovered.
Flesh grew solid in the place of the bone, and his condition improved in the body; he regained strength and returned to normal activities without any walking impairment whatsoever. Thus, if a protruding bone breaks in the body...
You should remove it in this manner: take a bandage, tie one end to the protruding bone and instruct someone to pull it upwards while you put another woolen pad over the first one.
Then you tie the bandage to the flesh beneath the bone, pulling its end downwards as you reveal the area to be cut so that the saw doesn't harm the flesh; place a plank or board under the bone from below, securing it firmly.
Because if you do that, the saw won't be hindered from cutting away the rotten bone; the incision should be slightly above the area of corruption so as not to leave any rot within the cavity which might go unnoticed by touch and thus necessitate another operation.
If the bone is decayed and it is not protruding but remains connected, with the decay in its center or a part of it, expose all sides of the flesh then place the piece of wood underneath before sawing from the first side where the decay is located.
After you have finished sawing it, then saw from the other side and let the sawing be at a slight distance from the decay as we said; if the decay is in the joint, cut off the rotten joint itself, and saw the bone where it connects on the other side.
If the decay is at a joint's connection, there is no other option than to use the file; if it was in the hand or foot carpals, then treatment will be very difficult but you should peel off and remove the rot however it appears before cleaning and filing it regardless of how possible.
However you succeed, ensure there are no tendons or nerves in the way; also know that saws and files to cut these bones vary according to their position, angle, thickness, thinness, largeness, smallness, hardness and sponginess. Therefore, you should prepare for each type of work the corresponding tool.
Know that the works themselves may indicate to you the type of tool required if you have extensive experience and knowledge in this craft, as the adeptness of a craft comes from seeing varieties of illnesses. One may then deduce for himself the tools required for each illness, and I will depict a set of instruments at the end of this chapter.
These will be examples to follow and measure against others, God willing; an illustration of a saw: [image].
Figure: Another Saw.
Figure: Small saw.
Figure: Large saw.
The blade of this scalpel is shaped like the head of a screw, with incisions resembling those on an elevator key. It can be used to scrape and smooth out joint heads if they become damaged or large bones.
Figure: Broad Scalpel.
Its upper arch and blade are made of iron, its handle of boxwood in the shape of a tight cone. Figure: Hollowed-out scalpel.
Figure: Delicate Scalpel.
Figure: Scalpel with curved tip.
Figure: Small scalpel resembling a probe.
Figure: Smaller Cross-section.
Its tip is shaped like a burnisher and it can be used in many places to smooth bones. Figure: Scalpel suitable for smoothing holes in bones.
Its tip is sharp and triangular in shape, made of Indian iron. This applies to all the scalpels and cross-sections we mentioned earlier as well. Figure: Scalpel.
Chapter eighty-seven.
On amputation and sawing bones.
If the extremity is gangrenous, whether due to an external or internal cause, and you have treated that corruption with medications but the treatment has not worked, and you see that the corruption continues to spread through the member without anything stopping it...
...then you must amputate that member up to where the corruption has reached, so that the patient may be saved from death or some great affliction which is greater than losing a limb. A sign of this is when the member becomes black, as though it had been burned by fire.
Or it may become gangrenous after turning black, with the gangrene spreading to what follows that member and affecting the entire body; in such a case, you should hasten to amputate it. The same applies if the corruption is caused by the bite of some venomous creature such as a scorpion, snake, or tarantula, among others.
If the corruption or bite is in one of the fingers, amputate that finger without delay lest the corruption spread to the hand; likewise if it has affected the hand, cut it off at the wrist joint and do not wait for the corruption to reach the two forearms.
And in the same way, if it has affected one of the arms, amputate that arm at the elbow joint; but if the corruption has spread towards the shoulder and you see it there, do not cut off the shoulder at all, for this will result in the patient's death. Instead, employ other treatments as best you can.
You should do the same with a leg, amputating it at one of the finger joints if corruption has affected that; but if it is the whole foot which is gangrenous, cut off the entire leg. If the corruption reaches the knee, you should amputate the leg at the knee joint.
If the decay has reached above the knee, there is no choice but to let it be and surrender the patient to death. The procedure for amputating or excising a limb is as follows: bind a ligature below the site you wish to cut, and another one above it.
The servant handling one ligature pulls it downwards, while another servant pulls the upper ligature upwards. You then strip away the flesh between the two ligatures with a broad scalpel until all the flesh is exposed, after which it can be cut or excised. Be sure to pad all sides with linen cloths.
To avoid the saw touching an incorrect site and causing excessive pain or a hot swelling, should bleeding occur during your work, cauterize the spot quickly or sprinkle some styptic powder on it. Then return to your treatment until you are finished.
Then bind the wounded limb with a suitable ligature and treat it until it heals. I will relate to you an example of this very condition that was presented in a man's leg; his leg had become blackened with a burning sensation akin to fire.
This decay began in his toe and eventually took the whole leg; the man self-amputated when he saw the decay spreading through the limb, driven by the severity of the pain and burning sensation. He cut it off at the joint and healed.
After a long period of time, the same decay appeared in his index finger; he consulted me and I sought to deter its progress by applying medicines to the hand after cleaning it. However, the decay was not deterred and began to spread into the other fingers.
Until corruption spread in the hand, which prompted me to cut off his hand; I refused upon him, hoping that I could dissuade him from doing away with such excellence and also fearing that he might die if I amputated his hand because his strength was already waning; when he despaired of my compliance, he returned home.
I heard about him that he had a sudden seizure and so I cut off his entire hand, and he recovered; I only narrated this story to be of help in dealing with similar diseases and as an example to guide medical practice.
Chapter 88.
On the treatment of abscesses, and how to inject them with medication.
Should a tumour appear in any of the fleshy organs, and it remains for some time until it fills up with matter; then bursts or is lanced and all the matter contained within it drains out leaving the site empty as if it were a vessel.
When the skin, which resembles a piece of cloth, has become thin and is not so severely corrupted as to affect bone, nerve or ligament - thus earning the appellation "abscess" instead of fistula; unless it remains for some time until corruption sets in one of these organs.
Then it is called a fistula or sinus, and its treatment entails cutting away all of the surrounding skin; especially if it has become thin and resembles a piece of cloth; and making sure that it does not adhere to the site due to corruption.
Should you wish for the skin to adhere, and corruption has not set in so severely, nor the skin become too thin; but if there is a certain amount of flesh on it - treat it with an injection: examine the abscess, should it be large and the pus draining from it emit a foul odour - inject it with Egyptian medicine.
which is equal parts vinegar, oil, honey and verdigris, are mixed together in a container and boiled until the medicine thickens to the consistency of honey; then you take what you need, dilute it with water and honey, inject into the abscess, tightly seal its mouth and leave the medicine there for about two hours.
Then you remove it by squeezing [the abscess]. You do this for several days until the abscess is purified and the stench disappears. Alternatively, if this medicine is not available to you, you can inject it with lye water; that is, take the ash from grapevine wood or oak wood and pour water over it.
Strain it and inject [the lye water] until you are certain that the abscess has been cleansed. If the patient is unable to tolerate either the Egyptian medicine or the lye water, then inject them with a mixture of water, honey and some powdered verdigris.
Or, inject them with a mixture of honey and wine because the honey will cleanse and wash [the wound] while the wine will seal the abscess; especially if the wine has some additional styptic and drying properties. Once you have done this several times and are certain that the abscess is no longer corrupted then inject it with something to promote flesh growth.
For example, you could take some palm tar, dissolve it in rose oil and astringent wine or inject it with one of the other salves and medicines described earlier in the chapter on salves. If the mouth of the abscess is too narrow to accommodate the syringe...
...then gently widen it with an iron rod or place a wick soaked in Egyptian salve or Serapion's ointment inside the abscess to help expand it. If, on the other hand, the mouth of the abscess is too wide you should draw its lips together with sutures and leave an opening just large enough for the syringe to enter without any excess.
Similarly, if the mouth from which pus is discharging is elevated upward, then split it in its lowest part so that the pus may drain downward; for when pus becomes congested deep inside a recess, it prevents flesh from growing there.
If you cannot split the recess toward its lower part as desired, then make sure to position the organ in an upright manner so that pus may drain from it easily according to what seems suitable for you and ensure that no amount of pus is retained within it at all.
As for the healing medicines which are applied to the recess from the outside and how they should be put on it, take one of the healing salves that is suitable for what you want and spread it over a linen cloth; let the cloth be large enough to cover the entire recess. Then, with the scissors make a slit opposite the mouth of the recess; this should be slightly larger than its mouth and then spread some soft salve on another piece of cloth to fit into that hole and place it there in such a way so as not to block the mouth of the recess thereby facilitating easy discharge of pus. The large cloth, however, must not be removed until...
The one on the mouth of the recess, you must remove it at all times so that whatever pus has accumulated inside may come out and also to know how much puss is draining from there whether a lot or a little; whether it's ripe or unripe...
And also inspect the location of the recess itself to see whether its owner feels pain there or not and if it has a swelling or no swelling; when you continue treatment thusly, should you perceive that what is coming out from its mouth is minimal...
Know that the hidden part has adhered, or is about to adhere; so then release it on the next day or on the third day. And when you have released the wound, replace the cloth with a new one and renew the ointment. If after a long time thin pus comes out from the hidden part, do not despair of its adherence.
Its healing is near, for there are people whose flesh grows slowly in their wounds, and others who are the opposite. If after many days pus that is not ripe comes out from the hidden part, know that the hidden part has not adhered; if the adherence of the hidden part is slow,
And if it takes a long time, increase the drying of the medicines; let them be medicines that are moist in their consistency but dry in strength, such as palm ointment if an extra amount of quicklime has been added to it. And the most effective treatment is to take palm ointment.
Dissolve it in rose oil, sprinkle on it old wine that is moderate in its consistency, then knead it with this and use it. A similar action may be done if you do not have palm ointment: take honey and cook it until it thickens; or use cooked honey, or take myrobalan, aloe, and costus, grind them all together, and sprinkle the powder over honey that is on the fire. Then spread it on a cloth and bind it to the hidden part, or cover it with cooked honey that has thickened and sprinkle medicines over it; then place cloths on top and bind them.
Or you may use for this purpose the long variety of aconite, the root of purple iris, buckwheat flour, and inula, used either singly or together: grind them, sift them, then sprinkle them over the honey that has been described; finally apply it. If the hidden part takes a long time to heal with this treatment, know that there is corruption deep within.
If it has affected the bones or any other hard nerves or ligaments then treat it like a fistula as described earlier.
Chapter 89.
The treatment of paronychia, ingrown nails, resection of extra digits, and the division of syndactyly.
Paronychia is a fleshy growth that appears under the thumbnail of the hand or foot, and it may also occur on other fingers. If left untreated for too long, it becomes swollen and hot.
Or it becomes corrupted and gangrenous, eating away at the base of the nail and possibly destroying it entirely. It may even spread to the bone, with a foul odor emitting from the affected area, causing the tip of the finger to become wide and turn bluish in color. If you treat it as mentioned in the previous section but your treatment is ineffective,
Then you must cut away with a blade all the excess growth from the nail, and cauterize the wound afterwards. Cauterization is very beneficial in this case. However, if the bone remains intact along with the nail,
And the angle that contains the nail has pushed the flesh inward, causing it to jab and injure itself, you should place a thin probe under the corner of the nail that is piercing the flesh, lift it upwards, and carefully cut away that piece of flesh.
Apply caustic medications to the remaining flesh until it is all gone, and then treat it with ointments until it heals. But if the corruption has spread to the bone, you must cut out that bone and remove it; it will not heal as long as there is any rotten bone left.
If you see gangrene and decay spreading into the finger, amputate it at one of the phalanges as mentioned earlier, then treat it until it heals. If the nail is struck or bruised and severe pain occurs, you should first bloodlet the patient.
Then, make an oblique incision in the nail with a sharp lancet from top to bottom, being careful not to reach the flesh beneath the nail, for you would cause the patient severe pain and lead to excessive growth of tissue at that spot. Then treat the area with something to alleviate the pain.
As for the extra finger that may grow in some people's hands, it can be entirely fleshy or have bones and a nail; the growth of some occurs at the base of the joint of another finger.
Or it may grow from one of the phalanges, and those that grow on a phalanx do not move; however, those that grow at the finger joint can possibly move. What is fleshy can be easily amputated by cutting it off at its base with a broad lancet.
As for the one that grows at the base of a joint, its treatment is difficult so you should avoid amputating it; but as to those that grow on a finger's phalanx, they must first be amputated by cutting off their flesh in a circular fashion down to the bone and then chiseling away the bone with an appropriate chisel.
Then, treat it until it heals. As for the fusion that occurs between fingers, this happens frequently and can be congenital or result from a healed wound, burn, or similar; in such cases you must separate the fused area by incising it.
Until the fingers return to their natural form, then place between them a cord or cloth soaked in rose oil so that it does not heal quickly; separate them, or insert a thin lead plate between them so that the wound heals as it should.
Similarly, if the fusion of some fingers to the palm occurs, split that fusion as seems appropriate and suitable for shaping the limb.
Chapter Ninety.
On cutting varicose veins.
Varicose veins are twisted, thick vessels filled with black bile; they occur in most parts of the body and are more common in the legs, especially in fig and ivy growers, and porterage workers. Therefore, it is necessary to first use strong purgatives to rid the body of black bile.
Then, the patient should have blood taken from the basilic vein. As for treating it with iron, there are two methods: one is to make an incision and remove the black blood; the other is to extract the entire vein. For the first method, the leg should be bathed in hot water beforehand.
So that the thick, cloudy blood becomes fluid; then bind the patient's leg from above their thigh to below their knee with a bandage, and make an incision in one or two or three places as needed.
Then, you should milk the black blood with your hand from below the leg upwards and then downwards until a sufficient amount of blood has been removed or according to what the patient can tolerate; bind it afterwards and instruct them to avoid foods that produce black bile. The process of purging and venesection should be repeated.
When the veins become full and this harms the patient, as for cupping, it should be done in the following manner: shave the leg of the patient if there is a lot of hair, then take them to the bathhouse and rub their leg with hot water until it turns red and perspires, or give them an intense workout.
If a bathhouse is not available to heat the body, then make an incision in the skin over the vein, either at the back near the knee or below at the heel, then open the skin with hooks and strip the vein from each side until it becomes apparent to the touch.
Once it appears, you will see that the vein is bright red and when freed from the skin, it also looks like a tendon. Then insert a probe underneath until it rises and comes out of the skin, then attach it to a smooth blind hook. Then make another incision near this one, about three fingers in length.
Then strip the skin from over the vein so that it appears, then lift it with a probe as you did before and attach it to another hook in the same way. Then make another incision or several incisions if needed.
Then cup it and cut it at the end of the incision near the heel, then pull it out and cup it until it comes out of the second incision. Then pull it towards the one above and do this until you pull it from the third highest incision so that when all is removed, then cut it.
If it does not respond to pulling and cupping, then insert a needle with a strong doubled thread and tie it, then pull it and put the probe underneath. Then twist your hand in each direction until it comes out, being careful that it doesn't break as if it does, then cupping will be very difficult.
If any part of it is left inside the patient, it will cause harm. Therefore, if you remove all of it, place a piece of wool soaked in rose oil or olive oil on the wound and treat it until it heals. If the vein is tense with twists and bends towards different directions...
If it is not straight, as we mentioned earlier, you should make an incision on each side of its twists and bends, then attach hooks to it so that you can remove the entire vein. Be careful when making incisions not to cut or injure any arteries because this will make removal difficult, so be very cautious.
Image caption: The tool used for incising the vein.
Image caption: The blind hook.
The hooks should not have sharp points like other hooks, nor should they be sharp-edged to avoid injuring the arteries. They need to be thick and smooth because if they are thin, they will cut the artery due to their sharpness, so it is important that they are thicker as mentioned earlier.
Chapter 91.
Removing the subclavian vein.
This vein originates in the legs, especially in hot countries such as Hejaz and the Arabian lands, as well as other dry and infertile hot regions. It may originate from other body parts besides the legs due to putrefaction under the skin.
It starts with severe inflammation in the legs, followed by blistering of the skin. Then, the vein begins to emerge from the site of the blisters. Just like how worms and snakes appear inside living bodies as well as the pumpkin worm and the worm that appears between the skin and flesh due to putrefaction.
It is as if it were the root of a plant or animal; when its end appears, it should be wrapped in a small piece of lead weighing one to two drachmas and tied up. The lead is then left suspended from the leg.
Whenever something emerges from it, wrap it in lead and tie it up. If it becomes too long, cut off a part of it and wrap the remainder; do not cut it off at its root before everything has been removed, for if you do, it will contract and go back into the flesh causing a tumor, putrefaction, and an evil ulcer.
Therefore, it should be managed and gradually pulled until all of it comes out without leaving anything in the body. In some people, this vein may extend up to five or ten palms in length.
I have heard that, for one man, it extended to twenty spans in length. If it breaks while you are treating it, insert a stylet into its hole and press the body firmly so as to empty all of its contents; then try to induce putrefaction at this site with medication over several days.
Treat it thereafter with remedies for tumors. This vein may have multiple branches, especially if it appears in the ankle or leg itself; this would give rise to numerous openings from which emerge different branches. Treat them as mentioned previously and according to what has already been described.
Chapter 92.
Incision for worms that develop beneath the skin, also known as cow disease.
This disease is called cow disease in some of our countries because it frequently affects cows; it involves a small worm that develops between the skin and flesh, crawling throughout the body up and down.
It becomes apparent to the senses as it moves from one organ to another until it pierces a spot in the skin and emerges, forming [a swelling] from the putrefaction of certain humours much like what happens with worms, snakes, and pumpkin seeds in the belly.
The potential harm is expected to arise when it crawls into the body, rises to the head, and reaches the eye; it may open [the eye] and come out, rendering it useless. This happens frequently. So, if you wish to treat it and extract it, this should be done upon its crawling and becoming apparent to the senses.
Therefore, you should tightly bind what is above and below [the swelling] with a bandage; then make an incision upon it and remove it. If it sinks into the flesh and you cannot find it, attack the area with cauterization by fire until you burn it away. The greatest harm it can do to the eye, as we have said, is blindness.
If you see that it has reached the head near the eye, bind tightly beneath it on the forehead and then make an incision upon it to extract it. The patient should regularly cleanse their body with medicines that purge putrid and noxious humours, taking care to avoid foods which engender putrefaction.
Chapter 93.
On making an incision for the disease known as 'nafir'.
This disease, known as 'nafir' in our region, is a pain that afflicts some organs and then moves from one to another; I have seen it just as I describe.
I was called to a sick woman in one of the villages; I examined her arm, and she showed me slight swelling in the radial artery. After an hour had passed, I saw that swelling crawling up the forearm towards her shoulder as quickly as mercury, just like a worm.
If it flowed from one spot to another, the pain left that place and settled in the shoulder; then I sat for a moment until it coursed through my entire body, even reaching the other arm. Then she told me that it circulated throughout her whole body as she had seen.
I was amazed by the swiftness of its transition from one organ to another, and I had never before seen this disease with my own eyes in such a manner; although, I have encountered others who experienced pain shifting from organ to organ, but I had not witnessed it as vividly as I did with this woman.
I could only attribute this to the fact that the woman was from a rural area, with a dry body and exposed veins; hence, the perceptible shifting of wind became apparent. It is unlikely for such a phenomenon to occur in those who live comfortably, with moist bodies and hidden veins.
Thus, if you wish to treat it and the patient feels the pain, and it presents itself visually as mentioned earlier, then bind it firmly from above and below with haste, and press down upon it until that congested wind escapes; cauterize the area.
If you do not see it visually, treat the patient by inducing a shaking motion to dispel wind, and employ remedies that repel wind and alleviate its accumulation, such as stinking seed, caper seed, and similar medicines.
Chapter ninety-four.
On extracting arrows.
Arrows vary depending on their type and the body part they strike; in terms of their types, some are large while others are small, and among them there are hollow glass arrows and solid glass ones, and there are those with three angles and those with four.
Some of them have tongues, and some have fragments. As for those that occur according to the organs in which they are found, they can be divided into two types: either the organs are among the major hollow organs such as the brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar. When an arrow strikes one of these organs and you observe the signs of death that I am describing to you, then you should avoid removing that arrow, for in most cases death will overtake its owner. When these evil signs do not appear and the arrow has not penetrated deep into the organ, then remove it and treat the wound. One sign of brain injury is when an arrow pierces through to the bone and injures the membrane covering the brain; this may cause severe headaches, delirium, and dizziness.
When these evil signs do not appear and the arrow has not penetrated deep into the organ, then remove it and treat the wound. One sign of brain injury is when an arrow pierces through to the bone and injures the membrane covering the brain; this may cause severe headaches, delirium, and dizziness. There may also be redness in the eyes, a red tongue, convulsions, mental confusion, vomiting of bile, and possibly bleeding from the nostrils or ears. Speech may be lost, the voice gone, and a white discharge like congee may come out of the wound, with watery flesh-like fluid running from it.
If these signs appear, cease treatment of the patient and do not remove the arrow if it has not been extracted. As for the signs when an arrow strikes near the left breast and the heart, you will sense that it is embedded in something solid rather than empty.
Perhaps there will be a movement in the arrow resembling a pulse, and dark blood will flow from the wound. This may be followed by coldness in the limbs, cold perspiration, and loss of consciousness; know then that death is certain. If an arrow wounds the lung, frothy bloody discharge will come out of the wound.
The vessels following the neck become swollen, and the patient's color changes; he breathes with difficulty and craves cold air to inhale. If an arrow has penetrated the diaphragm in the chest, it is usually close to the lower ribs, causing great pain and much respiratory distress.
He sighs and all the muscles of his shoulders move; if an arrow has pierced the liver, there follows great pain and from the wound issues blood resembling that of the liver in color: but if it has struck the stomach, undigested food may issue from the wound.
The case is clear: if the arrow has penetrated the belly and stuck there, and either feces or omentum or intestines have protruded through the wound; or if it has pierced the bladder and urine flows from the wound, then there is no hope of extracting the arrow nor of effecting a cure.
And if something protrudes from the wound and the patient suffers great pain, you may know that he is lost: but for wounds of the face, eye, throat, shoulder, arm, spine, collarbone, thigh or leg, and other such parts, there is generally no cause for serious concern.
When the arrow has not damaged an artery or nerve and is not poisoned, I shall relate to you some of what I have witnessed concerning such arrows, so that you may profit by my experience in your treatment: a certain man was struck in the canthus of one eye near the root of his nose.
I extracted it for him from the opposite side, under the ear lobe; he recovered and suffered no damage to his eye. I also extracted an arrow from a certain Jew who had been struck in the fleshy part of his eye beneath the lower lid: the arrow had gone deep but its tiny point still protruded from the wood.
A large arrow of the compound bow, its iron square and smooth without ears, was removed; the Jew recovered and no accident occurred to his eye. Another arrow was extracted from a Christian's throat and it was an Arab arrow.
It had ears, so I made an incision on it between the jugular veins; it had penetrated deep into his throat. I treated him carefully until I extracted it, and the Christian survived and recovered. Another arrow was removed from a man's abdomen; we thought he would die from it.
After about thirty days had passed and nothing changed in his condition, I made an incision on the arrow and treated it until removed; he recovered without any accident befalling him. I saw a man with an arrow lodged in his back whose wound had healed over it.
After seven years had passed, the arrow emerged at the root of his thigh. I saw a woman with an arrow lodged in her abdomen; her wound had healed over it and she was left with no changes to her condition nor did she feel any pain while performing natural bodily functions.
I saw another man with an arrow lodged in his face; the wound had healed and he felt no great pain from it. Cases like these are numerous. I removed an arrow from a leader's soldier that was embedded in the middle of his nose, slightly tilted to the right side.
The entire arrow had disappeared, so I was called to treat him three days after the incident. I found the arrow wound to be very narrow and when I probed it with a fine probe, I could not feel it. He felt a pricking pain and discomfort underneath his right ear.
So I hoped that the barb of the arrow would be found on that side, and so I bandaged the wound with a strong attracting poultice in order to mature it, hoping that the place might swell up and show some sign of the arrow's presence; but I now made an incision there, yet no occurrence occurred to indicate that the arrow had reached this spot.
So I continued to bandage it for many days, but nothing happened; the wound became closed up during that time and the patient despaired of its being extracted until one day he felt the arrow inside his nose and informed me of this fact; so then I applied the corrosive medicine on the wound for many days.
Until it reopened, then I probed it and felt the fine barb attached to the shaft; after that, I applied more of this corrosive medicine in order to open up the wound until we could see with our eyes the point of the arrow appear; and so it was a considerable time before I could extract it - about four months.
Then, when the wound had become wide enough to admit my instruments into it, I seized hold of and pulled on this point but it did not yield at all; so I went on working upon it in various ways with different kinds of instruments until one day I got a good firm grip on it by means of some strong forceps such as are shown in the figure below.
The physicians all declared that the cartilage of his nose could not be set, but I did repair it and the wound healed up; so now the patient is perfectly recovered without any further trouble at all, and I will inform you about the method employed for extracting certain arrows in order to provide a standard or criterion by which you can determine those cases which have not been mentioned.
For the parts and intricacies of this practice cannot be grasped by mere description nor encompassed within a book; rather, the skilled craftsman gauges the lesser against the greater, the present against the absent, and deduces novel techniques and instruments when faced with unfamiliar exigencies.
If we descend into the specifics of this practice, I say that arrows can be extracted from injured body parts in two ways: either by pulling them out from the point of entry or extracting them through the opposite side where they penetrated.
If the arrow is protruding from a fleshy spot, it should be pulled and extracted; if this proves difficult at first, one should leave it in place for several days until the surrounding flesh decays and makes extraction easier. This same method applies when an arrowhead lodges itself into bone.
If extraction remains impossible, then leave it be for a while and try again each day by pulling and twisting; eventually, it will come out. However, if this fails after several days, one must drill around the arrowhead into the same bone from both sides using a delicate auger to widen its path before extracting it.
Should an arrowhead deeply penetrate one of the brain's lobes and certain symptoms manifest in the patient as previously mentioned, refrain from extracting it immediately; instead, let it be for some time until its situation becomes clear after a few days.
So concentrate on extracting the arrow and removing it, if it is very deeply embedded and does not respond to extraction then use the drills around the arrow as I have described to you, then treat the area until it heals; but if the arrow has penetrated a region of the body that cannot be reached. And if it has escaped sensation, explore it with a probe; if you can feel it then extract it using some of the instruments suitable for extraction; but if you are unable to do so because the wound is narrow and the arrow deeply embedded, yet neither bone nor nerve nor artery are present.
Then make an incision to widen the wound and gain a hold of the arrow so that you can remove it; if there are two ears on it, grasp them with some instrument and free the flesh caught in them from all sides using every possible trick; but if unable to do this, break or cut through the ears.
And if you attempt to extract the arrow in any location, use your hand and the forceps to manipulate it towards all sides until you free it; be as gentle as possible so that the arrow does not break and make extraction more difficult for you; but if unable to achieve this within a reasonable time.
Then leave it for days until the surrounding flesh becomes putrid; treat it again at that point, as it will be easier then; but if you encounter bleeding, use what we have mentioned in the appropriate section of this book to treat such a case; take great care not to cut an artery or nerve or tendon and use every possible trick.
By all means possible free the arrow, gently and carefully as I have described to you; when extracting the arrow, ensure that the patient is in exactly the same position they were at the time of injury.
If that is not possible, then use whatever shapes you can. As for the arrow which exits from the opposite side, either something may have protruded outside or you will find the tip of the arrow by sensation from above the skin close by and see it protruding.
If it is difficult, then make the incision according to the size that accommodates the forceps. Then pull it; it will be easier to extract. If it gets stuck in bone, twist your hand around until the arrow affects the bone and creates space for itself, then pull it.
Otherwise, leave it for a few days before trying again until it comes out. If the arrow shaft is still inside, push against it with your finger. If the shaft has fallen off and you want to use force, insert the hollow tool so that its cavity encloses the end of the bone, then push with it.
If the arrow is hollow, push against it with a tool that fits into its cavity; this will make extraction easier. If the arrow is poisoned, you should scoop out all the flesh which has been affected by the poison if possible and then treat it accordingly.
If the arrow is lodged in the chest, abdomen, bladder or side and it can be felt with a probe close by and you are able to make an incision, then do so carefully avoiding cutting any arteries or nerves before removing it.
Then stitch the wound if necessary before treating it until it heals. Image: forceps used to extract arrows.
Its tips resemble the beak of a bird, shaped like a file so that when it grips an arrow or something else, it does not let go. They can be made in various sizes: large, small and medium, depending on the size of the arrow, its shaft, and the width and narrowness of the wound.
Illustration of the hollow syringe.
Figure of the solid cannon.
This [tool] is solid-ended like a pestle to facilitate its entry into the hollow arrow and force it forward.
Chapter ninety-five.
On opening the veins.
The vessels that are commonly opened in the body number thirty, sixteen of which are in the head: the two pulsating arteries behind the ears known as the *sensitives*, the two temporal arteries visible on the temples and the two vessels in the corners of the eyes called the *observers*.
Also the artery that stands upright in the middle of the forehead, the vessel at the tip of the nose, the two jugulars in the neck and the two vessels on the upper lip; those in the lower lip and these vessels known as *the four watchers* and the two veins under the tongue.
As for the vessels opened in the arm and hand, there are five: one is the cephalic which lies on the outer side [*i.e.* lateral aspect] of the arm; it is called the *head artery* by laypeople, another is the radialis or *radial*, this being formed from a branch of the basilica and a branch of the cephalic; the common people call it the *body artery*.
And the basilica which lies on the medial side of the arm and is also called *the axillary*; it is known as the *stomach artery* to common people, and the ulnaris or *ulnar*, this being the one that runs along the ulna bone and is clearly visible above the thumb, and finally the interosseus.
It is the vein between the ring finger and little finger, which has two branches. In the leg and foot there are three veins: one under the knee bend on the outer side; another is the saphenous vein located at the heel on the inner side; and the sciatic vein, which is found by the heel on the outer side.
In the other leg there are three similar veins. As for the two veins behind the ears, their ligation is beneficial in chronic fever, migraine, tinea, and chronic ulcers of the head; the procedure will be described as follows.
It begins by shaving the patient's head and then rubbing their nape in the area of the veins with a coarse cloth, doing so vigorously. The patient should then strangle his own neck with a turban until the veins appear; they are located behind both ears at two depressions on the head. You must palpate them with your finger: wherever you feel a pulse beneath your finger, mark that spot with ink.
Take a knife-like lancet, known as a fleam, and insert it under the vein in the skin until you reach the bone with the tip of the lancet. Then lift your hand with the vein and skin upwards and cut through the vein along with some skin; the length of this excision should be around two fingers' breadth.
Or something similar, and allow the desired amount of blood to flow out before tying them off with bandages; they should be left until healed. Their excision and cauterization were described earlier in this book. As for the two arteries located on the temples, their ligation is useful for chronic migraine, severe headache, persistent eye inflammation, and acute discharge into the eyes.
And the method of clamping them, as I describe to you: the patient tightens his neck with a turban until the veins become clearly palpable and their pulses are felt beneath your finger. Then mark with ink, then lift the skin above the vein up towards above with your index finger.
You insert the small scalpel from below, lift the vein upwards and sever it as you did with the other two veins; discharge blood according to your needs then release the patient's neck compression, placing your finger on the vein for an hour.
Then place cotton and a bandage, applying firm pressure from above; leave until it heals - their description, cutting, and removal have been previously mentioned in the book's introduction. As for clamping the vein of the forehead: its benefit is after clamping the temples, to treat chronic ailments of the face such as ringworm, sores, and unpleasant redness.
The method of clamping, as I describe to you: the patient tightens his neck with a turban until the vein becomes visible; then take the instrument called the axe, and this is its image:
Place the protruding spike on the head of the axe onto the vein and strike from above with a comb or another object in its direction; allow blood to flow as desired, then release the patient's neck compression and apply firm pressure until it heals.
It may be opened with a broad scalpel, although it should not have a sharp tip like other scalpels but rather a slightly wider one; you clamp it on an angle as the bone is close by and a thin scalpel might break.
The two veins in the corners of the eyes benefit ailments of the eye such as scabies, redness, and drooping eyelids; also diseases of the face. As for clamping them: have the patient tighten his neck with a turban then clamp while you stand over their head, at an angle slightly lengthways with a small, somewhat broad scalpel.
If there is no flesh in the area, then a thin-edged scalpel may break. Send as much blood as you need and place some cotton on it; bind them for one night, then remove it. As for bleeding from the nose veins, it is beneficial for acute fever.
Severe headache and diseases of the face, such as erysipelas that appears on the nose, especially if it is chronic. The procedure for this bleeding is to have the patient tighten their neck, then hold your left hand over their nose while you take a long thin scalpel.
Insert it in the middle of the nose tip itself, between the cartilage and bone on a straight line because the vein is not felt there; then blood will appear immediately. You should press your hand with the scalpel slightly to send as much blood as you need, then bind it for one night, after which it will heal quickly.
Bleeding from the temples is beneficial for shortness of breath, early stages of leprosy, and melancholic diseases that appear on the skin surface such as vitiligo, ringworm, and foul ulcers. The procedure involves having the patient tighten their neck under both temples with a bandage while you stand over them.
The patient should sit on a chair, then you will bleed the vein from end to end with wide cuts and drain as much blood as is moderate or according to what you see fit; then do the same for the other vein before removing the bandage.
You should bind both veins with moderate force to avoid the patient suffocating, then leave them until tomorrow when the wound will have healed. Bleeding from these two veins after bleeding from the cephalic vein is beneficial for treating canker sores in the mouth, gum disease, and foul ulcers; as well as chapped lips and bad sores.
Those that are in the nose and its surroundings, and how to cauterize them: Have the patient sit before you and tighten their neck with a turban. Then turn their lips and look at the two veins which you can see, one on the right of the lip and the other on its left, observing their darkness.
This is also the case because around them are thin, dark veins which you should cut cleanly. If it is unclear to you and you do not know which one to choose, aim for the larger and more visible [vein]. Do likewise with the two veins in the lower lip.
As for the two veins under the tongue, cauterizing them after cauterizing the carotid arteries is beneficial for goiters that form in the throat due to diseases of the uvula and mouth. To do this, have the patient sit facing the sun between your hands; lift their tongue and look underneath on one side for a vein, and another on the opposite side. They will appear dark.
Cauterize them but be careful not to cut too deeply, as underneath are arteries and you may cause bleeding from these. As for the three veins that are commonly cauterized in the elbow among people, there are two methods of doing so.
You may either use a broad, basil- or olive-shaped lancet to pierce them gently, or else make an incision with a knife-like lancet. These are known as "nashal." [This is its depiction.] Illustration of the broad, basil-shaped lancet:
It should be broad as you see, suitable for opening the hollow veins that are full, prominent, and visible; those which contain thick, cloudy blood. This is an illustration of the olive-shaped lancet:
This scalpel is narrower and has a finer tip, suitable for lancing thin veins that contain thin, bile-based blood. This is an illustration of the 'neshl' scalpel.
This 'neshl' is suitable for incisions, and there are various types of it, wide or narrow according to the size of the veins as well as their tightness. Based on this one, others can be inferred; it's a well-known tool among craftsmen.
As for the 'basliq', which is one of these three veins, its benefit when lanced is that it drains blood from ailments beneath the throat and neck in the chest and abdomen region. The phlebotomist should be careful when lancing it and place it on a nearby neck, as underneath there is an artery; if they make a mistake and go too deep with the scalpel, they may sever that artery.
Should this happen and blood gushes out, it is important not to lance the 'basliq' with a standard scalpel but rather use an incision with the 'neshl'. If the 'basliq' is not clearly visible, one should avoid it and move on to another or request some of its branches.
Or you can lance the place of the 'arm-rope', as it is clear and you can make an incision with a 'neshl' scalpel as we mentioned before. If you wish to specifically lance the 'basliq', you should feel the area prior to tightening the arm so that you identify where the pulse is, then mark this place with ink.
Then you should bind the arm and make an incision with a curved 'neshl' scalpel as mentioned before, making sure that your strike is away from the position of the artery. Whenever you see a swelling at the place marked with ink when tightening the binding, this shows that it's an artery; therefore, avoid it.
If you see the blood, when it is let, springing up like a boy's urine and being thin and red, then know that it comes from an artery; at such a time press your finger on it for quite some while, then take off your finger; if the bleeding stops, it often does so. Then bind up the arm.
Leave it alone, and warn the patient not to neglect it; let him lie on his back and keep still for some days until he recovers. If the bleeding does not stop nor can you manage it, nor do any remedy occur to you at that moment then cut off the artery if it is visible to you; its two ends will contract and the blood will be checked.
Or take a pistachio shell, split it and get one half; bind this tightly over the spot where the artery is with bandages and rollers for another day: if bleeding stops, well and good; otherwise treat as already mentioned by applying drugs that stop haemorrhage: this is not difficult in most cases.
The spot where the wound is small and bandaging easy, let him know; but as for the cubital artery its benefit when opened is that it draws blood from head to foot because as we have said, it unites a branch of the basilic with one of the cefalic.
The cupper should stand at the patient's head while he is opening it, because beneath lies a nerve; if you go too deep with the lancet and wound this there will be numbness difficult to cure, or perhaps incurable: often enough this nerve can be felt.
If it is not easily seen in some people and the nerve is thin and indistinct, you should open the artery by making a slit with a needle, taking care to avoid the nerve as much as possible: if the artery lies between two nerves make a lengthwise cut along the course of the artery. As for the cefalic vein opening it has the effect of drawing blood from the head.
It is beneficial for eye diseases, and in this vein, specifically, if you wish to bleed it; make a small incision with an olive-shaped scalpel or with the broad basilic knife because it is safer than all other veins since there are no arteries or nerves underneath.
However, when bleeding, you should avoid the head of the muscle and aim for a softer spot; if it is not hit on the first strike, rebleeding several times does no harm unless it swells in some people if not bled on the first strike.
But that swelling does not harm it; as for the method of bleeding, its indications and what should be done beforehand to correct it, first you should know that bleeding is either used to maintain health only.
Or it is used in diseases; that which is used to maintain and sustain health, and as a precaution against the occurrence of illnesses, bleeding should be done on one of the three veins located at the elbow, namely the cephalic, radial, or basilic vein; and bleeding should be performed at the beginning of spring when signs of fullness appear.
Bleeding used for diseases has no specific time; it should be performed whenever needed, day or night.
It should not be performed on boys until they reach fourteen years of age, nor on the elderly who have exceeded sixty; if someone intends to bleed for any reason.
They should clean their bowels beforehand with a gentle enema if there is excessive retained waste, to prevent any noxious matter from being drawn into the veins during bleeding and harming the vital organs; nor should one who has eaten too much or is drunk be bled until these states pass.
Let cauterization also be avoided after an attack of diarrhea, vomiting, and debility; as well as excess in coitus, fatigue, exercise, watching, fasting, or anything that enfeebles the body or mind; then take care to thin out the humors if the blood is thick.
By means of food, drink and medicines if he can; then let him go to the bath unless there is some obstacle or let him take exercise so as to thin out his blood: let him have his bleeding done early in the day as we said before, taking care that on that day his mind shall be free from all bad humours.
such as cares, anger and fear; from all bodily symptoms such as excessive fatigue or debility and coition etc.; let him have in his room the things people are accustomed to use, such as different kinds of perfume, flowers and amusements etc., each one according to what he can.
Then the bleeder sits on a cushion which shall be higher than that on which the patient is sitting; then he takes out his arm and the bleeder rubs it two or three times with his hand, then ties on him the bandage by means of the thong, turning it twice or thrice, but let the tightness of the pressure not be excessive.
Because when the tightness is not moderate, if it is excessive then it prevents the blood from flowing; but if it is too loose, that also prevents the flow of blood: after being tightened he ought to rub his hands together.
Until the veins swell up and can be felt, then the bleeder wipes the lancet with a little old oil specially prepared for this; he then puts his index finger of his left hand on that same vein just below the part to be opened so as to prevent its turning aside, thus avoiding missing it. For some veins you will find them like tendons, retreating upon incision; and others are filled with wind. Whenever the scalpel is placed upon them they fall away from it, misleading the surgeon, and the vein is not opened by the knife. And even if it is opened, its opening will be narrow.
Therefore, the surgeon should be certain and deliberate in all these matters; then he should make an incision with the scalpel. If the vein opens on its first attempt, well and good; otherwise, he should try again a little lower or higher, swiftly, unless the place becomes swollen.
If it swells or the patient is distressed, leave him for a day or two and do not bind with a bandage; for this may bring on an acute swelling. He should not enter the bathhouse either. Then he can undergo venesection again if he wishes. If the scalpel goes in but the opening is small and the flow of blood thin,
And if you fear that the quantity of blood will not be what you require, return the scalpel to the same hole gently and directly; enlarge it a little more, doing this quickly before the place becomes swollen. For in many people swelling can occur from a small opening.
If you see that it has swollen, do not return to it at all; for this will be of no use. Put a little oil-salve upon it; for this facilitates the flow of blood and is better in such cases than pure oil or other ointments.
Use the oil-salve for all your venesections of veins when you find difficulty in obtaining a flow; and so also may theriaca or schauzenaia, if either is applied to the place: it will thin and dissolve blood that is thick.
If a large swelling occurs at the phlebotomy site, which happens frequently, especially for someone who has never bled before or if the vein opening is small, then immediately place over the swelling a sponge soaked in warm slightly salted water and compress it tightly for an hour; this will cause the swelling to subside.
You should do this after all the blood has been removed from that vein or another one; if some blackness or greenness remains at the site over subsequent days, it does no harm, but if you like, then apply some dissolved myrtle and saltpeter.
Or use some juice of mallow and the like; frequently, a swelling with a hard lump occurs during the phlebotomy of the basilic vein: place your hand over it; if you find that it yields when pressed then this is an ill-placed vein so be careful not to apply any of what has been mentioned above.
It may be that arterial blood is spouting from it, but bind it with something astringent to harden the site and then treat it with the rest of the treatment until it heals; you should remove as much blood for each person according to their strength and how dark their blood appears.
If the blood is dark, allow it to come out until it becomes red; likewise, if you find it thick then send it out until it thins and also if it is sharp let it flow until its sharpness subsides; one who is full of strength should have their blood removed all at once.
Someone strong should have the vein opening widened and a wide scalpel should be used; for someone weak, the reverse is true: it must be narrowed. You ought to remove blood in multiple sessions with the hole being narrow. The best thing to use when cutting into a vein is an oblique-angled chisel that cuts without puncturing.
This type of venesection is safe from bleeding and nerve damage, and it is the best and safest method compared to cutting across or lengthwise. For those who usually experience dizziness during venesection, they should eat something beforehand like bread soaked in grenadine or vinegar.
If the patient is emaciated and blood has been taken from them three or four times, then if they have a cool temperament, they should eat bread soaked in quince juice, or honey sweetened with spices, or basil wine before venesection.
If dizziness occurs during venesection and it is due to the excessive loss of blood, then the patient should be given meat broth and diluted basil wine. They should also use perfumes with musk, loosen their chest with it, and employ all other methods mentioned in the chapter on fainting.
For those wishing to invigorate their arm and improve blood circulation, if venesection is performed for extensive purging and the patient's strength is weak, then the blood should be released gradually in small amounts according to their strength over several days.
If someone wants to invigorate their arm and improve blood circulation again, but has a strong physique, then they should do so seven or nine hours after the first venesection. For those who wish to draw blood from one part of their body to another, it is best to wait until the second or third day.
If there is an excess of hot and agitated blood in the body, which has caused a fever, then it should be extracted all at once, removing as much as possible by widening the incision until dizziness occurs, but only after examining all other conditions for venesection. And place your hand on his pulse while the blood flows, lest death should occur in the place of fainting; this often happens if the phlebotomist is ignorant and heedless. It is not appropriate when you wish to loosen the arm and allow the blood to flow again.
If the vein's mouth is closed and the blood does not flow easily, you should pinch it firmly or twist strongly; this is very harmful. Instead, either leave it until phlebotomy can be done again, or remove with a scalpel blade whatever congealed blood there may be in the mouth of the vein.
Or apply to it something of salt dissolved in water, or apply to it something of the 'triac typicum' or 'schizophragma', and pinch it gently until the blood comes out; if the vein has swollen, then leave it.
Do not touch it until the swelling subsides; if the need arises to let blood again, and there is no alternative, either phlebotomize above that place or in the other arm or in the other vein.
As for the phlebotomy of 'nodus cubiti', it is done instead from the radial and ulnar arteries if these are not found or are hidden, since it is composed of them; the method of phlebotomy here is that the patient should immerse his hand in warm water until the forearm turns red and the vein becomes clearly visible, then a ligature is applied above with moderate force.
Then phlebotomize the vein with a slight oblique cut, neither across nor along it; let the incision be wide and perform this above the wrist-joint somewhat; if the blood does not flow then return the hand to the vessel of warm water and allow the blood to run into the water.
Until you achieve your goal, if it is during the summer days, you may dispense with re-immersing the hand in warm water. The flow of blood is facilitated more by warm water during winter times. And the phlebotomy from this vein is safer than all others. Because there is no pulsating vein nor nerve underneath it, and phlebotomy from the basilic vein of the right hand benefits liver ailments. The procedure for this phlebotomy: you should bind the wrist with a bandage or hold it in your hand after immersing it in warm water until the vein swells.
Because there is no pulsating vein nor nerve underneath it, and phlebotomy from the basilic vein of the right hand benefits liver ailments. The procedure for this phlebotomy: you should bind the wrist with a bandage or hold it in your hand after immersing it in warm water until the vein swells. This will be confirmed by touch; then you phlebotomize it a little sideways, and if you cut it completely, that would not harm him in any way. Be cautious to not over-incise your hand with the lancet because underneath is the nerve of the fingers and the place is bare of flesh, then return the hand to warm water.
And let it bleed out as much blood as possible, for if you do not return the hand to warm water, the blood will coagulate at the vein's mouth and prevent bleeding. When enough blood has been extracted, apply ointment and salt on the vein so that it does not heal quickly.
The same should be done for every narrow vein, and as for the benefit of phlebotomizing from the left hand, it is beneficial to ailments of the spleen; you do its phlebotomy exactly like the second one, and as for the great saphenous vein, its phlebotomy benefits diseases in the lower body such as uterus disorders.
Such as amenorrhea, kidney diseases, chronic ulcers of the thigh and leg, and their like, you should immerse one's foot in warm water and massage it until the veins fill up with blood; then bind above the ankle with a bandage, the vein being located at the heel towards the big toe.
It has many branches on the face of the man, so open it in its widest branch or near the heel at its junction; this is better and safer. If you open it on the face of the man, then be cautious of the nerves that are underneath.
Make your opening like a slight slant, as if you want to amputate it; and let the scalpel be sharp. If the blood does not come out easily, then immerse his leg in hot water and leave the blood flowing until it is finished. If the opener misses the vein with the first cut,
If necessary, return with the opening a little higher; this place is safe and there is no danger if you are cautious of the nerve as we said before. And so you should do likewise to the saphenous vein on the other leg too, equally. As for the sciatic vein, its location is at the heel, from the outer side.
The benefit of opening it for hip pain, when that is due to hot blood, and the method of opening: have the patient enter a warm bath quickly; pull their leg taut from the hip to four fingers above the heel, then bind it tightly with a long thin bandage, as without this it will not be apparent.
Once it is visible, open it in any way that you see fit: a slight slant is better; or else amputate it completely; or cut it deeply. The place is safe and for the most part very hidden in people, so if you do not find it...
And if it is not apparent to the touch, then open one of its branches: those that appear on the back of the foot towards the little toe and ring finger; be cautious of nerves. And release as much blood as you wish.
Then loosen the binding and place some cotton wool on the venesection site, then bind the area again; it will heal quickly.
Chapter 66.
On cupping, and the way to use it.
Cupping devices may be made from horns, wood, copper and glass; cupping can be performed in two ways: the first is traditional cupping with bloodletting, the second is dry cupping without any incisions.
This form of dry cupping can be done in two ways.
These also include: 'akhadain', which is on both sides of the neck, 'al-dhagn', which is under the lower jaw, 'al-kathin', which is at the shoulder, 'al-'a'az', which is above the tailbone, 'al-zandain', which is in the middle of the forearm, 'as-saqain', which is on the shin bone and 'al-'urqubin', which is below the calf muscle.
Cupping attracts blood from the small vessels that are spread throughout the flesh; for this reason, it does not cause the same weakness as venesection and cupping should never be used, whether with or without fire, in any disease that arises due to excess until the whole body has been purged.
If necessary, for any disease or condition, cupping can be performed at any time: at the beginning of the month, in the middle and towards the end.
For some people, when there is an excess of blood and it needs to be extracted through cupping, they experience a heaviness and headache in their head. Others may notice fullness and redness in their face, head, and neck. Some might feel itching on their face, jawline, and eyes, while others experience darkness and soreness in their eyes. There are also those who scratch at the site of cupping.
Some people laugh a lot, while others taste blood in their mouth, experience bleeding gums, and spit out blood. There are also those who sleep excessively, and some see blood, redness, killings, wounds, or similar things in their dreams. When we notice any of these signs...
Especially if it occurs in the middle third of the month, we then advise cupping after two or three hours have passed during the day. As for the benefit of cupping at the nape, it is helpful for relieving heaviness in the head and excess fluid flowing to the eyes.
However, it is important that this procedure is done after the body has been thoroughly purged. This cupping can be an alternative to venesection at the temple. It should be avoided by those with a cold brain or who have a cold due to the risk of great harm.
For this reason, it should not be used by the elderly or those with cold ailments in their head. Those who use it excessively may experience forgetfulness.
So, it is advisable to instruct the cupper to lower their hand slightly with the cup to avoid causing forgetfulness. As for cupping at the scapula, it serves as an alternative to venesection at the radial and median cubital veins.
Therefore, it is beneficial for asthma, shortness of breath, respiratory distress, coughing, and fullness. The cupping at the scapula should be slightly elevated because if it is placed lower, it can cause weakness in the heart and stomach.
Cupping of the carotid regions is beneficial for pains occurring in the head, ophthalmia, migraine, quinsy, and toothache, serving as an alternative to venesection of the basilic vein. You should instruct the cupper not to go deep with the incision lest they sever an artery and cause bleeding.
Cupping under the chin is beneficial for thrush in the mouth, gum disease, and similar ailments of the mouth, and may serve as an alternative to venesection of the veins on the lips. Cupping of the shoulders is useful for palpitations resulting from fullness and heat.
Cupping of the volar aspect of the forearm is beneficial for the same conditions as venesection of the basilic, median antebrachial, and cephalic veins because it draws blood from all those thinner vessels in the flesh and draws those thin vessels from other thicker ones until the draw reaches the three thickest veins.
You should instruct the cupper not to go too deep with the incision because the area is devoid of muscle and contains nerves and arteries underneath. As for single-scar cupping on the coccyx, it is beneficial for haemorrhoids in the anus and ulcers below.
You should instruct the cupper to use a large cup made of copper because the area requires strong suction, and perhaps a glass cup would break and cause multiple incisions. As for cupping on the legs, it noticeably reduces fullness.
Because it draws blood from the entire body and is beneficial for chronic pains in the kidneys, uterus, and bladder, induces menstruation, is useful for pustules and boils, and may serve as an alternative to venesection of the lesser saphenous and greater saphenous veins except that it greatly weakens the body, causing most people to faint. Cupping on the calcanei has similar benefits to cupping on the legs.
The method of applying cups is to first place the cup empty and then suck it with a moderate amount of suction. Do not keep the cups in place for too long, but rather place them quickly and remove them swiftly so that the humors are drawn towards the site evenly. Continue to repeat this process until you see the area turn red and open up.
When the blood appears red, make an incision and resume suctioning gently. Then consider the condition of the bodies; for those with soft flesh and porous skin, it is advisable to only make one incision, lest the site becomes ulcerated.
Instruct the cupper to widen and deepen the incision slightly, and adjust the suction gently with a light massage; if there is any thickness in the blood, it should be cut twice - once to open a path for the thin blood and its water content, and then again to extract the thick blood.
If the blood is very cloudy, repeat the incision a third time to reach the maximum amount of extraction. In general, if we want to extract only a small amount of blood, one cut will suffice; but for more significant amounts of blood, we make multiple incisions, especially if we suspect that it is thick.
It is advisable to make a deep incision, with the limit being the depth of the skin itself. We must consider which oils should be used when applying cups and what waters and precautions the cupped one should take. For those with thick, hard, dry skin and narrow pores...
The sites for cupping should be anointed with oils that are opening, softening, and dissolving. In summer, for example, oils such as marjoram oil, violet oil, sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil.
If it is winter, use oils such as narcissus oil, iris oil, chamomile oil, or lily oil. If the excess [substance] is thick and cold, then let the oil be marjoram oil, dittany oil, pine oil, or chervil oil.
If the patient has wide pores and soft flesh, they should avoid oil. These individuals should wash their cupping sites after cupping with rose water, cold water, currant juice, squash water, purslane water, or similar liquids. For those whose blood is particularly moist...
For those whose excess [substance] is thick, their cupping sites should be washed with vinegar, myrtle water, or sumac water and the like. As for patients with thick phlegm, their cupping sites should be washed with old wine, marjoram water, chervil broth, chamomile water, and so on. Cupping must be avoided in the bathhouse and immediately after a bath.
Instead, it should be done an hour or two after leaving the bathhouse. One must not sleep after cupping. What patients should do to prepare for and recover from venesection and cupping.
First, one must examine the patient. If they are choleric and their blood is predominantly sharp and inflammatory, they should take cooling substances like pomegranates, dandelions with vinegar, lettuce, vinegarsyrup, juleps, and similar items. Their diet should consist of capons, lamb meat in a thin sauce, sour dishes, and the like.
For those of a cold temperament, they should drink mead, mibon wine, or Byzantine vinegar-syrup and take fragrant medium-aged wines that are neither too old nor new. They must be instructed to eat less and make sparrows, quail, young pigeons in thin sauce, and the like their staple food. On cupping day, drinks should be more plentiful than food.
It may be necessary to give some people, at certain times, an antidote known as the 'Farouq treacle,' or a remedy made from musk or chelidonium, either before cupping [therapy] or before and after venesection in order to fortify the vital organs and thin out the blood. This should not be given to those suffering from fever.
The cupping glasses that are used without incisions are those placed on the liver, spleen, breasts, abdomen, navel, kidney area, and hip joints. This is because these organs cannot withstand being cut into; instead, they are meant to draw blood from one organ to another.
When we place the cupping glass on the breasts for nosebleeds, or use it to release cold air that has become trapped in an organ by placing the cupping glass on the abdomen and navel, it breaks down and warms the organ while relieving pain due to its ability to dissipate that cold air.
It can be placed on the kidneys if there is a blockage or stone present, as its strong suction may open the blockage or dislodge the stone from its position. Similarly, it is used on the liver and spleen when there is an accumulation of wind [gas] in these organs. These cupping glasses can be used empty with just suction.
It can be used with fire, and it can also be used filled with warm water for cases of sciatica. The cupping glass should be large and filled with hot water alone or with water in which certain suitable herbs have been boiled.
It is then placed filled on the affected area, held in place for a time, and removed to be reapplied as needed. This is an illustration of the cupping glass used with fire:" [Insert image caption here]
Its mouth should be two open fingers wide as illustrated, and its depth is half a palm length. On one side, about halfway up, there should be a small hole the size of an inserted needle. It can be made from tin or yellow brass with thick edges.
It should be smooth, flat and polished so as not to harm the organ when placed on it. At its center is a crossbar of brass or iron where the candle with fire is put. This cup can also be made larger than what has been described above or smaller according to the disease.
The teeth of the user should be taken into account: bleeding cups for boys and thin people differ from those for men with large physiques. As for how to place this cup with fire on the organ, you should light a wick with fire made of tight cotton or a small candle of pitch, placing it at the center of the hardened penis inside the cup.
This should cause the fire to rise upwards towards the bottom of the cup so that the patient's body is not burned. Then place it on the organ with your finger over the hole we mentioned, and when you hold the cup in place, you will no longer need to keep your finger there.
Steam will then escape through that hole, and the cup will loosen up where it is placed. Relight the wick in the same way as before and return it if needed. For cups used to treat shoucha disease with water, there's no need for a hardened penis or a hole.
It is used by filling it with water and placing it on the organ only. This is an illustration of its shape: [IMAGE CAPTION]
The larger these cups are, the better they will be at holding more water.
Chapter Seventy-Seven.
On the use of leeches.
Leeches are mostly used in cases where it is not possible to apply cupping glasses, either due to the small size of the area, such as the lip, gums, and similar parts, or because the affected member is devoid of flesh, like fingers, nose, and so on.
The procedure for using leeches is as follows: Select those that are found in fresh, clean water free from contamination, and then leave them for a day and night in fresh water so they become hungry with nothing remaining in their stomachs. Then the body should be purged, either by venesection or cupping, and the affected member wiped clean.
Once the skin turns red, apply the leech to the area, and when it is full, it will drop off. If possible, suck the spot with a cupping glass as this enhances its benefit; otherwise, wash the area first with vinegar then water and massage, squeezing it gently. Should blood continue to flow after the removal of the leech so that it becomes profuse, dip a piece of linen cloth in cold water.
Place the cloth above it until the oozing stops; if there is an excess of blood, sprinkle powdered zinc oxide, oak gall or similar astringents on the area to stop the bleeding, or apply peeled broad bean halves to the spot.
Leave it there until the broad bean sticks to the area, whereupon bleeding stops; and if a second application of leeches is necessary, do not use the same ones but others if possible because they may refuse to attach themselves. If this happens, wipe the spot with fresh blood.
Push a needle into the location until it draws out some blood, then place [the plaster]. If you feel any sign of blood, it will adhere to its position. When you wish to remove it, sprinkle some aloe, salt or ash on it and it shall come off.
Chapter Three.
In algebra.
This chapter is also useful for what is needed in the practice of medicine, which is setting fractures and dislocations occurring in bones.
Know, my sons, that this chapter is claimed by the ignorant among physicians and laymen and those who have never browsed an ancient book on the subject nor read a single letter of it.
And for this reason, this branch of knowledge has become non-existent in our country and I have never encountered a single expert on it. I have derived what I know from it by reading the books of ancient authors for a long time and striving to understand them until I extracted that knowledge from them, then I stuck with experimenting and practicing throughout my life.
And so in this chapter I have illustrated for you everything that my knowledge encompasses [on the subject]. And upon it my experience has gone after I have brought it close to you, purified it from the intricacies of length and abbreviated it to its utmost limit, clarified it to its utmost clarity, and illustrated for you numerous pictures of devices used in it.
For it is from the utmost clarity, as I did in the previous chapters, and there is no strength except through Allah, the Exalted, the Magnificent.
Chapter One.
There are concise phrases and general principles regarding bone fractures, which must be presented first. Before we begin to discuss the individual fractured or dislocated body parts one by one, it is necessary that we mention, at the beginning of this section, some statements and chapters. It is imperative that you, and anyone else keen to learn this noble profession, first understand and grasp the true meaning of these statements.
Thus, I say that whenever a fracture or dislocation occurs in any body part, one should act swiftly and first proceed to apply cupping, administer laxatives, or both together. Unless there is an impediment, such as weakness or if the person with the injury is a child or an elderly person, or the weather conditions are extremely hot or very cold.
Then, the patient's diet should be restricted to cold pulses, fowl meat and goat meat, while avoiding drinking, fatty meats and overindulgence in food. All foods that fill up the veins with blood must also be avoided until the swelling subsides and there is no fear of a build-up of fluid in the affected area.
Once the broken bone has started to heal, the patient should return to their normal diet and eat more nutritious foods that are fatty and filling with a sticky texture such as porridge, rice, heads, trotters and cow's stomachs. Eggs, soft fish and fatty drinks should also be consumed as well as other similar foods. This regimen will ensure that the bone fracture heals faster and better. Remember that broken bones in young men or elderly people can never fully heal to their original state.
Their bones are thin and tough, and sometimes the most delicate and softest of bones, like those of small children, may join together and fuse. However, nature produces a substance resembling glue on all sides of the broken bone; this is thick and sticky, joining and knitting the pieces together so that they adhere to each other.
It binds the bone pieces together until they become as strong and secure as they originally were, so that nothing hinders its functions.
This is why the patient's diet should include foods that are nourishing, sticky, and thick, as we have mentioned. Understand that fractures can vary according to the affected body part, for a broken leg differs from a broken head, and a broken chest bone differs from a broken back.
Similarly, all other body parts differ from each other, and we will discuss each type of fracture separately in its respective section, explaining them distinctly. The nature of a bone fracture can also vary within the bone itself.
It may be a simple fracture without splintering, or it could be a longitudinal fracture with splinters and protruding fragments. The bone could also be fractured with an open wound piercing the skin, or it might be a minor fissure.
Each type of fracture requires a specific technique for its reduction, as will be detailed in the respective sections. One can identify a broken bone by its deformity, swelling, sensory perception, and the sound it makes when gently prodded with one's hand.
If there is no obvious deformity, no sound upon gentle probing, the patient does not sense any disturbance when the bone is palpated, and they experience minimal pain, then it is unlikely to be a fracture; instead, it may be a sprain or mild fissure that should not be manipulated by stretching or prodding at all.
Then apply to it the medicines, which shall be mentioned later on, that are appropriate for such a place and bind them gently; know also that when bone breaks in two without splintering but is simply separated into two parts, each part becoming quite distinct from the other.
You should proceed at once to set it and straighten it before any hot swelling occurs; but if a hot swelling does occur, leave it for several days until the hot swelling subsides then smoothen it in whatever way you can with gentleness and ingenuity.
Know that its setting and straightening is easier than in the case of bone with splinters; it should then be bound as shall be mentioned later on. If there are splinters, however, the broken limb must necessarily be stretched out from both sides, whether hand or foot.
Either with your hands if the limb is small or else with two ropes, or with a rope and hand; be sure to place the limb on an even surface in its normal position so that when the broken bone extends you can then proceed to put those extra bits back into their places with whatever ingenuity and gentleness you are capable of.
Take every precaution against inflicting pain and hurt on your patient by what you do; exert yourself to bring the two parts of bone together in their best possible position, and at that time feel them with your hand and palpate them; if you find anything out of place set it right and straighten it as far as you are able.
Beware of too violent stretching and strong twisting as many an ignorant practitioner does, causing thereby either a hot swelling or permanent injury to the limb, which I have seen happen repeatedly from their treatment.
Then, after smoothing and perfecting the incision and securing it tightly, ensure that this limb remains still and at rest. Warn the patient not to move it while awake or asleep, nor when turning over, experiencing discomfort, defecating, or during any other movements they may perform.
For if they feel any pain or discomfort in this position, have them move to another position where there is no pain; but let that new position be one of equilibrium and straightness.
Lest the limb become crooked when healed, and as for how to secure a broken limb, know that these broken limbs differ in their size, shape, and form; those which are small like an arm, finger or forearm.
Then the bandages should be soft and gentle for small limbs; but for large ones like a thigh, back or chest, the bandages must be wide and strong because a broad binding keeps the limb in place and provides an even pressure from all sides without any weakness.
And after you have finished smoothing the edges, begin to apply the appropriate coating. With a gentle yet firm motion, apply the appropriate coating to the broken area; then start wrapping the bandage around this area three or four times, depending on the limb's requirements; tighten it slightly with the bandage and continue upwards towards the upper end of the break.
Tighten it less than at the broken area, and continue wrapping further away from this point; gradually relax your grip on the bandage so that you achieve a comfortable tightness when you reach the correct spot above the break; then take another strip of cloth, wrap it around the break too.
Wrap the bandages and then take the wrap to the lower side of the fracture. Your action in tightening and loosening the wrap should be as we mentioned for the first upper one. Then place between the bandages some soft padding or cloth that evens out the angle of the fracture.
If there is no deformity, put nothing in it; then wrap it with another bandage and place on these wraps the splints, tight ones from your kit, if the limb has neither swelling nor hot inflammation.
If there is swelling or hot inflammation, apply something to reduce the swelling and eliminate the pain; leave it for a few days then bind on the splints when you do so. The splints should be made of broad halves of reed, carefully prepared, or they may be of grid wood.
which are made of pine, palm leaves, heath or elecampane and the like, whatever is available of this sort; and let each splint be of this width and shape.
except that the splint which is placed directly on the fracture should be slightly thicker and wider than the other splints. As for the length of the splint, it should be made according to what suits the broken limb in terms of its size, large or small. Illustration of a splint: [illustration]
Then bind the splints with another bandage, exactly as you did before; and tie over it firmly with thread as we mentioned, that is, make the binding tighter at the site of the fracture. And the further away from the fracture, the less tight the binding should be.
The threads should be of moderate thickness and fineness, and they should be made from damp linen especially, for if the thread is thick as I have seen those who are ignorant do with their threads which consist of folded strips of linenthis is a great mistake.
Because with it you pull too far from the center, and fine threads are also unsuitable because you cannot tighten them as much as desired; nor should there be less than a finger's breadth between splints.
If the patient is injured by the splint ends after being tightened in the correct places, then put underneath it soft padding or fluffed-up wool so that nothing hurts him from this; and as for when there is a fracture along with a wound and the skin has been pierced, we shall come to its treatment separately.
Be aware that not every broken member should be tightened with splints from the very first day, because if the limb is large you should not apply splints to it until after five or seven days, or even more according to how much security there may be against hot swelling.
This is the description of the bandages used by former doctors for setting fractures, dislocations and contusions: a simple, brief dressing that sets the fracture and can be applied to most temperaments, especially children and women since it neither tends towards heat nor cold.
That is, you take flour dust which is the bran that sticks to the walls of a mill when it grinds and mix it as it is without sifting with egg white; make your dough neither thick nor thin, then use this.
Another plaster dressing to set fractures, dislocations and contusions: Take mastic, ladanum, acacia, resin, galbanum, aspalathus, each ten drachms; myrrh and aloe, each five drachms; juniper berries twenty drachms; Armenian or Roman clay, twenty drachms. All the ingredients are pounded and mixed with juniper water, or with raw egg white if the patient is in a hot condition; this plaster dressing may then be used. It has an excellent composition: it sets broken bones quickly and suits most people due to its moderate nature.
Another plaster dressing that is also beneficial for fractures and contusions: Take galbanum, mastic and white marshmallow, each ten drachms; myrrh and aloe, each five drachms; acacia six drachms; Armenian clay twenty drachms. All ingredients are finely pounded, sifted and mixed with water or raw egg white to form a plaster which may then be applied.
A plaster dressing for joints and bones that have come out of place, to alleviate the associated pain and also useful for splitting and breaking of bone: Take white wool which has been treated with sulphur, immerse in vinegar and cooked oil then apply to the affected area; this plaster does not possess strong binding qualities.
However, it is excellent in reducing hot swellings and alleviating pain specifically; another plaster dressing to set broken bones: Take the leaves of the fig-mulberry tree and the leaves of the wild poppy, pound both together then apply while still moist as a plaster dressing. Another simplified plaster dressing for use once bone has been set.
If you wish to disperse the remaining swelling, take marshmallow root, chamomile flower heads and violet buds; mix with caraway seed flour in equal parts, pound together then form a plaster using linseed as a binder if the affected member is not hot, otherwise use coriander water or plain water. Apply this plaster.
Description of another bandage, more effective in inducing suppuration than the first one, to be used when a hard swelling occurs at the site of bone healing: take marshmallow root, flax seed, fenugreek, crown of the king, marjoram, violet flowers, and chamomile; of each, [take] one part.
All [ingredients] are pounded and mixed with lye water or fresh water, or with an ointment, depending on the warmth of the limb and the activity of its heat; however, Hippocrates did not mention in his book that it should be placed on a broken limb when setting it.
Except for the caustic plaster made from wax and oil alone, and described as having an average thickness between thick and thin; Galen recommended that things containing drying agents with some warmth, such as myrrh, aloe, frankincense, and similar to what we mentioned, should be placed on a broken limb when setting it.
Description of a bandage beneficial for weakness and pain: take [a] bean pod, chickpeas, human hair cut fine or feathers of a bird, marshmallow root, and salt in equal parts; pound them and sieve, then mix and apply as a bandage. As regards the amount that the bandage should overlap...
Then [you] undo it; the way to do so is as follows: if there occurs in the patient no pain, itching, or movement of the broken bone from its position then do not remove it for many days. But if there occurs at that place severe itching, painful discomfort, or swelling...
Then proceed to undo it immediately and do not delay that at all; remove the bandage from him, then take a soft cloth or sponge soaked in water at room temperature, dip them into lukewarm water, and wash the place until the itching calms down and the pain subsides. Then leave the limb to rest for an hour.
Then cover it with yellowed wool soaked in vinegar, oil, or rose water; bind it there for a night until you feel safe from hot swelling and the member's inflation subsides and its pain goes away. Then return to gentle compression and light dressing, but not as tight as before.
Treat it gently until it heals; if you see that the swelling, redness, pain and inflammation have all gone as they should and you need to dress and compress again then do so just as first. If nothing of what we've mentioned happens in the member.
Then do not remove it except after three, four, five or seven days - perhaps even twenty; all that depends on how the member appears to you as we said until if necessary the bone will be reset and close to knitting.
Increase the compression further than your first attempts and increase greatly the diet of the sick person compared to what was mentioned before; if you see that the fracture site has dried out and wasted more than it should then know that nourishment is prevented from reaching there.
Then wash it with warm water every time you remove the dressing; do that every three days and ease off on the compression slightly: by this action nourishment is brought to the member and it will heal quickly. As for what the ignorant bone setters do, of breaking the member again...
If it did not knit in the first place as should be and is set crooked then that is an error on their part: a great risk! Even if this were correct, the ancients would have mentioned it in their books and I would see some trace of it there - but I do not. And it is correct that this should not be performed.
Chapter Two.
Regarding a simple fracture of the head.
Simple fractures of the head are numerous in type, varied in shape and manifold in cause. Some result from a sword blow; it may be that the bone is completely shattered down to the membrane beneath. As an axe does in wood.
This kind is called an axial fracture, or *falamand*, and the wound may be large or small. Alternatively, the sword may only cut partway through the bone, shattering its surface but not cutting all the way through; this type of fracture is known as avulsion, or *intiz'a*. Again, the resulting injury could be either extensive or minor.
Some fractures are comminuted or depressed, resulting from a blow with a stone, a fall onto one, or the like; they may nearly penetrate to the membrane beneath, or be confined to the surface of the bone.
The wounds caused by these fractures may again be large or small; there are also minute, hairline fractures of the bone.
This type is called a hairline fracture, *sha'riyyah*. Other fractures result from a fall or blow with a stone and so on; the bone may be driven inward, creating a depression like that seen in a brass pot struck by a blow.
Such fractures are most often found in the skulls of children, whose bones are softer; as with other types, fragments may or may not be present, and we shall discuss treatment in due course. All varieties can be identified by careful examination.
Inspect it with probes and remove the rotten flesh from it, and as for the hairy type, you know that by exposing the bone and wiping and smearing it with ink; then the fracture appears black. And as for treating the fracture, first examine the symptoms of the patient.
If you see in his symptoms something that clearly indicates fear, such as vomiting bile and stretching out, loss of reason, loss of voice, fainting, acute fever, bulging and redness of the eyes, and other similar symptoms, then do not approach the patient or treat him; for death will surely befall him with these symptoms in most cases.
And if you see symptoms that do not alarm you, and expect him to recover, then begin his treatment; for when the wounded comes to you soon after being injured on a winter's day...
You should strive to remove the bone before the fourteenth day in any case; and if it is during the summer, you must hasten to extract the bone before the seventh day, lest what lies beneath the bone membrane spoils, exposing him to the symptoms we have described.
If the bone fracture has reached the membrane that covers the brain, and is accompanied by a crushed and bruised bone, then you must cut away the crushed and injured portion as I describe to you: shave the head of the wounded patient.
Then expose the bone in whatever way is feasible and according to the shape of the wound, considering what will be easiest on the patient. If you encounter bleeding or hot swelling during the process of exposing the bone, then treat it accordingly.
Stuff the wound with cloths soaked in wine and rose oil, then dress it until the swelling subsides and the bleeding stops. Then proceed to scrape the bone and extract it; this is done using one of two methods.
As for one surface, it is that you cut the bone with a delicate, narrow-bladed saw, and this is its image: .
Then you use another saw after this one, slightly wider, and this is its image: .
Then you also use another saw, even wider than the second one, and it should be that you have several different saws, some wider than others, and some shorter than others, and they must be very sharp at their edges, and they can be made of Indian iron or good steel.
Use gentle strokes with the saw to avoid shaking and injuring the head, but if the bone is strong and hard, you should drill around it before using the saws with drills they call non-diving drills, though they are called non-diving because they do not go deep.
Because they do not penetrate beyond the limit of the cranial bone to what is behind it, due to the drill having a rounded edge below its sharp tip, like a ring or small circle, which prevents it from diving and going beyond the thickness of the bone.
You should have a large number of these drills, each suitable for the thickness of that bone, so you are prepared with a drill for every skull, whose sharp tip matches the length and thickness of that skull in proportion. Here is an image depicting three types. Of drills: large, medium, and small.
As for the method of drilling around a broken bone, you place the drill on the bone and turn it with your fingers until you feel that the bone has been penetrated, then move the drill to another spot, leaving a distance between each hole equal to the thickness of a rod or something similar.
You then cut with the cutters between each pair of holes, doing this as gently as possible, as we said, until you remove all the bone either by hand or using some other instrument that you have prepared for it.
Like the gentle scissors and forceps, you should be very careful that the drill or cutters do not touch any of the peritoneum; once you have drilled through the bone and separated it from the peritoneum if it was attached to it, and removed it then you need to strip it.
Any roughness that remains in the bone should be smoothed with another instrument similar to the cutters but it must be thinner and more delicate than the rest of them; if any small bones or fragments remain, remove them gently using an instrument you have available for this purpose.
You then treat the wound using sutures and ointments which will be described later; the other method of treatment is quite straightforward with no risk, Galen mentioned it and praised it greatly: this is what he said... You should begin by exposing the bone at that part of the fracture which is most prominent, then once you have exposed it place the tip of this lens-shaped cutter underneath; here is an image of it:
The lens-shaped part should be smooth, not cutting anything; the sharp part should have sides that go lengthwise as you see in the image so that the lens-shaped part is resting on the peritoneum and the sharp edge of the cutter is facing towards the bone; then you hit the cutter from one side.
With a small hammer, you cut through all of the bone gradually while staying clear of the peritoneum so that it does not suffer any damage at all; even if the surgeon is the most inexperienced or nervous person and was feeling drowsy!
If any part of the membrane remains attached to the bone in some places, scrape it off with the edge of the same lens-shaped cutter and remove it carefully as it will come away without harm or fear.
If the bone fracture does not penetrate the membrane and only a part of it has been broken off, leaving roughness and small fragments behind, you should smooth out that roughness and remove those fragments with fine chisels of different sizes that have been prepared for this purpose so that you can use in each case the one most suitable and effective according to what your work demands.
And in treating the same broken bone, you should first use on it the widest of these chisels to smooth it, then use one narrower than that and continue doing this until you come to using the narrowest and thinnest ones.
As for other small cracks and fine fractures, you should treat each one according to what is best for its healing; this is something that will not escape the attention of anyone who has even a basic knowledge in this art after having read our explanations concerning major fractures.
If the membrane remains exposed after you have removed the bone, you should take a piece of linen cloth large enough to cover the wound and dip it in rose oil; then place this over the opening of the wound before covering it with another folded piece of cloth, triangular or otherwise. Dip it in wine and rose oil, then place it on top of the first piece of cloth; do this as gently as you can so that you do not burden the membrane any further before applying a wide bandage over these without tying it too tightly - just enough to keep the wound closed.
Leave it with this treatment for a day or two until you are certain the hot swelling has subsided, then loosen it and use afterwards the medicines that accompany it such as iris roots, carline thistle flour, benzoin powder, hellebore and similar substances by making powders from these remedies.
Sprinkle the powder dry on the wound, and generally use a remedy that cleanses without causing irritation; make every effort to ensure your treatment of the wound is clean with no greasy residue or dirt, and never allow pus to accumulate.
Because pus, if it gathers on the membrane of the brain, corrupts and putrefies it; this causes great harm to the patient. It may also occur in the lining of the head when bone is exposed there, especially if treatment is neglected.
If you see blackening on the surface of the wound and the patient displays symptoms as mentioned, know that death is certain; unless this blackening has been caused by a medicine applied to it with the power to cause such discoloration.
You should take one part honey and three parts rose oil, mix them well and use a cloth to apply it; then treat the lining with appropriate treatment until healed.
Chapter Three.
On setting a broken nose.
Know that only the upper segments of the nose can break, or one of them individually because they are bone; whereas the lower part is cartilaginous and cannot break, but may become bruised, bent or flattened.
If one side is broken, you should insert your little finger into the nostril and straighten that break from inside with your index finger and thumb on the outside until the nose returns to its natural shape. Do this gently and be careful not to cause any pain to the patient.
If the break is at the top of the nose and you cannot reach it with your finger, it should be straightened with a slightly thick rod. If the break occurs on both sides, do the same. Hurry to fix it within the first day after the fracture.
If you can't do it immediately, wait until after the seventh or tenth day when the hot swelling has subsided. Then insert a wick made of linen cloth into the nostril; use one wick for a single-sided break and two wicks for a double-sided break.
The wicks should be thick enough to fill the nostril. Some early practitioners of this method recommend wetting the wicks with butter and changing them daily, but I do not agree with that; instead, the wicks should be soaked in a mixture of egg whites and flour.
Leave the wicks in place until the bone heals and the cartilage hardens. You can also insert into the nose, at the location of the wick, a tube made from goose feathers wrapped with soft cloth; this will help hold the broken nose more firmly in place without obstructing the patient's breathing.
This step is not strictly necessary, but you may do it if you wish: make a tube from the wicks themselves. If during treatment the nose becomes swollen, apply to it a bandage soaked in aloes or cotton dipped in vinegar and rose oil, or some other suitable ointment.
If there is no hot swelling, you should treat it externally with finely ground semolina and myrrh powder mixed with egg whites. Then place a soft dressing on top of it without binding the nose at all, especially if the nasal bones are broken into small pieces.
If it is shattered, you should make an incision and extract the pieces using the appropriate instrument; then stitch up the wound and treat it with a suitable ointment that will fuse and heal it. If there is a wound inside the nose, you should use cauterization and employ lead tubes for treatment. Until it heals.
Chapter Four.
On setting fractures of the lower jaw if it is broken.
If the lower jaw is broken without an open wound and if it is broken from outside only, not in two pieces with inward depression, recognizing such a fracture is easy.
If the fracture is on the right side, you should insert your left index finger into the patient's mouth; and if it is on the left side, then use your right index finger to lift the fracture gently from inside out.
If the jaw is broken in two, you should use traction from both sides to align it until its straightened; If there are injuries to the teeth as well.
If the teeth are also dislocated, you should extract any loose ones with a golden, silver or silk thread; then apply gold chloride to the fractured jaw and place on top of it a folded cloth and a large splint secured tightly or a piece of leather as long as the jaw itself. Then bind it from above in whatever way seems suitable to you, and tighten the binding so that it does not come undone; instruct the patient to be gentle and calm, and make their food soft porridges; if you suspect any change in shape, no matter how slight, immediately untie the bandages on the third day.
Then bind it from above in whatever way seems suitable to you, and tighten the binding so that it does not come undone; instruct the patient to be gentle and calm, and make their food soft porridges; if you suspect any change in shape, no matter how slight, immediately untie the bandages on the third day. Then repair the dressing with flour from a millstone along with egg whites or fine semolina, after removing the splint; place on the bandage soft lint pads; as long as it stays attached and there is no change in the condition of the bone, leave it be.
Do not remove it until the fracture heals and is fully mended, for often this type of break will mend in three weeks; should inflammation occur during that period, use the methods we have mentioned repeatedly to treat it, so as to reduce the swelling.
If the break is accompanied by a wound, examine it; if there are small pieces of bone or fragments protruding from the wound, carefully extract them using whatever instrument seems appropriate to you; should the mouth of the wound be narrow, widen it with a scalpel according to your needs.
Once you have extracted those fragments and there is nothing left, suture the mouth of the wound if it is wide; otherwise, apply one of the ointments suitable for this purpose. Stitch up the wound until it heals.
Chapter Five.
On the setting of a broken clavicle.
The clavicle most often breaks at the front, near the end of the shoulder; there are three types of fracture: either it snaps and shatters into two pieces without producing any fragments, which is the easiest to set;
Or there may be fragments in the fracture, which is more difficult to set, or it may occur along with a wound. If the fracture is without a wound then two servants must be brought; one of them controls the arm adjacent to the broken collarbone and the other stretches out the neck toward the other side.
Then you should adjust the fracture with your fingers until it takes on the proper shape and there are no protuberances or crookedness in it. If more stretching is required, a ball of rags or wool should be placed under the patient's armpit.
The bone should be of the required size and you stretch it, lift the collarbone, and press on the ball with your hand until the fracture is aligned properly. If you cannot grasp the end of the collarbone from outside because it has become too deep then the patient must lie down on their back.
A medium-sized pillow should be placed under their shoulder, which is of a suitable size for the bone, and the servant presses down on their shoulder so that the deep end of the collarbone rises upwards; then you can set the fracture correctly and align it with your fingers.
If you feel that a fragment of the collarbone has broken off and is moving, then it should be opened up and that fragment removed gently; if the fragment is trapped in the bone then devise a way to cut it out using one of the instruments prepared for this purpose. After the instrument which holds back the soft tissue has been placed under the collarbone; this is an implement made of wood or iron, and here is a picture of it." [at this point in the original text there is an image of what appears to be a pair of scissors]
It resembles a spoon without a handle, and its width depends on the size of the bone you need to treat, whether large or small. As for its length, that too is determined by what is required for the operation. Make it with two ends; as you can see one end is wider and the other narrower.
If the wound opening you created when extracting the bone splinter is wide, and there's no danger of hot inflammation, then sew together the lips of the wound with stitches. But if it is a minor breach or if you fear hot inflammation, stuff the wound with lint and bandages according to its depth.
If there is a wide hot inflammation, moisten the wound with rose oil and vinegar or wine, then bandage it up. As for resetting bones without injury or incision, use a poultice made of millstone powder with egg white. Put a soft splint on top, then place a cushion under their armpit if necessary. Take an extremely long turban that is about one palm width in width and use it to bandage the splint and poultice. Then take a thin wooden splint. Its width should be three fingers, and the length likewise. Wrap it in a cloth, then wrap that cloth with the splint into the part of the turban that covers the fracture. Then tighten the turban around the break as you would normally tie it. And bring it around their neck, under their healthy armpit and also the affected one. Loop it back several times on each side as you see fit to ensure the fracture is held firmly in place.
Your primary concern should be that the splint does not move from its position over the broken bone. Therefore, the patient should be examined daily. Whenever the bandage loosens and you see that the splint has moved, correct this by tightening the bandage again. Then, make the patient sleep on their back at night with a small pillow under their armpit.
Raise it with a pillow so that their arm is elevated above the side, thus raising the clavicle fracture with the elevation of the shoulder. Alternatively, tie their arm to their neck. Do not loosen the bandage if there are no complications such as itching or swelling within twelve days.
Then, change the dressing whenever you see it necessary. The wound should be closed, leaving it tightened until the clavicle fracture heals and consolidates, strengthening more in twenty-eight days. It may take less time for some people to heal.
Chapter 6.
Chapter 6: On the setting of a broken shoulder. Rarely does the shoulder break at its widest point; instead, it is usually the edges that fracture. Whenever any part breaks or fractures in the middle, this can be determined by touch and the type of fracture depends on the shape.
Smooth and reset it into its natural shape with any possible trick, then apply a mix of mill dust, egg white, and soft gauze to the area. Place on top a double-folded piece of cloth as a pad, followed by a wide splint made of wood.
Make sure it is thin, as wide as the whole shoulder or slightly wider. If there are any bumps under the splint in one of the shoulder areas, smooth out these bumps with a soft gauze until the splint lies flat. Then tighten from above with a long turban.
Apply a firm traction and secure the splint to ensure it does not move out of position; check the bandage daily, each time you see it loosen tighten it again and adjust the splint should it shift from its proper place. The patient must lie on their sound side with the affected shoulder taking twenty days to heal.
If this process takes one or twenty-five days and upon completion you can remove the bandage safely, since it is a bone that does not fear fragmentation nor deformation; if any fragments protrude from beneath the skin, make an incision to expose them then extract said fragment. Manage any such hot swelling that occurs with the same methods as previously outlined for clavicle fractures.
Chapter Seven
On Setting Fractures of the Ribs.
The middle of the chest may fracture rarely, but its sides fracture and splinter frequently; symptoms include a tilt downwards with intense pain, difficulty breathing and coughing.
Perhaps blood is expelled and the dent in the fractured bone may be visible to touch; to set it, have the patient lie on their back with a pillow between their shoulders then press down on their shoulders while gathering their ribs together by hand from either side, taking care not to force the realignment.
Adjust it until the bone is restored to its proper shape, then wrap the affected area with bandages and padding using a light wooden splint such as willow or heather wrapped in a cloth. Then gently secure it to the broken bone, so that it does not slip off; wrap the bandage around in a spiral manner towards the back several times and tighten it firmly. Then check on the bandage at all times, and whenever it loosens, you must tighten it again.
If it becomes necessary to remove it due to an injury, pain, or swelling that occurs in the affected area, you must promptly do so; undo the bandage and treat any problems that arise with their specific treatment methods, then reapply the bandage if deemed appropriate. Face it and ensure you tighten [the bandage] until recovery is complete.
Chapter Eight.
When it comes to rib fractures, know that the ribs typically break in their thicker parts near the back and on their edges at the front because they are cartilaginous; this is not difficult to identify when examining with your fingers due to sensitivity.
The rib fracture is set with your fingers until the shape appears correct, then you must bandage and secure the broken bone with a splint if needed; should the ribs be pushed inwards towards the interior of the chest cavity, this will cause intense pain for the patient.
Piercing, like that which is experienced by those with a splinter; this occurs because the bone pierces into the diaphragm and also causes difficulty breathing, coughing, and heavy bleeding - these symptoms are difficult to treat. The old masters employed many techniques for this problem.
Some say the patient's diet should consist of foods that cause flatulence and wind, so as to make the belly swell, expand, and force the fracture outwards; we discourage this approach because it may contribute to the occurrence of hot swelling if not already present or increase and confirm its presence.
And some have said to place a cupping vessel over the site and then draw it with force, which is most similar to measurement; however, there is fear that the vessel may attract debris to the site given its weakness. And some have said that the site should be covered with wool that has been immersed in hot oil.
The splint becomes full between the ribs until it is filled, making the bandage level when you wrap it around in a circle. Then treat the patient with treatment of the shaft regarding food and medicine; if the patient cannot bear an intense pain. And if the bone was piercing the diaphragm causing harm, and we feared for the patient, then it is necessary to make an incision over the site and expose the broken rib; afterwards, place under it the instrument that preserves the peritoneum, which has been previously described, and cut the bone gently before extracting it.
Then we bring the edges of the wound together, if it is large, with sutures and treat it with ointments until it heals; if a hot swelling develops during that time, then immediately moisten dressings in rose oil and place them over the site while also treating the patient internally with what will soothe the swelling.
They should lie on the side where sleep is easier until it heals.
Chapter 9.
On the setting of vertebrae of the back and neck.
As for the bones of the neck, if they suffer a fracture - which is rare - and most often due to bruising, as well as the vertebrae of the back; if this happens to someone and you want to know whether it will heal or not. So observe: if you see that his hands have relaxed, become numb and lifeless; and he is unable to move them, extend or grasp them; and when you pinch him or prick with a needle he feels nothing and experiences no pain, then know that in most cases he will not recover, so he shall perish.
If he can move them and feels when pinched or pricked, know that the spinal marrow is intact and with treatment the patient will recover; if similar affects occur in the back then you must ascertain whether they too shall heal.
Then observe his legs, if you see that they have relaxed and the same symptoms as in the hands occur; then when he lies on his back wind and faeces escape involuntarily, and when he lies on his stomach urine escapes without control. And when he lies on his back and wishes to urinate but cannot, know that he shall perish so do not trouble yourself with treatment; if none of these symptoms occur then the situation is less severe - the course of action in such cases is to attempt to reduce swelling caused by inflammation.
By applying rose oil, or with egg yolk roasted and combined - apply this three times a day until the inflammation subsides; then apply one of the strengthening dressings to the area, bind it tightly, and advise the patient to remain calm and still.
The patient must sleep on the side that causes no pain until they recover; if a splinter or fragment of bone has broken off within then it is necessary to make an incision and remove this. Then you must close the lips of a large wound with stitches, and treat it with healing salves until recovery; if the lowest bone of the coccyx - that is, the tailbone - has broken then insert your left thumb into the anus.
The broken bone is leveled with the other hand according to what can be achieved and facilitated, then it is bound with bandages and splints if needed, and then it is tightly secured.
If you feel a broken splinter in it, make an incision on it and extract it, then treat the wound with the treatment mentioned earlier until it heals.
Chapter 10.
On setting the fracture of the hip.
Bones of the hip rarely fracture; when they do, the fracture is one in which the bone splinters at its ends and splits lengthwise while angling towards the inside, causing pain to the patient where it occurs, with a sharp piercing pain and numbness experienced by the leg on that side.
Its setting is by feeling it with your hand to determine the fracture, and its nature; if the fracture occurs only at its ends, then level that fracture as best you can until its shape resembles its natural form.
If the fracture is lengthwise, or if it has angled inwards, then place the patient on their stomach so you can treat that fracture; once you have set the bone, bind it with bandages and then apply a splint made of wood or leather, securing it tightly.
Do not fear the fracture dislocating or the splint coming loose; use padding to fill any indentations along its sides until it is tightly secured and level, then instruct the patient to sleep on their back or on their healthy side; if there is hot swelling.
Do not continue to manipulate or set the bone until this hot swelling subsides, then apply the appropriate treatment as before and return to setting it properly; if there are splinters in the bone or some splintering at its ends, these must not be removed.
It should not be touched but rather smoothed from the outside, as we have said, and left tightly bound until it heals.
Chapter Eleven.
In the setting of fractures of the humerus.
The humerus is the bone between the elbow and the shoulder joint. If it is fractured, its treatment has two forms; one of them is to take a curved smooth rod of moderate thickness shaped like this: [Image follows]
Secure it with two ligatures at its ends, then suspend it from a high point and seat the patient on a chair; next place their broken arm onto the rod so that the armpit lies against the middle of the rod's curve, after which suspend something heavy above them.
Or have an assistant extend it downwards, then the physician aligns the fracture with both hands until the bones are aligned as they should be; alternatively the patient lies on their back and their arm is suspended from their neck by a ligature.
Then instruct two assistants to stabilize the bone above and below the fracture with their hands, each then pulling in opposite directions; if stronger traction is desired, secure a ligature under and another over the fracture, with each assistant then pulling on one of these towards them.
If the fracture is near the shoulder joint, the ligature should go under the armpit and another below it towards the elbow; if closer to the elbow, place them on these two areas.
Then realign the fracture gently, avoiding excessive force; once it is properly aligned and well-united, bind it up unless there is hot swelling, in which case leave binding until day seven instead applying a lint pad soaked with vinegar and rose oil.
When the swelling subsides, then tighten it. The method of tightening is to place the bandage over the fracture and then wrap a new cloth bandage around the bandage. Then bring the arm together with the same forearm and lay his hand open on his shoulder.
Use the cloths and tighten them around the upper arm and forearm so that the arm acts as a splint if there is no obstacle to prevent this, and nothing has changed for you regarding the broken bone. If you fear any change from using this method, then use splints.
It involves placing a splint directly over the fracture itself, which should be wider and stronger than the other splints. Leave a finger's width between each splint, and let the length of the splints match that of the fracture plus three fingers' width on either side.
Then tighten around the splints as I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
It should be tighter on the site of the fracture itself.
The further away the fracture is, the less tight it should be. If you see that the splints and tightening are as we have described at the time of setting the limb, then proceed.
If you fear hot swelling, leave the tightening and splints until day seven as mentioned before. Then inspect the bandage every three days to prevent itching or swelling at the site, or any obstruction of nourishment due to excessive tightness. Correct all this according to what we have described.
If you are certain that none of these issues will occur, do not remove the bandage for many days. The patient should lie on their back with their hand placed over their stomach. Place a wool-filled cushion under the upper arm and elbow at an even height.
Inspect at every time, night or day, lest the shape of the broken member be disturbed or the bandage slacken. So correct all this with your best efforts and provide nourishment for the patient as previously outlined: let the diet first be light until the bone shows signs of knitting.
You should then make his diet more substantial, for it is the habit of the humerus and femur to knit in forty days; whereupon you must remove the splints, send him into a bath, and treat with salves suited to this purpose. If the fracture be comminuted...
Then do not remove the bandage until fifty days or two months have elapsed.
Chapter Twelve.
On the setting of fractures of the arm.
The arm consists of two bones called the ulna and radius, the latter being smaller and adjacent to the thumb; while the former is larger and situated beneath the latter at its lower end. The greater bone may be fractured singly or the lesser one by itself, but they are more frequently broken together.
When the upper smaller bone is fractured, its reduction is easy and union speedy; but when it is the lower bone that is broken, the fracture is worse and slow in uniting, the worst being when both bones are broken together. If only the lesser bone above be broken...
In reducing it the physician should make its extension easy and gentle until he has restored it to position; but if the greater bone is broken, its extension must be more forcible; while if both bones are fractured together, the extension must be still more vigorous.
The hand's shape should be positioned during its setting and extension with the palm down on a cushion, the thumb elevated above all fingers, and the little finger lower than the other fingers; the patient sitting cross-legged.
The cushion should be at the same height as him, so that the patient does not have to strain.
Then the attendant stretches the arm from below, either with his hand or a bandage; another attendant does likewise from above. Then the physician aligns the bone to restore it to its best possible shape. If there are fragments in the broken bone, they will become united.
Try to replace each fragment in its original position as best you can; if any fragments emerge and irritate the skin, but there is no hope of setting them, make an incision at that spot and extract it following the method we mentioned earlier. If the fracture coincides with a wound, I have dedicated another chapter specifically for that.
Then you may refer to that chapter for its treatment. If swelling occurs during the initial setting, apply a patch saturated with rose-oil tar ointment mixed with white wax; it should be of moderate thickness and applied gently until the swelling subsides.
Remove the tar ointment and apply a bandage prepared from fine wheat flour and egg white; ensure that the splint, which is placed over the fracture itself, is slightly wider and stronger. Remember that, in most cases, there are six splints for the arm.
If the fracture is in one ulna or both, make sure that you secure it more tightly around the site of injury and gradually loosen it as you move upwards or downwards, just like we previously mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
Let the bandages used to wrap the fracture be soft and moist, not too rigid. The thread that is used to tighten [the wound] should especially be made of linen, a moderate thickness between thin and thick as we described, and check both the limb and the bandage after several days.
If something needs to be corrected, such as an itching that occurs in the limb, it should be washed with warm water until the itching subsides. Leave the limb loose for one night so that it can rest and then resume tightening.
If the tightening has relaxed, and the bone has shifted or something similar, correct all of that to your best ability. Also, check if nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb due to excessive tightening; in such a case, loosen it slightly and leave it for several days until nourishment can reach it again, then resume tightening.
If nothing mentioned above occurs to the patient, do not remove [the bandage] until after twenty days or so have passed. Then, hang the patient's hand up onto their neck and let their arm be at a moderate angle. They must avoid all disturbing movements as best they can and should sleep on their back.
Be aware that this fracture of the arm can heal in thirty days, or maybe two-and-thirty; it could even happen as early as twenty-eight [days]. All of these estimates depend on a person's constitution and their strength.
Chapter 13.
On treating fractures of the palm of the hand and fingers.
The metacarpals of the palm and phalanges [bones] of the fingers are rarely subject to fracture but often suffer from contusions (bruises). Whenever a fracture or contusion occurs in the palm...
The patient should sit cross-legged and in front of him there should be a level chair.
Then he should place his hand on it, stretched out; next the bone-setter extends the broken bones and the physician aligns them until they fit together well. If this is done successfully and no hot swelling occurs, then the bandage must be applied along with a splint made of suitable material. Finally, a splint should be placed over it to match the location.
I have wrapped it in a soft cloth; if the fracture is directed downwards towards the palm, make something like a ball out of a piece of cloth and instruct the patient to grasp this with his broken hand. Then tighten [the bandage] with a long strip of cloth.
The splint should be made of soft leather so that it fits the skin when all parts of the hand are bent; tighten this as necessary. If, on the other hand, the fracture is directed outwards, a second splint must also be applied from below in the palm to keep the hand open and extended.
Next, apply the splint as required for hand movements and tie [the fingers] together with a bandage; if the fracture affects one of the phalanges, then align it accordingly, especially in case of the thumb, and bind this to the palm. You may also wish to provide a small upright splint that keeps the fracture straight.
If it is stable, the fracture should be aligned and bound together with the adjacent healthy finger; alternatively, all [the fingers] may be tied one to another in a row, which is preferable, or provide them with small upright splints.
Proceed as we described for the thumb and watch carefully during and after treatment, especially for hot swellings; this should be addressed immediately whenever it occurs, following the instructions given above.
Chapter Fourteen.
Repair of fractures of the femur.
The femur is often fractured, and it can be felt because it moves both forwards and backwards. Its repair requires a bandage above the fracture and another below it, with the patient lying on their front.
Then each servant's bandage should be extended to its side in a moderate manner, and this is when the fracture is in the middle of the bone. But if it is close to the hip joint, then a soft bandage should be applied, either made from wool or something similar.
If the fracture is towards the pubic area at the hip joint, then the bandage should be extended above it, and another one underneath the fracture. Similarly, if the break is close to the knee, the bandage should be near the knee with the extension going downwards. The physician will then manipulate the bone with both hands to restore its natural shape.
The bone will unite well, and the bandages can then be tightened if there is no hot swelling in the limb. However, if this occurs it should be left for a few days until the swelling subsides before treatment resumes.
To bandage, a hard turban should be wound around the fracture two or three times with some remaining overhanging. The leg is then bent so that the heel touches near the hip socket and a long piece of thread is inserted between the thigh and calf below the knee. The ends of this are brought out from above on either side.
The overhanging part of the turban is then wrapped around the leg and thigh, followed by splints being placed on the femur at the fracture site itself and made into one splint over the tibia. The gap between the thigh and calf should be filled with soft rags to provide an even tension.
Then start with a strong pull from the center to the fracture site, three or four turns; and as you move further away from the fracture site, let your pulls be less tight, softer, and more relaxed.
Then take the ends of the thread that you had inserted between the thigh and leg, and tie it to what follows from the splints above; then pass the ends of the thread downwards until you reach the heel of the foot, and also pull on the ends of the splint from the other side.
So that the bandage does not slip from its place, then leave it pulled tight as long as there is no pain in the limb, nor any swelling or puffiness and such like; but if anything of that sort should occur, immediately loosen it and correct whatever has happened, just as we have mentioned before.
If there is a splinter in the bone which pricks, it should be smoothed out if possible; otherwise, make an incision and remove it, treating the wound as previously mentioned until it heals. Sometimes this fracture of the thigh can be treated without adding splints to the leg.
As mentioned before for the upper arm and forearm, except that treating it thus does not cause lameness in the patient; but if you treat only the thigh without adding the leg, the patient will always be lame.
Know that the thigh fracture heals in about fifty days, or a little more or less, all depending on different temperaments and other conditions.
Chapter Fifteen.
On the fracture of the knee cap.
The thigh bone is rarely subject to fractures but often prone to contusions; if it does fracture, this may take the form of either a split or shattering of its parts with or without an accompanying wound.
You ascertain all this by touch; and you set it [the bone] by bringing together with your fingers the parts that have become separated, so they join up as closely as possible in a gentle and precise manner. You then apply bandages to it, followed if necessary by a round splint.
You then tighten the bandage above to match, and afterwards check all the conditions we have described in other fractures such as hot swelling or similar; you treat each one with what is appropriate until it heals.
Chapter 16.
On setting the leg fracture.
The leg has two bones: one thick called the tibia, and another thin called the fibula; they are subject to the same types of fracture as the humerus and radius. Therefore, its setting is like that of the arm, with no difference in procedure; if both bones fracture, the leg bends in all directions, whereas if only the thinner bone fractures it bends forward; and should the thicker one break towards the foot there will be no need to elaborate further.
So use extension and alignment, and secure the splints accordingly; except that if it is a severe fracture with many fragments then extend less and more gently, being careful not to damage the bone further during reduction.
In the case of the leg, there is one extra step compared to the arm: once you have aligned the splints and finished all other work then take two pieces of pinewood laths used for floorboards that fit between the cracks in the planks or else palm leaf stalks or similar.
Select those that are slightly thick and not too thin, let their length be the same as the length of the leg from the knee to below; then wrap each one with a cloth, two folds along its length, placing one on the leg and the other on the opposite side.
Let it be from the knee to below the foot, then tie the two pieces in three places at both ends and the middle; with this bandage, the leg will not lean right or left and is well-conditioned. A wooden gutter along the length of the leg may also be used.
It is placed inside to keep it from moving, and this should be done especially in the case of a fracture with an accompanying wound. The leg must be examined daily, and you must pay close attention to any swelling or inflammation. Whenever something like that occurs, treat it accordingly until it heals. The leg bone takes thirty days or so to heal.
Chapter seventeen.
On the fracture of leg bones and fingers.
The heel is never subject to fracture, but leg bones and fingers can be fractured. Fingers are rarely fractured; more often they suffer a bruise or sprain.
If the leg bones are fractured and you see that some of them protrude, let the patient place their foot flat on the ground as if walking; then stand up yourself and put your foot over the protruding bone, pressing it down to level it.
Thus returning them to their proper places, then take the bandage and splint from above and place beneath the sole of the foot a small board with two flat ends; then bind the foot tightly after wrapping it in cloth and doing whatever else is required.
If three or four days have passed, loosen the bandage. You will find that the bones are aligned, whether they were broken or dislocated. The procedure is as you see it. However, if some fingers are broken, set and align them according to what I described for setting the fingers of the hand.
Then make a splint for the broken finger, extending along its length and being slightly wider than it. Place under the foot this board that I described to you and secure it tightly. If two or three or more bones are broken.
Make a splint of appropriate size for each finger, wrapped in a soft cloth. Secure the board at the bottom of the foot, ensuring that both ends of the board extend beyond the sole of the foot to provide proper support.
You should not forget to monitor all the symptoms we mentioned for various fractures and apply appropriate treatments as necessary.
Chapter 18.
On the fracture of a woman's os coccygis, pubic bone, and penis bone.
If a woman's vaginal area is fractured, have her sit with legs folded and slightly bend her toward the back. From behind, support her while the midwife fills her vagina with cotton to create a ball-like shape.
Then gently shake the woman and slightly elevate her hips. The cotton will gradually exit, forming a ball-like shape at the vaginal opening, realigning the broken bone. Place a pad on her back. Whenever she needs to urinate, remove the cotton gently so she can pass urine.
Return it to its original position and then restore the labia to their former state, doing this for seven days or so until it is healed. Alternatively, if you wish to use a sheep's bladder, attach a reed tube to its mouth, insert the entire bladder into her vagina.
Then blow into the tube with force until the bladder inflates inside her vagina, and the fracture will be restored. Then pack it with cotton and keep him or her bedridden for several days as described above until healing occurs. As for a broken pubic bone in either men or women, this method can be employed to set the fracture.
Evening out [the fracture] as described for the hip bone. The correct treatment of these strange fractures, which rarely occur, should not be obscure to you, especially if you have some experience and understand my book well, yes indeed, because in most cases the fracture itself will guide you.
As for a man with a broken thigh, insert the gullet of a goose into his penis, wrap it in a piece of cloth and bandage it; leave it thus for three days or so until healing occurs.
Chapter 19.
On setting fractures of the bone, if they coincide with wounds.
If a fracture occurs with a wound, especially if the bone is large like the femur or humerus, one should proceed immediately to bloodletting at the site of the injury if the conditions for phlebotomy are favourable as described previously.
If the wound is bleeding, one should cauterize it with powdered green vitriol if nothing else is available; then attend to setting the fracture on that very same day and do not delay.
If no hot swelling occurs, but if a hot swelling does occur, leave its healing until the ninth day until the hot swelling subsides. Do not approach it on the third and fourth days at all because it may be exposed to bad symptoms.
If the broken bone is protruding from the skin and exposed, you should try to reposition it and align it gently with your hands for a short time. If this cannot be achieved by hand, then realign it using this tool, which is made of iron, approximately seven or eight fingers in length. Its width should match the size of the wound.
For this reason, the physician should acquire three or four of these tools according to what is required for treatment in each type of fracture. Let them be round with a slight thickness so they do not bend when pressure is applied during use.
They should have a sharp tip with a bend at the end, their upper portion being thicker while from the middle downwards they are much thinner. This is an illustration of them: [insert image here].
This tool is called 'pirr' in Greek, meaning a small lever. You should place its sharp, hooked end against the protruding bone and push with it once to ensure the bone returns to position. Once it has returned somewhat to alignment, smooth out the ends of the fracture so they fit together.
If the broken end of the bone is thin and cannot be properly grabbed by the tool, then you should cut off that end of the bone to enable a better grip for the tool. If you are still unable to reposition the bone using these methods, then cut through it with an appropriate cutter as described previously.
Apply it with one of the instruments, and strip from the bone all that remains of roughness and thin scales; if you replace the bone and find that afterwards the patient has a severe painful sensation then know that the bone is not in its natural position.
If you are able to restore the bone to its natural position then do so, for this will greatly benefit the patient; when your setting of the bone is complete immerse a cloth in black astringent wine, especially if it be summer-time, and apply this but not any pitch nor anything oily.
lest putrefaction and corruption ensue; then apply splints while the fracture is being set, leaving the wound exposed by making a hole in the bandages with scissors to fit over the wound.
take the greatest care not to bind up the wound with the fracture as is often done by ignorant physicians, causing death or gangrene or pleurisy in their patients; rather let your bandaging be loose and gentle differing from that of other fractures.
if the wound is bad or if it be a large one and you fear some of the symptoms described, with much pain in the locality disturbing the patient then do not apply splints but make bandages for him out of hard cloths instead of the splints and bind them on.
when a day or two has passed and you see the wound becoming purulent then remove the cloth soaked in wine which you have applied to it; now use poultices and ointments such as we usually treat wounds with, like "the fourfold ointment," and so forth-you should loosen the bandages.
Examine the wound every evening and morning until it heals, keeping the limb elevated so that pus can drain downward easily. If many days pass without healing or ceasing of discharge, then know there are small bone fragments present.
You should probe the wound with a probe, and whatever small fragments of bone are exposed, remove them; but if there are others which do not come away easily and irritate the limb, causing pain when they touch it, then rasp off as much as you can and extract them in any way possible.
If the wound becomes congested, corroded or affected in any other way by putrefaction, then you should treat each symptom as its nature demands with the remedies described elsewhere.
You should take note of what I say and keep it in mind: if a large bone is broken with fragments sticking out from the limb, such as the thigh or upper arm bones and similar major limbs, you should not try to pull on them or extract them. Indeed, many a time death results from such pulling and extraction; rather you should leave it alone until it putrefies, for perhaps it will fall off by itself after twenty or thirty days.
Then you should treat the wound if there is any scope for treatment, otherwise leave it alone.
Chapter Twenty.
On the treatment of complications arising from some fractures.
Complications often arise following the healing of a fracture, especially near joints, resulting in an unsightly appearance and potentially impairing the natural function of the limb.
Examine the area; if the swelling is soft, use astringent medicines such as aloe, frankincense, myrrh, galbanum, and mucilage, taking some or all of these and mixing them with an astringent beverage, egg whites, or vinegar.
You should press it down with difficulty and pull [the swelling] tightly onto the wound; you leave it this way for several days without loosening it, then loosen it and repeat until the swelling has gone, God willing, or fasten a tight sheet of lead over it.
For lead has the property of removing all inflammation from the tissues, so if the swelling has become hard and tough but needs to be removed, make an incision above it and cut away any protruding tissue or use a curette to remove some until it is gone; then treat the wound until it heals.
Chapter Twenty-One.
On treating broken bones after they have healed but the limb remains thinner than it was originally.
When broken bones heal but the limb remains thin and weak, this is due to many factors. One factor is due to frequent loosening and re-tying of the bandages, or because they are tied too tightly, so that nutrients cannot reach the limb; another reason may be excessive washing [of the wound]; other factors include too much movement at the wrong time, or a lack of blood and weakness in the patient's body.
The treatment for this is to nourish and enrich the patient's body, increasing their blood supply; use of a bathhouse, bringing joy and happiness, and so forth; then apply pitch to the limb to draw nutrients towards it or continue washing with warm water. Until food can pass through it and return to its natural shape.
Chapter Twenty-Two.
In treating broken bones, if they knit crookedly and prevent proper movement.
Whenever any part which has healed after fracture displays a bent, protruding or twisted bone, and the appearance of the part is disfigured. Unless the part ceases to perform its natural function, there is no need to agree with those who claim that it should be broken from the top; many ignorant physicians and bone-setters in our country do this.
This action is highly reprehensible, leading to great danger; the least harm it causes is paralysis. However, if the deformity and dislocation are still fresh, one should immerse the part in water that has boiled with herbs such as marshmallow leaves, roots, and flowers of the crown imperial, or similar plants.
It should be bandaged with softening poultices such as well-prepared diachylon, or marshmallow root saliva can be mixed with chicken fat and sesame oil and used for the bandage; alternatively, fleshy figs can be pounded with pigeon droppings and similar medicines called 'underminer of consolidation'.
Sometimes dislocation can be resolved by continuous, gentle massaging with the hands and moving the part in all directions at all times; but if the deformity is old, hardened and severe, treatment with iron becomes necessary.
Then one should cut above it, separate the bone ends and remove any excess dislocation or bone with fine scissors, taking great care to be gentle; afterwards treat the wound as described earlier until it heals.
Chapter Twenty-three.
The jaw is a dislocation of the joint, which hinders movement and makes the limb ugly, causing severe pain to the patient. Whenever anyone experiences a jaw fracture, they should return it immediately.
They should never delay; if they do, the area will swell and become so inflamed that it becomes difficult to return the jaw. Therefore, this process should not be delayed or subjected to movement or extension when swollen because it often causes spasm and severe pain in the patient.
If this occurs, they should immediately proceed to venesection of the patient and then allow it to rest until the swelling subsides slightly before massaging the limb with hot water and oil; it can then be gently returned to its place after which each limb should be treated as described in its respective section.
I have also arranged the jaw chapters in order, according to what was previously mentioned about fractures from top to bottom of the body.
Chapter Twenty-four.
In the treatment of fractures to the lower jaw.
Jaw dislocations are rare, and they occur in one of two ways: either the jaws move slightly out of place and become loose or they completely detach from their sockets so that they are no longer connected to each other at all. If the dislocation is minor, it may correct itself naturally in most cases with minimal intervention.
If the dislocation is complete and total, you should hasten to reduce it quickly without delay. The servant holds the head of the patient while the physician inserts their thumb into the joint inside the mouth if the jaw is displaced on one side.
Or they may use both thumbs if the jaw is dislocated on both sides, and the rest of their fingers from outside to align it. The physician asks the patient to relax their jaw and let it go in any direction while they align the jaw and push it back into place.
If it is difficult to reduce, especially if both jaws are dislocated, you may use a hot compress and oil to facilitate the process. Do not delay reduction as we mentioned earlier. Once the jaws have returned to their proper position and the patient's mouth closes without relaxation, then apply bandages made of cloth pads with a cerate prepared from wax and rose oil.
Secure it gently with a loose bandage. Have the patient sleep on their back with their head supported by two pillows to prevent movement from side to side. Ensure they do not chew anything, instead provide them with soft, liquid food.
Once the pain subsides and the jaw heals, they may eat as desired, but should do so gently without exerting force when opening their mouth to eat, drink or yawn until the jaw is completely healed.
If it proves difficult to reduce both jaws when they dislocate and do not return to their proper places, this often leads to fever, persistent headaches, abdominal pain and frequent vomiting of bile. If you observe these symptoms, know that the condition is severe.
Many patients die due to this condition within ten days.
Chapter 25.
In reduction of the dislocation of the collarbone and shoulder joint.
As for the collarbone, it usually dislocates on its internal side due to its connection with the chest and sometimes externally where this can be identified through touch. The reduction is achieved by making the patient lie down on their back and extend their arms.
Then you should press the area with your palm forcefully and it will go back in place, after that a bandage and splints are put on to secure it. The end of the collarbone which connects to the shoulder is rarely dislocated but if ever this occurs then it must be reduced and adjusted as we mentioned previously according to whatever method seems suitable.
Then you should place a bandage, splints and tighten it while asking the patient to rest until recovery occurs. Using this same method exactly you can reduce dislocation of the shoulder if that ever happens too.
Chapter 26.
In reduction of the dislocation of the shoulder joint.
Know that the shoulder can dislocate in three ways: first, towards the armpit downwards; second, towards the chest; and thirdly, upwards above the shoulder which is rare.
It does not dislocate backwards due to the position of the shoulder blade, nor forwards because of the nerve location; most often it dislocates and comes out downwards towards the armpit especially for those with less body fat as this happens quickly in their cases.
As for those with abundant flesh, it is the opposite; meaning that [the instrument] comes out with difficulty and goes in with difficulty. Sometimes a blow or fall may cause a hot swelling of the shoulder, which one might think has dislocated, but this must be tested to ascertain its veracity.
Then you advance in its treatment, and one recognizes the dislocated jaw if it is downwards towards the armpit. If you compare between the dislocated shoulder and the healthy shoulder, you will find an obvious difference; you will see that the head of the displaced shoulder is crooked, and when touched under the armpit, the head of the shoulder feels like an egg.
The patient is unable to raise their hand to their ear or move it in all directions. Similarly, if the dislocation is towards the chest or upwards, you will find this apparent upon touch and it will not be hidden.
This jaw can be easily reset if it is soft or the patient is a child. To do this, have your assistant raise their hand upwards, then place your thumbs under their armpit and lift the joint forcefully upwards into its proper position as the assistant raises and extends their arm above.
Then have them lower their arm, for it will return swiftly. If it does not return as mentioned and the dislocation has been present since some days ago, then the patient should bathe in hot water and use a poultice that relaxes and softens, such as marshmallow root, fenugreek, and rosebay leaves cooked in water and applied.
The patient should then lie on their back, and a woollen ball of moderate firmness is placed under their armpit. The physician places their heel on the ball and holds the patient's hand in theirs as they extend it downwards.
He kicks the ball with his foot, then he returns to a standing position. If you wish, you can reverse this process by getting a taller man than the sick person and having him stand on the side of the patient's body. His shoulder should go under the patient's armpit while lifting their armpit upwards so that the patient is suspended in mid-air. Another servant pulls the patient's hand down towards their lower abdomen. If the patient is light, something else should be hung on them to add weight. This returns the jaw to its normal position, and it can also be reversed in another way.
A long wooden stick is driven into the ground, its head rounded like a pestle in a mortar, neither too thick nor too thin. Under the patient's armpit, you place this stick after putting soft rags over its head; the patient stands along the length of the wood.
The patient's hand is extended downwards from the other side, and their body is also stretched out forcefully from the other side. The joint returns to its place quickly. If it is difficult to reverse using all that we have mentioned so far, then apply this treatment by taking a wooden stick about two arms' lengths long. Its width is four fingers, its thickness two fingers; it has a rounded head for easy insertion deep into the armpit in this manner:" [image of wooden stick]
Soft rags are tied to the rounded head so that the stick does not hurt the patient. It is then placed under the armpit with the hand and arm fully extended downwards on the wooden stick, which is also bound to the upper arm, forearm, and hand.
The arm is placed on a crossbar of a ladder laid flat, and the hand is extended downwards. The rest of the body hangs freely from the other side until the joint returns to its normal position. Once this is achieved by any means possible, a moderate-sized ball of wool should be placed under the armpit.
Then the prepared bandage, made from mill dust with frankincense and egg white, is applied to the entire shoulder like a tourniquet, and then the ball [of linen] is firmly tightened under the armpit. The arm is held towards the neck, and the bandage is tied around it above the shoulder, and secured tightly with a ligature.
He is left for seven days without moving his arm, and the patient's diet should be kept light until the joint regains its strength; this will accelerate healing. After five or seven days the bandage is removed and movement is encouraged. If the shoulder remains solid and does not relax, then healing has occurred.
If the joint repeatedly dislocates due to moisture or another condition, cauterization with three disks should be performed as described in the chapter on cauterization. If all these steps are taken and the bandage is removed after seven days but the joint remains unstable...
If the bandage is re-applied and tightened several times without success, and the arm drops down limp and cannot be raised above the shoulder, then know that the nerve in the joint head has been severed or stretched or relaxed. In this case, the joint will never remain stable.
As for the jaw that is directed towards the chest, breast and back - to return it one must push and extend with both hands until it is in place. The same treatments can be used as before so that healing occurs. If after recovery there remains a lump in the joint which impedes movement...
The patient should use the bathhouse frequently until this lump softens and returns to its original state.
Chapter Twenty-Seven.
On the treatment of elbow dislocation.
The elbow joint dislocates with difficulty and also reduces with difficulty, it can dislocate in all directions but most commonly anteriorly or posteriorly. The type of dislocation will not be hidden from you as it is visible and palpable in any direction.
If you compare the dislocated elbow to the healthy one, it will be obvious with a depression of the joint and an inability to flex the arm or touch their shoulder. You must act quickly to reduce the dislocation before any hot swelling occurs.
If hot swelling occurs, it will be difficult to reduce and may never heal properly, especially if the dislocation is posterior as this is the worst type of all elbow dislocations with severe pain and often leading to death.
The reduction, if it can be performed, is done with the assistant extending their arm and the physician's hands above and below the elbow while pushing on the joint with both thumbs or the base of the palm until it returns to its original position.
If the dislocation is anterior, it can be reduced by flexing the hand quickly so that the base of the palm strikes the adjacent shoulder. If this does not work for reduction then use a very strong and powerful extension with two assistants extending the arm.
The patient should be held by two assistants to prevent displacement during extension, then the arm is rotated in all directions after wrapping the hand with a folded cloth or wide bandage. If the physician touches the joint with their hands, they should grease them to facilitate smooth gliding of the joint.
Then the joint is pushed back with great force until it returns, and after its return, it should be dressed with a bandage containing astringents and drying agents along with egg whites, tied tightly, and the arm attached to the patient's neck for several days.
Then undo it. If the joint remains in place, untie the bandage and leave it alone; but if you see that the joint is not yet firm, reapply the dressing and bandage and leave it for a few more days until it firms up, then remove them. Should any swelling occur after returning and releasing the joint...
If there is difficulty in movement, apply moist heat in the bath and gentle massage with friction until it softens or place on the joint a sheep leg from a fat lamb, then tie it up and leave for a day and night before removing it and taking them into the bath; once they perspire, gently rub the joint.
Then put the lamb leg back on once, twice, and a third time along with bath immersion until it softens; if you wish to use moist cow manure lightly applied with butter, tie that onto it for several repetitions which will soften it and restore the joint to its original condition.
Chapter Twenty-Eight.
On the Treatment of Wrist Dislocation.
Wrist dislocation occurs frequently and its reduction is simple compared to other joints, although it is important to reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before any swelling or hot inflammation develops at the site.
Reduction is performed by placing the patient's wrist on a board, with an assistant extending their hand and the physician placing their palm over the joint process and pushing it back into place; however, one must check that the dislocation was not reduced toward the palm side of the hand.
Let the patient place the front of their hand on the board when extending and flexing, and if the jaw protrudes towards the back of the hand, let them put their inner hand on the board so that the doctor's hand is placed over the same joint protuberance; if it returns immediately, otherwise, bind it with a dressing to reduce swelling.
Leave it untreated, as it cannot bear to be disturbed again and you will not be able to bring it back after some days have passed; except that the joint remains bent without harming the patient unless the hand becomes relaxed and unable to grasp anything.
Then you will know that the nerve has been severed or bruised, and there is no remedy except to bind it by cauterization; this may be helpful or it may not do anything at all. Once the wrist has been repositioned, apply the dressing we described earlier, then bind it and leave it for five days.
Then loosen it and exercise the hand; if movement is difficult and some stiffness appears, soften it with warm water and rub it several times until it becomes supple.
Chapter 29.
The treatment of finger dislocation.
Fingers can dislocate in any direction; when one of them dislocates towards the back or front of the hand, extend the finger and push the dislocation with your thumb until it returns to its place, then tie a bandage around the head of the finger and hang it facing the direction it was dislocated.
Leave it for two days, then release and extend the finger until it is straight on that day; if it's night time, rebind it in the same way you did before. Continue to untie it during the day, exercising it with movement, and rebinding at night. Do this for several days until it strengthens.
Similarly, you should do the same if it is turned towards the inside of the hand; tie it to the opposite side and treat it as in the previous case until it heals. Do likewise when it tears open toward any other direction.
Chapter Thirty.
In treating the dislocation of vertebral bodies.
When a vertebral body becomes dislocated, or there is complete dislocation of the neck, or when many vertebrae are displaced from their positions, there is no cure because death will be swift for the patient.
A sign of this is that the patient's stool comes out involuntarily, they are unable to control it, and often some of their limbs become lax - either one or both legs, or arms, or even just one.
When a vertebra is dislocated, it can move in four directions; if the displacement occurs towards the back, it is called a hunchback. As for its treatment, you should first examine whether this condition has been present since youth - in such a case, there is no cure and complete healing cannot be expected. However, if the hunchback occurred due to a fall, blow or similar trauma...
The ancients have described various forms of treatment in great detail, but most of it is not particularly useful; I will summarise the key points here, having drawn upon their insights and added my own explanation, while also depicting an instrument which differs from what they outlined.
When the hunchback occurs in the chest from the front, there is no cure; nor can it be treated if the displacement happens towards either side. However, when it affects specifically the back, as I am about to describe, a treatment is possible: you should place the patient face down.
On a flat bench near a wall, spread beneath it a moist cushion so as not to harm his chest; then place an upright wooden plank embedded in a hole in the ground at one end of the bench towards his head and another wooden plank towards his legs at the other end of the bench.
And a servant holds the plank, which should not be fastened in the hole, and another servant holds the other one in that position; then wrap it around the patient's chest and under his armpits with a soft, tight bandage and stretch the end of the bandage to the plank at his head, tying it there.
Then pull it taut with another bandage over his hips, above his knees and at his ankles; then gather all the bindings together and tie them to the other plank at his feet; each servant should stretch towards their side with the plank and the binding, but the two planks must not move from their embedded positions.
However, they are not fastened as we said earlier; the physician should press his hands onto the lump with force until it recedes or place a board on top of it and lean against the board with his legs until it subsides; if it does not recede with this treatment then take a plank which is about three cubits long.
Carve a place in the wall, which we said should be near the patient, where you can insert one end of the plank; then put the middle of the plank on top of the lump and have the physician place his feet at the other end while pulling hard so as to press down on the lump.
It will return to its place; if you wish, it can be made with a screw which is turned by hand: this involves embedding two planks, each one cubit long, in the ground near the patient's head at the end of the bench and another two near his feet at the other end of the bench.
Let the distance between each board be one span, and in each board make a hole through which the rod passes, and fasten all the boards very firmly to the ground so that they do not move at all; then insert a round stick, which is the spiral rod on which the bandage is twisted, into the holes of the two boards.
At one end, make a hole and fasten a rod to it which is one span long by twisting; there should be the same on the other two boards. Then, you must tighten the bandage that was wrapped around the patient's chest into the spiral at their head and the bandages tied to their legs into the spiral located near their feet.
Then, a servant should stand by each spiral with his hand on the handle that twists it; meanwhile, the physician will ensure the hump is straightened as previously explained. Here is an image of the spirals, blocks, and patient:
After the vertebrae have been pushed back and the area has healed, you should apply a dressing dried with egg whites followed by a compress; then, place a splint made of board over the top, which is three fingers wide or similar and as long as the hump.
Then, attach it with the necessary bandage and have the patient consume a light diet until they recover. If there is any further protrusion in that area once healed, then one should use medicines to relax and soften while continuing to use the board we described for an extended period.
A lead plate can also be used for this purpose. A protrusion may appear near the vertebrae at the back, which could be mistaken for dislocation but is actually an extra bone that has grown; in such a case, do not treat it with this method as death may occur.
Chapter thirty-one.
In the treatment of dislocated hip.
Know that the hip and shoulder joints can only dislocate, unlike other joints which suffer small displacements and depressions; the hip joint dislocates in four ways.
This is because it can dislocate inward, outward, forward and backward; the hip most often dislocates inward, very rarely forward or backward. The sign of an inward dislocation is that if you place the patient's healthy leg next to their sick one, then the latter appears shorter than the former.
The knee appears more swollen on the affected leg, and the patient is unable to bend their thigh towards their groin; furthermore, this area below the groin is clearly visible since the head of the femur has moved in that direction.
The signs of a dislocation outward are the opposite of those above; in the case of forward dislocation, one can fully extend their leg without pain, but is unable to bend it back due to knee pain and cannot walk straight ahead.
There is retention of urine, the groin becomes swollen and when walking there is heel-striking; for a backward dislocation, the knee cannot be straightened nor can it be bent before the thigh is flexed, furthermore, the patient's leg will also appear shorter than the other one.
The groin is relaxed and the head of the femur appears to be at the waist; regarding treatment, if this condition has been present for a long time in the patient without any attempt made to reduce it or change its course then there is no cure.
You should not expose it, and as for the one who recently dislocated any type of the four faces of the joint, you must quickly twist the hinge, extend it inward and outward, and move it right and left; perhaps...
It returns and does not require any other treatment, but if it does not return to its place this way, then you should prepare a strong assistant who will extend his leg from below, either with their hands or with bandages tied above the knee, while another assistant extends it from above.
He inserts his hands under the patient's armpits and then tightens a soft bandage at the top of the thigh, while another assistant holds onto the other end of the bandage and pulls either from the front toward the collarbone or from behind towards the back.
They all extend at once, lifting the patient's body off the ground and suspending them in mid-air. This type of extension is a common method for all four types of dislocations. If the joint returns to its place with this procedure, then that is sufficient; otherwise, each type requires specific treatment as I have mentioned.
If the dislocation is inward, then the patient should lie on their right side; a bandage should be tied around the top of the thigh between the hip and the area beneath the groin.
Then the bandage is extended upwards from the groin towards the top of the body to the collarbone; another strong assistant takes hold with both arms, embraces the thick part of the patient's thigh, and pulls it outwards with a strong pull so that it returns to its place.
This type is easier than the other methods of treatment to restore this organ, but if it proves difficult and doesn't respond to this type of treatment at all, then you should bind both legs of the patient firmly with a strong yet soft bandage around the heels and knees.
And there should be four fingers between each one of them, and the patient's leg should be stretched more than the other by two fingers; then the patient is suspended from a wooden beam in the house with their legs hanging two feet above the ground.
Then, you instruct a strong servant boy to embrace the head of the thigh and another boy hangs onto the patient while pushing against the other boy embracing the thigh with force; this quickly returns the joint back into place, and for the specific method used when the jaw is dislocated outward...
The patient should lie on the table as described for the hunchback case, and a bandage is secured firmly around their sore leg in particular, and also across their chest; then two wooden beams are placed - one at their feet and another at their head - with an additional beam placed securely in the middle of the table.
It is wrapped in wet rags to avoid causing pain to the patient, and so that the beam remains between their thighs without being pulled downwards during stretching; then each servant boy pulls in their respective direction while the physician aligns the hip with their hands - if it responds well and returns...
And if it doesn't respond, then place the board and apply pressure as mentioned for the hunchback case, except the patient should lie on their sound side; and if the dislocation is forward, then the patient's leg must be stretched in one motion while they are positioned like this on the table.
The physician places the palm of his right hand on the affected inguinal region and then presses it with the other hand, while directing the pressure downwards towards the knee; if the dislocation is posterior, the patient should not be extended downward.
He should be elevated above the ground but placed on a solid surface; his body, from hips to knees, should be outwards according to what we have mentioned about laying him face-down on the bench with the bandages tightened.
As we have said before, compression with a board should also be used on the site to which the joint has dislocated; once the hip joint has been fully returned as it ought and its return is not hidden from you in that you extend the patient's legs.
If you see that both legs are equal and the patient can flex his leg without difficulty, then know that the joint has returned as it should; at this point, bind the thighs together, take up the bandages, and secure them with a cloth wrapping tightly enough to prevent movement of the hip in any direction.
The patient must remain still for three or four days, then remove the bandage and bindings; measure both legs against each other, if you see that they are equal in size, know that the joint has healed firmly so release the patient to walk; however, if you detect any laxity.
If so, rebandage and retighten as before; leave it in place for three more days then remove the bandages again; have him walk slowly on it for several days until it strengthens, God willing.
Chapter Twenty-Three.
On the treatment of dislocated knee.
The knee dislocates in three ways: inward, outward, and downward, meaning backward; it never dislocates forward at all. The sign of its dislocation is that you order the patient to bring his leg up against his thigh.
If it does not stick to the thigh, then know that the knee is dislocated. To cure all of its ways of dislocation, have the patient sit down and extend his legs if he has the strength for this; have a servant sit behind him to hold onto his waist and slightly twist him backward, while you yourself sit on top of his thighs.
You push your back against his face, and place his leg between your legs; then you grasp his knee with both hands and lock them around each other's fingers on top of the patients knee; next, press down hard upon both sides of the dislocated joint using your hands, while another servant extends his leg until the knee is put back into its socket.
The sign of its return is that the leg will stick to the thigh in a supple manner without force; then bandage it and attach the leg to the thigh, binding them all together with a bandage for three or four days before releasing them. For some time only light walking should be done until he regains his strength.
If this procedure is impossible to perform, then resort to the strong extension with bandages that I will describe in my treatment of the hip until it returns.
Chapter thirty-three.
On the treatment of dislocated heel.
The heel may be slightly dislocated, or it may fully dislocate. The dislocation is either inward or outward. You can identify the dislocation by observing swelling and protrusion of the heel in the direction of the dislocation.
Treating a slight dislocation is easy; it can be gently pulled and straightened until it returns to its original position. However, treating a complete dislocation requires the patient to sit down, with a strong assistant holding them from behind at their mid-back.
Then, you hold their foot with your right hand at the top and your left hand underneath it at the ankle. Pull the foot towards yourself twice using both hands, then extend it with your left hand while pushing the front of the foot towards the shin with your right hand, without applying excessive force.
Repeat this process twice as described, and on the third time when pushing the front of the foot towards the shin, also pull it with your left hand at the ankle. The foot should return to its normal position after one or two repetitions; if not, repeat the process until it does.
If the foot still doesn't return to its normal position using these methods, lay the patient on their back on the ground and firmly hammer a sturdy peg into the earth between their thighs, wrapping it with cloth so as not to harm the patient. Then, an assistant should grip their thigh.
Another assistant should then extend the leg either with their hands or by using a strap tied to the patient's ankle. Both assistants pull in opposite directions of each other, ensuring that the peg between the patient's thighs remains upright and does not move downwards during this process, as it anchors the body. The physician then realigns the dislocation with their hands.
Another servant holds the healthy leg downward, and then the jaw quickly returns to its place. When the jaw has returned, and you have confirmed that it is in the correct position, take the bandages and splint and secure them tightly with ligatures. Tie the foot securely with the ligament downwards and avoid damaging the nerve located above the heel at the back.
To ensure the ligament is not too tight and causes harm, leave it for two or three days. If the ligament has loosened, tighten it again before releasing it on either the third or fourth day. The patient must refrain from walking for forty days.
If the patient attempts to walk before this period, there is a risk that the jaw may dislocate and become irreparable. Should they experience any hot swelling, you should apply the treatments we have previously described elsewhere regarding therapy and poultices until it subsides.
Chapter 34.
The treatment of the jaw of the toes.
When treating dislocated toes, a gentle and slight adjustment should be made without causing any harm. This is not difficult to achieve but rather straightforward. If the dislocation is in one of the joints of the hindfoot, the patient's foot should be placed on a flat surface.
Or you can place the patient's foot on a board while they stand upright as if walking, and then step firmly onto one of their joints with your own foot to ensure it returns to its original position without any bumps.
Afterwards, place a board underneath the sole of their foot that fully supports it and has two ends. Secure it tightly for three days before releasing it, then ensure they do not walk for many days until it strengthens and there is no risk of recurrence, God willing.
Chapter thirty-five.
There are three types of jaw injuries: with wounds, fractures or both combined.
When any of these injuries occur, treatment is difficult and requires careful setting of the jaw; death often follows.
For this reason, only the most skilled and experienced practitioner who is gentle, patient, not rash or bold should attempt such treatment; at first they must use remedies that ease hot swellings alone then hand the patient over to another doctor.
To God be the judgement, unless you pray for his safety from harm with a light illness and some hope appears to you, then remove him immediately at the outset before hot swelling occurs.
If the jaw returns as you wish, use treatment to ease hot swellings and treat the wound with suitable drying ointments; if the jaw is fractured and bone splinters are present remove them immediately. Follow in this what we mentioned earlier for simple diseases, as described previously in their respective sections.
Do your best and keep yourself away from any risky ventures, as I advised you earlier; this will preserve your reputation and be safer for your well-being, God willing.
