To you, dear sons, I have completed this book which is the latter part of the science of medicine combined with its completeness. And I have done the end through its demonstrations and by its statements. And it came to my mind that I should complete this book with this treatise, which is a part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
And because the art of hands is practiced in our region and is unknown everywhere, it has been lost and discarded, and nothing remains from it except for small descriptions in books by the ancients that have been performed by hand. And because of this, errors and vanity have come about, and minds are closed, and knowledge has become distant.
It seems that I will revive this treatise in its entirety according to the path of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and will come together with the forms of the cautery instruments, and other tools of work alongside their declaration and preparation, just as it is necessary.
And because no good masters are found in our time, the art of medicine has been extended. And it is necessary for the one who intervenes to master in the art of anatomy, as Galen says, as long as he knows the measurement of the limbs, and their forms and connections and separations, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and tendons, and the number of bones, and their movement and mobile and stationary veins, and the location of their exit.
And so says Ipython that with speech we are many, and with action we are few; indeed in the art of hands.
We tell you at the beginning of this book that if someone doesn't know the things we have spoken, they may go wrong and mislead people; thus I have seen many times more than others who interfere in this science and abandon their knowledge and experience.
And I saw a foolish man treat an abscess on a woman's neck, and cut the arteries beneath it. Because so much blood flowed out that the woman died in her death throes between his hands.
And I saw another physician who treated a stone in an elderly man's bladder, and the stone was large; he removed part of the bladder with it, and killed the man within three days.
And I have already been summoned to extract, and saw the location of the disease and the size of the stone, and if they were well cut it would kill him.
And saw another case where he was called to treat the leg of one of our country's Duke who had broken his leg, and had an injury as well due to the break. The patients were full of ignorance, forcing the break onto the wound in various places using strong force, not allowing any healing for the wound, making it so until the second month; he was instructed not to disintegrate the break; stayed this way until the leg swelled up completely and the foot, leading to his downfall.
I was summoned to come to him, and I quickly went to relieve his leg; and when I heard it being dislocated so smoothly that he felt no pain.
But every pathway of corruption had already been confirmed throughout the body or member, and it could not be healed; and the process of decay continued to spread within the limb until the entire member was lost.
And as for another instance where one abscess weakened another intertwined abscess, and then it inflamed due to the wickedness of its lordship.
For the ulcer, when it is pure of melancholic humours, does not allow one to touch it with iron if it isn't in its entirety within what can be removed all that which has been corrupted.
And because of this, skilled children, you are required to know that the work of hands is divided into two parts: meaning, an area where there is danger in multiple positions; and I will show in each section of this book where it has strength and danger.
Because it is necessary for you to keep this in mind, so that no one may speak ill of you.
If you take your weapons in readiness, and treat your illnesses lightly yet firmly, and use the best way so that through God's grace you come to salvation and are ready; and leave terrifying diseases without complaint for healing; and remove your weapons from those who make you doubt, and have faith in what you can do so that you may go from this world to glory with honor.
Galen advised in some of his admonishments: "Do not take in for treatment false illness, that you might be called a foolish sight by others."
I have composed this treatise according to three chapters.
The first chapters discuss fire cauterization and medical cauterizations, and organize chapters up to the joints; and descriptions of instruments, metal tools for cauterization, and all that is necessary for the operation.
The second chapters deal with cutting and piercing, as well as suction cups and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, among similar matters; and organizes chapters along with descriptions of instruments.
The third chapters are about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar matters; it organizes up to the joints from the head onwards, along with descriptions of instruments.
Just as we recall our work, it is fitting that I explain the quality of each aid and the harm of each constitution.
I say that the qualities of help, and harm, are the longest word and subtlest science and the secrets answer to it; and many wise people spoke about this, agreeing with it. And they suffice me with their words, for I fear its length.
I say that the fire cautery universally helps with all types of body composition where there is substance, for it deals with two compositions: these are known as hot body with substance and dry body with substance.
In the composition of a hot and dry body combined with substance, there was no agreement and they said that fire cautery is a great help. And another group said the opposite: that fire cautery only benefits diseases that come from heat and dryness.
For the nature of fire is so hot, and should never be treated with diseases of heat or drying; and it is said who says otherwise that the cautery provides great help for hot and dry illnesses that come into the body. For when you compare the body of the person and their moisture to the constitution of fire, you find that the body is cold.
And I agree with this word. For I have found it true on every occasion through experimentation.
And with any passage, do not interfere beyond him who has proven it, and who knows through long usage the chapter of cauteries, and the variety of skin types in men, and their dispositions and causes of illnesses, and the occurrences and space during treatment; we have no fear for other skin types, especially for cold and moist diseases. And all these matched and agreed with the cautery.
And know, children, that when assembled in fire, a cautery has secrets of healing arts, and it offers more benefit than a hot medical treatment.
For fire is simple, and does not come out except at the body part that is heated, and does not harm other parts if you do not name it.
Hot medicines travel from one part to another by removing, and cause diseases in the affected limb; and by chance they excite the patient.
Fire, due to its height and the goodness of its substance, does not do this if there is no excess.
And I have found this through experimentation and the length of service and study that I have put into the art, which corresponds to the truth of things; and for this reason, I apologize for the length of my words, because I do not want to withhold from you the secret of fire and its quality, how it removes diseases from bodies, as the philosopher demonstrates in his demonstration. Now accept this knowledge in your thoughts.
And know, son, that they decided on what times the cauterizations should be performed, and prescribed them carefully.
And I say that cauterization is suitable in all times, because the damages occurring are alleviated by the aid of the cautery; and likewise if the cauterizations are for necessary pains that cannot wait until larger harm befalls to the limb.
And never think like those who are fools, my dear child; for a disease cured by cauterization does not have a return. And they say it this way; but it is not as they believe, because cauterizations are just medicine that changes the complexion and dries out the fluids that cause pain, and works better than medicine for hastening its power, and through the virtue of its work and its authority.
And the possibility is that diseases come about in any way according to the disposition of the sick person and the location of the disease and its virtue; and they accumulate in him unnecessary things through the acquisition of meats and similar matters. If only cauterizations are given where there is little excess matter and moisture, as with cauterizations for pain, and similar things, then such pain does not recur; but this happens seldom.
And no one understands why cauteries are called the ends of medicine, and this is seen; but they do not believe that cauteries can follow medicine, but their understanding is false, and it is said that cauteries are at the end of medicine because when we administer methods for cures in any disease and they don't work, then we administer our cautery, and it works. Therefore, it is true that cauteries are at the end of medicine, not according to the understanding of those who misunderstand.
The old ones said that gold cauteries are melted better than iron ones, and they mentioned this only because of the quality of gold and the purity of its substance; and they stated that the metal parts of a cautery do not cause rotting, but this is not visible as I have proven it and found out that some people do experience this. And gold cauteries are more melted than iron ones, just as they said.
And yet, when you heat the gold instrument, you do not know immediately by the color of the gold when it is heated, and it quickly cools down; and if it is heated too much; it gets too hot to use; and thus there is enough prevention.
And for this reason, we use our fire cautery that has been prepared for our work.
So I have ordered this chapter on how to find the shoulder joint until this point, because it makes the search for it lighter.
with the olive cautery
The use of cautery is appropriate in cases of moisture and cold within the brain. There are two kinds done by reason of an illness called 'soda', and due to various humors descending from head to eyes, and ears, as well as from numerous dreams and toothache, and throat pain, and especially for all diseases coming from cold such as paralysis, soda (a type of stroke), apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
The form of this cautery involves purging the patient with a solutary medicine to transform their body for three or four weeks, depending on how well the disease, its intensity and regularity suit the body. Then it allows the recovery of the diseased part afterwards.
And then hold their hands together in your palms and place their hands on the bridge of their nose. Afterwards, put the root of your palm against the root of their nose between their two nostrils; let them breathe as you move your middle fingers to where they bleed, then heat up the cautery which is called 'olivare', this is its form:
And place it in its natural position with ink, and move your hand down gradually while pushing lightly against it; then raise your hand alone, and if you see the bone .i. a small dot; and if you do not see it, continue using the cautery until you see the bone as I've instructed. After this, take .i. pinch of sulfur, put it in oil and wet cotton inside, and place it on the bone, letting it stay there for three days. Afterwards, apply buttered oil on the skin; let it remain until the scab falls off; then treat the wound with balm known as 'tetrafarmaçon', until it heals over.
And they said that the more an open wound stays exposed, the more it purges out impurities; and because of this help, movements occur.
And it was said that one should leave the cauterization for so long that part of the bone gets burned, and then remove that which is burned from the bone, and treat it.
And it is said that the cautery should be left in place for as long as necessary, pressing so strongly that one lifts up to the bone as wide as a thumb that women insert into their fuses when they are menstruating because the body's fluids can then escape; and should the wound remain widely open after this? Afterward, it must be treated and sewn.
And these two ways of applying the cautery do not seem to me to be entirely good for everything, except where there is a channel for fear; and I think that I should leave them like this. For the joints weaken through continuous exposure to nature, as we attest in other limbs; even when the joint of illness is weak due to nature, and my first application of cautery feels more soothing and less painful to me, so from this usage, I work thus together for their benefit.
from the old pain in the head
When throughout the head comes chronic pain and lasts for a long time, one should use the patient's elbows and pills that are called 'cochies', and treatments of chief [possibly referring to herbs] and ears and bandages; and if one applies the cautery as we have previously said, it may prove effective.
Take care that the shoulder of the sick person is not too cold and robust in nature; therefore, apply the cautery under the fire for a bit as we have spoken about.
After you perform the cautery on each part of the shoulder until it reaches the bone, as we have said previously, do one more cautery where your hand is called "vassel"; and make two others in which suction cups are placed; and lift your hand so that you do not reach the bone: patients feel much greater pain with this cautery than with others, and I will speak further about it elsewhere; and it must be known that the cauterizations of the shoulder parts should be more precise than when one cauterizes the middle part of the head, and this is the form:
For the fire cautery, When suddenly in part of the head comes an intense pain,
The cauteries of fever require you to soak a piece of wool in sweet alcohol, then apply the peel and cover it with one band around each shoulder, positioning them so that the alcohol can reach the skin. Then secure it well for 12 hours; afterwards remove it and let it out on its own for two days or three.
After the oil treatment as long as it is clean; and if you see that you are doing with some burning medicines that I have written or the tenth treatise on burning medicines.
The iron cautery is done in this manner. Heat up the shape of the cautery as follows:
And call it "closed" because its head is made in the shape of a bell where there is .i. point of curvature, and in the middle it has a small appearance; and place it on the painful area, and hold your hand and gently turn the iron until half of the thickness of the skin is burned; then lift your hand so that the artery doesn't burn, when it is done, let out an abundance of blood.
After that, put cotton in a sailcloth, and apply it on the wound for three days; then change to damp cotton soaked in butter, and continue treating the wound with oil as long as it remains clean; if you wish to cauterize this headache with the iron cautery ("cultellare"), do so at its tip, but be careful not to cover the artery in this headache that is not old.
Regarding the use of a fire cautery, instruct the patient to allow their hair to grow long and evenly; if they are pricking at their base, hold them steady so they don't move until they fully grow.
When you are treating migraines as we have discussed in the divisions of diseases previously, if it does not benefit and you find that none of the cauterizations mentioned from the medicine and iron do not apply, then it is necessary for you to heat up the cautery which is called 'cultellare' until it's white; and do this on the part of the body where there's a line approximately half an inch long, and use your hand once, making sure that you don't cut into the artery and stop before reaching the bone; and guard against the jaw clenching when eating, ensuring only the jaw is moving and not any spasm affecting the patient, and guard against blood drainage from the artery if it's been cut, or sudden fear even in someone who doesn't know this procedure and hasn't experienced it; and leave your work for me to finish; but I will tell you how to stop bleeding when the artery has been cut, and show you where it is done in this book.
And if you find that this cautery does not work for the disease and the patients are suffering, use it on the head as we have said before, and treat the wound until it has healed; and if you observe to administer the cautery that we have said in the chapter about extracting the artery, with a two-bladed knife; and these cauterizations are better than others and more helpful.
The pain of the ear from both cold and heat
When pain comes from cold in the ear, and we have applied solutive medicines and other treatments that we mentioned under division, and if the pains do not subside, then heat this cautery called "points", according to its form.
After applying points all around the ear, or around both if pain is in both ears, and after removing somewhat from the root of the ear right where you have marked its edge; place ten points around each ear. After that, treat the area until it becomes healed.
Of the torment of the mouth
Treatments that need to be healed by the fire cautery are only those that move from pus, as we have explained in sections of diseases; and no cautering should be done on symptoms that come from scarring and rash of nerves.
When you treat this sign of torture that moves from pus in the ears and from discharges from the nose and gargling, if it is not effective, then it is necessary for you to cauterize the hair with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and another a little beyond the temple, and the third on the junction of the two lips; and place the cautery where the healthy part opens, and make it cauterize the head of the ear above slightly below the nose horn, and another in the temple as long as an inch; and leave the cautery burning until half of the skin is burned; and this is the shape of the cautery:
And as for the sign of the knife wound that we have described earlier, but it is a bit more subtle; so it needs that the knives be a little thicker. After treating the wound as I have said before, until it heals properly.
When dealing with an old apoplexy and you're treating it as we have described, and if the patient doesn't improve, and the sick person has a fever, then do this: four cauterizations. Two of them on the two tips of their head, one around the head, and one where the neck is called 'vessel' as we previously mentioned, and the final one on the mouth of the stomach; and treat it just as we have described before.
Of Liturgy
For this illness, you should give the patient large berries and pills that lighten the brain; after that, you examine the head of the sick person thoroughly, and then place the strappado made of tamarisk on their occipital region. And this is how to use a cautery: do it as I have said.
If it's healing like this, well done; and if not, you should do the following: apply three fire cauteries down to the neck while descending, leaving an interval of one thumb between each one. Treat as with the others, and if you see them adjusting, and the patient is suffering, then apply another cautery in the middle; and if necessary, two more above the two horns, and treat until it heals. And use the cauteries known as 'olivare', as I have said previously.
from the cold of the head It is necessary to cleanse the head of warts and what we have previously discussed; after treating the head with a cautery, then apply it to the patient, on each horn of the head and one at the base and three on the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the horns are moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease has spread, then apply four more cauterizations on the spine of the back; and leave until the most sensitive area is completely dry, then lift your hand; afterwards treat until it heals, and use the cauteries known as 'olivare' that we have previously mentioned.
Regarding the application of a cautery with fire, instruct the afflicted to allow hair growth until it is long and even; and if they poke at their origins, restrain the eyes so that they do not move until they grow.
The epileptics should only use fire cautery if they are of the phlegmatic type, and it is necessary to first modify their diet with years' worth and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division where the diseases are large and suffer from medicine.
And if it's a child who can't bear the discomfort, make them gargle and chew frequently with good meats; after that, they should have their head in the middle, and I do one fire according to what we said before, and one fire on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the disease is strong and causing suffering, make fires as I said for those who are paralyzed and have softening of muscles, over the spine at the back and neck, and apply olive wood fires in the manner that I have described.
If the patient is young, make him a fine fire cautery according to this method:
When it is due to melancholy that the excesses or moisture are corrupted and blood is thickened, then apply the cautery of partial cauteries as we have said for the one who has paralysis.
And if it is due to the cause of melancholy that the excesses decline towards melancholy, and there are symptoms in the body of moist maladies, then let them drink something that purifies the brain according to what was stated previously in this section.
After the king of the patient's ailment; after make two thread from well-made linen, as one circle, if put it into the head; and the patient sit upright, and must be held in all directions; after present the treatment, and rub with old bee wax; and heat the fire moderately so it can be applied without causing pain; afterwards empty the circle through the head, and let it cool down; and do this to the patient once a week for another procedure, until they are well.
If you see that the cauterization is taking place, make several points all over the cautery. This way of cauterizing moistens the brain significantly more; and then put damp cotton in bee wax and fat on it.
regarding the wisdom of the eyes When the eyes first come by means of the signs that I have described in division, then you should start and continue to provide the patient with things that cleanse the head, and protect it from all moisture. Make them sweat or take several baths fasting.
After commanding him to move his head and have the fire cautery applied around the head, then apply two cauterizations on each temple when both eyes are descending or when one eye is descending while the other remains still. And for every cautery, take care of all veins and arteries that are near the brain; and apply the cautery long according to the width of the temples; and guard against bleeding out; if you see too much blood coming out, stop it with something as you know how to do so.
And I will teach you about the extraction of arteries and incisions in how to apply the cautery; and every time, do not cauterize or burn anywhere near the two bones behind.
of the tears' boughs
When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed, and present on the veins, or out from the arteries that are at the apparent backside of the head; and it's seen that they're excesses of cold humors, then I make them to be treated with cautery as I said at the beginning: first. apply fire to the head, and secondly. two cauteries on each of the four temples, and thirdly. two more cauteries under each of the four bones; and if it needs more care, carefully cauterize above the eyebrow, with one small cautery in total.
of the tears' paths within the eyes
When you administer the medicines according to what we have said in the division, and if it does not benefit, then try giving the patient three bad eggs; after that, rub the head, and apply a cautery right in the middle of the olive oil cautery; and make two cauteries using the 'claw' type cautery on each eyebrow, slightly above the hairline; and beware to avoid touching the artery so you don't cut it. And this is the shape of the cautery which is called "claw":
And when the paper of the ear is softened by illness and moisture, then use this cautery which is called "olive". This has this shape:
And if you see to apply two cauteries on the two ears as long as they are; and do not let your hand rest until that third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner I have said.
of the hair which points the ear No time has there been when the hair of the ear turns into wax and touches the ear, and in this case one uses cautery according to two ways: that is to say by fire, or with burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they have grown and are even, then heal the patient; afterwards draw on the paper of the eyes a figure that looks like a leaf of myrtle, and mark its beginning under the sign opposite the hairs; then apply moist cotton dipped in egg white and garlic paste to the eye, then heat the cautery according to this shape:
After applying the cautery to the area you've marked, do so gradually a little bit at a time, until the skin is burned in that spot; and signs of healthy healing are when you see the paper retreat, and the hairs stand up at the eye's edge; then lift your hand, and leave it like that for three days. Next, place wet cotton in butter until the scab is removed; afterwards apply ointment until it becomes clean.
And when hairs and paper start to soften after this, then resume the cautery on that same area as you did first. If hairs have fallen out, apply the cautery until the paper rises back up to its natural position in a uniform way, ensuring it doesn't pinch or irritate the eye.
The instructions for the hot cautery are to guide the patient on letting hairs grow until they are large and uniform. Then create a shape of parchment resembling a bay leaf. Next, take French soap and live charcoal; each will require one-third, and grind them well together. Grind it quickly so that it doesn't cool down. Then apply this mixture according to the shape of a bay leaf on paper covering the affected area. If the ailment lasts for only an eye's span, you must cut into it within an eye's span. And if in both eyes; then stuff cotton moistened with egg white beneath each eye. Ensure the patient's side is toward your body and place your elbow while applying the medicine. Press one-third of a spoonful of the mixture along with some saliva every time the patient feels irritation from the medicine, for it feels irritation like fire. When you have done this for a long time, if the medicine prescribed to you is needed. And when the suppuration is past, if you lift the limb from the wound, and raise it again if you see the paper lifted in the same manner as it was lifted by the constraint of fire or incision; and if it's like this, then it's well. If not, still apply the medicine to the limb or until the medicine has taken effect, so long that your movements are equal, and your eyes adjusted; then place a wet cotton in butter until the burnt skin is covered, after treating the wound from the ointment called 'dyafen' and others, until it heals.
And if you need to guard very well over your work so that no medicine touches the eyes. And when the paper becomes moist and the hair sticks in the eye, then reapply the medicine to that limb which is softened by the paper correctly; as you did before. After this, treat it until it heals; and this is the form of the leaf of mirtle:
And know that the eyes of men vary in size and smallness, and according to this are your restrictions; and do not have the right path respond to him who studies this craft.
Of treating fistulas by cautery
When you treat a fistula as we have explained in the sections on diseases and your treatments are not beneficial, then it is necessary for you to apply a cautery treatment according to this manner.
Instruct the patient to place their head in your healthy position; and guide the surgeons' hands on their head between your palms so it does not move or slip from its place. After that, apply cotton soaked in egg juice or garlic juice to the eye; then heat up the cautery which is made: and place it close to the eye as if it were the shape of a goose feather, combine it with the point of the cautery touching it; if you see, make sure it points from one feather tip to the other, and if you can see, make it resemble a tent. But always remember that the position that works best for your operation is what truly matters.
After pressing the fistula when it has been opened, and treating the putrefaction, drying it out; if it is closed but still produces something, take it outside of the body; after this, place a cautery on it. Hold your hand at the part below the nose near the eye with the cautery, so that you don't lose control of your hand movements; and put the cautery in the grease around the eye, and allow it to decompose.
If you come to the beginning of the cautery up until the bone, that would be well. If not, then repeat the use of the cautery once more, and do so again if necessary, and leave it for three days; after this place a damp cotton in butter, and continue with the ointment cure as long as there's no fever, and if forty days pass without fever, then apply corrosive water until the bone is exposed. Follow these instructions according to what suits your chapter.
And there is a way of performing a cautery on a fistula that none of the old ones mentioned. Understand about the fistula and prepare for it; after this, place in the wound one fine piece of chalk as you see its form: And they do it in the quantity of one and a half pints; hold your hand or cudgel tightly, and don't move the injured part until the heated metal has reached its oil; and one must place cotton soaked with moisture over the eye: the lead when applied to diseased tissue, and healthily heals diseased areas.
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery as we have described, that's good. If not, then one should administer pertussis to the nose, and bring the fistula back into the body according to what is proper for its own natural function.
cuts in lips Rarely, there appear tears in lips which are called 'hair', and similarly in infants' lips.
When you treat these tears as we have discussed in sections, and if the treatment doesn't help, then apply this: take a small surgical instrument for cauterization according to this form:
And immediately place it in those tears until you reach the base; afterwards, heal the wound with tallow until it is healthy.
from the abscess of the throat
When an abscess appears at the root of the throat or in the uterus, or on the palate, or under the roots of the teeth, after becoming putrid and swollen it becomes a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in divisions, but it fails to improve: therefore, it is necessary that you have one cautery according to the size of the fistula; after the removal or erosion of the fistula, hold your hand until the metal reaches the bottom of it, then any further; and do this once or twice, following the treatment we mentioned in treatments, while it remains healthy. If treated like this, it is good; and if not, you should expose its location and remove the infected bone as found in your chapter.
The shifting of teeth
When the gums soften due to moisture and teeth move, you treat it through medicines but if this fails, then place the head of the patient in a healthy position; afterward heat up the cautery as follows: take one stick next to the tooth. And place the end of the cautery immediately inside the tooth, while holding your hand so that the heat reaches the root of the tooth; after that lift your hand and start using the cautery according to your will; afterwards fill the infected area with salt water, let it sit for an hour and then remove it.
And in this way, the teeth that were moving are stabilized, and the gums that were soft are made firm, and the moisture that was corrupt is dried.
Of toothache
When toothache comes from coldness, or there is coldness or frostbite, and medical treatments don't help, then one must use cautery according to two ways: and butter cautery and fire cautery.
Butter cautery if it is like this: you take butter from a cow, and use the tip of a iron or silver spoon; afterwards take cotton and wrap it on the tip of a needle, and immerse the wet end in the cold butter until it solidifies; then apply it quickly to the painful tooth and hold it until it has cooled down; and do this often until its effect reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see wet wool or cotton immersed in cold butter on the painful tooth, put them again on the aching tooth, and place a hot iron there until the heat reaches the pain in the tooth.
The assembly of fire for the cautery is such that you take one iron or ardent coal, and let it be large enough so that the heat does not reach the mouth of the patient; after heating the cautery, from which it will cool later, place it on a tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools down; do this often, as the pain will be relieved either that day or the next. And it is necessary that the patient fill their mouth with good butter in anticipation of this cautery, and then press hard; and this is the form of the cautery:
When the scrophules are due to cold blood and moisture, and do not respond to digestion by medicines, then apply the cautery as described below in this form, making two openings for the fumes to exit from the other side; place the hot cautery on the abscess once or twice, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; if the abscess is small, adjust the cautery according to the size of the abscess and leave it like that for three days; apply moistened cotton soaked in butter until all pus is removed; afterwards, cure with ointments and poultices until healed.
When moisture invades the channels of the heart, and especially when it comes from a cold constitution, then it's necessary that the body should be cleansed by diuretic medicines first; after this, apply the cautery at the base of the throat, but make sure not to come too close to the throat, nor burn the blood much except just a bit. Next, do another cautery at the junction of the neck and head of the spine, and use the cauterizations that we call "clavicle" as shown before; then cure accordingly until it is healed completely.
It seems like this text might be incomplete or perhaps contains a typo. The translation would depend on the correct content. If 'de la toust' refers to something specific in context, such as 'treatment of the eye', here's an assumption for its English translation: When all and the diseases of the womb are due to cold moisture, and the patients do not have fever or dryness, and if it is an old disease, then apply two fire cauteries on their force in their veins; and another one directly under the buttocks between the two nipples. And let the cautery called "clavile" be according to the shape that was previously mentioned.
And if you see this, apply the fire cautery at the entire point which is called "pains" from which the shape of this was previously described in the disease of the ears; and have the points until thirty, or beyond that. After treating the area according to what was said before, apply three rings according to this form:
And for these, make the fire cautery lighter, because you do it three times in each area.
On the dislocation of the shoulder When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. After that, bandage the limbs on his back and sides; afterwards, lift out the kidney which is inside the testicle with your left hand; and if the joint has dislocated internally, apply the cautery iron which has two points like this:
and cauterize the kidney until it pierces up to the ribs, and join together four applications of the cautery, and this is done by using the cautery which has three points, because there are three stages in the cauterization process; and the nerves follow the delicacy of a tent, which is the shape of the cautery with three points:
And always attach this one on this first nerve because there are seven cauterizations needed.
After placing the cautery, knead with thread; afterwards let the patient rest, and do not stretch the limbs for too long until they are well supported.
And if it is dislocated upwards, where little has happened, then make the cautery on the thick part of the clavicle, or use several cauterizations. For the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed and the patient's injury is healed.
of the weeping cautery
The ancient ones said that it is necessary to do pleursin cauteries from the roots of aristologe, and in this manner: take a long root of aristologe, the longest you can find, and let it be dry, also making sure it's as big and as long as your fingers; and boil it in oil, then apply it to fire, and cauterize one cautery between the elbow joint and neck region, and two smaller cauteries slightly downward towards the area under the beard; and two cauteries between the fifth rib and sixth, behind a little bit; and one cautery below the buttocks, and another on the stomach, and one in-between the two shoulders, and two more at two ribs farther down than the cautery between the shoulders; and do not squeeze your hand, instead apply it widely like when smelling.
And the old ones said that no man uses fire-cautery with one raseur (a medical tool), and they warm it up and place it between the ribs until it reaches the abscess; and once relieved of pain, as we have mentioned for the abscess under the liver. But in this work there is fear or perhaps now the patient dies, or a fistula occurs which cannot be cured.
Of mice
When you treat the disease of the mouse in those that we have said about divisions of treatments, and it does not benefit at all, then they apply three methods of cautery which are all good.
Amongst them is a method that involves making three or four cauteries, in a line according to the length of the mouse, according to the figure of the heart as we explained before; and do not press your hand throughout the cautery, and let the patient feel their presence at their back.
And another method of cautery is to heat the cautery which has two ends, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the head where the mouse comes from the left side, where the pain arises, and let the elevation you raise the head according to the head, according to the length of the body, and the cauteries should be according to the width of the body.
After having lit the two fingers, let them burn until they are perceived on the other side, and then remove the cautery. Thus there will be three. If you observe, completely cauterize with the full cautery at three points. After treatment when it has expelled putrefaction for a long time, this proves that other treatments mentioned before were beneficial.
regarding dropsy
The fire cautery is not suitable for dropsy, except in the method called "asclytes". When you treat according to the methods we have discussed before and if your treatment does not benefit, then it's necessary that you make four cauterizations around the anus, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one under the kidneys, and two at the back on the spine, and one near the keel. And let the cauteries be well close to the kidney region.
After letting the cautery open for a long time to fumigate, do not stop the remedy from the patient after the cautery; and then healing would hasten, and both the two remedies would work together with God's help.
The shape of the cautery for the belly should be like the illustration we showed before; and for that one used for the back it should be similar to an olive, as described earlier.
Regarding swelling of the joints When the joints are swollen in someone who is hydroptic and filled with yellow bile, it is necessary to apply the cautery on the back of each joint between the little finger and the ring finger. Then lift your hand with the cautery without turning it. Do not insert too deeply in the center; otherwise, it would go beyond the yellow bile, and then proceed with the application of heat according to this form:
After doing this on the two legs, do it twice on each leg at the tip of the cutlass. And let the cauterizations be long, one before in front of the knee and the other behind, in the middle of the leg; and leave the cauterizations unattended for a long time without curing them until the pus comes out; after that cure the other treatments that we have mentioned.
from memory
When the stomach ailment comes from cold and moisture, as long as the retention and digesting powers in the stomach and intestines are weakened and unable to function properly; and you see the patient suffering greatly with strong green symptoms, then apply a large cauterization on the stomach following what was discussed previously or cauterize the stomach using circulating cauterization. And apply three small cauterizations around the throat at each small spot, and two small cauterizations on each hip, and four cauterizations on the hips.
And if you see the moisture abundant and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the elbow, and one on each knee, and two small cauteries on the stomach beneath the large one. Because the treatment is advantageous when there's good help present.
of the treatment of hemorrhoids
When the hemorrhoids are or have a base, or one or more, and they are old, being large, cold, and moist pus, and if treatment does not work as we have described in divisions, then proceed: three on the spine of the back, that is all exposed beneath the loin bone little by little in triangular fashion, and one cautery under the buttocks. Two more;
And if you think that the stomach is cold and the food does not cook properly, and you see swelling of the faeces, then on the faeces perform one large cautery on the stomach as described previously, and another on the liver, and another in the belly with the whole cautery. Leave the cautery for a long time. Afterwards treat the wound until it heals completely.
of the flesh ailment which is named 'theul'
When you treat 'theul', heat up the cautery until it is glowing white-hot, and then place it entirely against the 'theul'; keep your hand on the cautery as long as its tip reaches the origin of the vein from which the pus flows; do this once or twice, and if there are multiple 'theuls', cauterize each one just like we have explained; after treating with beneficial remedies when they are clean; and if you use a large-hot cautery to treat 'alchatim', it will provide more assistance.
of poorly treated wound
When the patient cannot bear surgery or opening [a wound], as we will describe in its proper place, if such illness arises that can only be cured through cauterization.
When there's no opening present and it's aged with festering, rotting pus and corrupted moisture, test the entire area with a fine probe thoroughly. Make sure you know fully how many parts that probe has moved into.
Of kidney disease When abdominal pain originates in the kidneys and is accompanied by large wind movements, it does not affect all women equally. Therefore, it is appropriate to apply a cautery to both kidneys and on the clavicle, as we have mentioned previously; and if we cauterize in the middle, three cauterizations will be made in line, and they will provide more assistance.
From the bladder When the bladder is swollen and weak from heat and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then perform a cautery in the lower part on the bladder, where the pubic hair begins, and one to each side, and let each cautery be as long as a finger; and do one cautery behind the back, or two if needed; and have the cauterizations shaped like a 'Y' according to the form previously described.
Regarding the marriage When the marriage is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception with others, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends delay; and when they come, one feels great pain: then it is necessary to do three cauterizations inside the womb, as we have said or the bladder cautery, and two cauterizations behind the back; and have the cauterizations shaped like a 'Y', as we have said.
From the hip
When the viscous fluids descend to the cavity of the hip, and for this reason it moves out of its place. The signs are that the leg is longer than the other when measured together; and it's found that the legs start at the visible departure point, thus you should cauterize the wound on the cavity of the hip with one cautery seeming like a circle, and mark before the hip inside the cavity where the cavity turns; and let the cavity be within the circle. And if the cautery is made as those that have been cauterized in the stomach.
And if these cauteries are not present, make three large olive-shaped cauteries and let the cautery be as flat as all the knives; and apply the treatment until it is healed.
关于髋部的疼痛 When pain comes into the hip joint, and it's due to coldness and moisture, and patients are treated in accordance with what we have discussed about division and treatment for these conditions, but if the disease is old: then you should cleanse the patient of thick fluids using foul-smelling pills or other good pills that resemble them.
After you perform the cautery; and the method of the cautery consists in two ways: which is to say, a combination of hot medicines, and fire cautery. The fire cautery can be done in several ways, among which one way is like this: you cauterize on the hip joint with three triangular cauteries according to this shape, and each has good depth and largeness, and there is space between each cautery as big as a thumb, and these are olive oil cauteries; never do you make a cautery in the middle of the main part of the hip joint, for there are four of them according to this shape:
And if you see fit, cauterize with a circular cautery as we have mentioned before in the dislocation of the hip joint; but do it so that the circles contain the entire hip joint, and all parts of the knee are burned.
And this is the method for sciatica treatment, when pain stays in the hip, and does not reach up to the thigh or leg. And if it reaches up to the thigh and the leg, then apply two cauterizations there where the pain persists, and one above the ankle three inches, on the left side a little; use cutlery cauterization methods and burn away the thick part of the muscle; and should the patient feel that the pain extends down to just below or close to the foot, cauterize there where he feels the pain, three points or four at the point called 'points' on the cauterization.
And if more work is needed, then proceed with it; and should the pain be spreading from the knee towards the thigh, apply cutlery or circular cauterization, and make sure to diligently carry out all your cauterizations without allowing them to stop short of burning nerves and major arteries, and do not cause the patient any greater harm or contraction.
And I have seen several people who performed cauterization on the ankle up to the foot, and left it until their leg was swollen all over, and likewise with their feet, they became inflamed and rotten in all of them. After a stomach solution, they died from it.
And if the pains are in two parts together, make cautery on one and other, according to this manner.
And heat it until it turns completely red and emits steam, then place it on the hip boil, and twist over the healthy side. And apply one cautery once and let it sit for three days; then apply a poultice of butter, and keep the wound open long after that. Continue with ointment treatment until it heals.
Albucasim says that we use very little of this cautery for the fear of his judgement, and yet few people use it. Nevertheless, this is a good cautery, which one can tolerate, and leaves where it appears.
of the pain of the back
When pain comes to the back, whether by falling or impact or from too much evacuation, or due to exposure to cold matter, none of these conditions warrant cauterization, for it is akin to what arises from the infusion of cold matter.
After the patient has been treated for bad pills or other similar conditions, one should apply this to their back where the pain is felt, marking three lines of length and applying burns at each line according to the size and quantity that the body can withstand; proceed with the burn technique as described for the "point" cautery. And if you see fit, do three or four burns around the median cautery following this form:
This disease often affects small children, and at the onset it is characterized by a lack of strength when they stand up, followed by fear. You will find an inflammation in the last spinal nerve on the back and sometimes there appears a phenomenon on other nerves.
When you see this and observe its cure, if you apply it with a hot iron in this manner on the body.
Then let the iron cautery touch each part of the spine equally. And if you see this, apply the hot iron to the spine for two or three lines and place them close together. After the cure is done as long as it is sound in accordance with what we have said, be careful not to use the cautery when the area is inflamed which might affect a nerve.
of the pain in joints
When joint pain is due to moisture spread throughout each limb, and when pain comes in the foot, which they call "gout" properly, and when it is caused by cold and its treatment can be cured with medicines that cannot cure it, then it should be treated using cautery in this manner: make a series of iron cauterizations around the joint of the foot, and apply olive oil as follows:
And if you need to touch the foot of the patient, if it is ordered that you apply heat all over the cauterizer saying "point". And should pains come up to the knees and other joints, and this happens often, then you should apply heat on each knee three times or four from each part, across all the olive oil cauterizers; and if you need more, make more, but do not remove your hand until such time as the wound is healed.
And should the pains descend to the knees and back, then administer the cauterization as we have said in our chapter. And if the pains are located on the hands, apply points inside the fold two lines; and if there is still no pain on the back, apply points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and should the pains come down to elbows or shoulders, cauterize each part, and well govern the patient and take medicines. For if you give him good governance and purge phlegm, he will be healed with the help of God.
Of the rupture of the uterus
When rupture occurs in anger, and the bowels descend to the kidneys; it is something new. Therefore, when you are curing his eyes, do not let him drink during that time; and use things that calm the stomach so that the wind descends from his stomach. After that, make him sit on his back between your hands, and instruct him to scratch his armpit until the bowel has healed, then remove it with your fingers, and apply heat to the rupture over bone where the knife was used; ensure it resembles half of a circle above his chest. Then prepare the cautery as described here:
Until it is white and smells of stink. Then remove the bowels by lifting them up; and have your attendants cut his hand to prevent them from turning back; and work well on his thighs at the patient's instruction, and place one cushion and one servant under his knees, and another under his buttocks that scratches his hands; then put the cautery at the sign across your entire palm, and hold it steady with both palms until you reach the bone. And if you don't reach the bone on your first attempt, continue trying again as many times as needed up to the bone; and be careful not to let the bowels escape when you apply the cautery; do not burn them; and so that the patient does not suffer further harm or any other illness.
And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your actions are worthless. And it is necessary that children's cautery measures be subtle according to their size, and also large people should have cautery as large according to their measure; after three days cure his side by applying butter until the scab comes off; after this use other ointments until he heals completely, and let him rest on his back for forty days so that the wound is well healed; and it is necessary that his treatments be prolonged so much that the bowels do not protrude when he will want to walk in chambers.
And after forty days, when he wishes to stand up, a well-made bandage should be applied, and this for another forty days; with good rest, he should engage in light activities and avoid overconsumption of water and food, as well as excessive shouting. And when he follows this instruction, he will be entirely healed. I shall explain the treatment for cutting (possibly referring to surgical procedures) later in this chapter. regarding the rupture of the belly
When abdominal ruptures occur and are known, and you see they no longer grow, apply fire to the affected area according to its quantity, using one-third of a spoonful for each application; after that, treat it as we have instructed before. And none of the old texts suggested using a three-cornered cautery at the angle in this manner:
But the first sign of rupture is that the area swells and you make a line across the width above the injury, and another below, and then hold your hand with the metal part of the cautery over the entire length. But the first applications of heat are lighter and wetter.
from old pain in no limb When pain comes to no limb, whether from falling or being hit, and this pain lasts long, and the treatment of medicine does not help, then it must be cauterized with a cautery called "points", and apply the heat according to the length of the member and its smallness and weakness, as well as its twisting location and pain. If it responds to the first application, that is good; if not, try another round of one more heat on top of this one, because such treatments are designed to affect the limb closest to them, so you must continue the cauterizations until the body heals.
Regarding cautery from fire, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
The healings are aided many times by cautery and especially the disease that comes from the putrefaction of bile and melancholy. If you see cautery, take care so that this disease is in the beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not spread or remain, and you doubt that corruption penetrates the entire body, then do this:
And if the measles are everywhere scattered; and it is clearly missing, then it is necessary that you apply this cautery with these cauterizing methods to the head, and once on the nape of the neck, and seven cauterizations on the spine of the back, and one large near the chest and another below, and two near each shoulder blade; and two on the ribs, and two on the tendons of the foot, and one for each joint in hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and be careful not to burn any nerves that are behind the heel, do not burn them. And never apply a cauterization near bone on the shinbone, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And know that the more I use the cautery, the more assistance I give, and it benefits him; and know that when a sick person doesn't feel pain from the cautery as a healthy person would, because their body is already completely corrupted. And you should have large and small cauteries according to limbs and joints, as you will find in methods for metal tools. After the cure, wash the area several times with honey and other treatments until it heals properly.
To bloom
When swelling appears in any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters but doesn't heal, then one should perform cauteries on the limb according to its size; and let each cautery go somewhat inside the hollow of the diseased area; then treat it with ointments until it heals properly. And whenever a new swelling appears at the hand or foot or back, along the exit of the nerve that paralyzes the limb, thus one extracts the swelling; and always no one should interfere unless they are knowledgeable about limbs and the exits of the moving nerves in the body.
Of cauteries, instruct the patient to let their hair grow long and evenly; if they prick at their roots when young, hold them steady so they don't move until grown out.
When the disease called "albaras" matures and medicine no longer helps, then one should use a small fire cautery according to the size of the spot, until the boil is removed and its color changes. Then apply cornmeal several times mixed with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood from chicken and blood from duck, each in proportion. Mix all together, bind it with a cloth, and leave on the affected area until healed.
The treatment of a sore by cautery
When the ulcer begins and you see it stopping, if you halt its progress by applying a cautery to the spot that seems like the first circle around the ulcer. And always, they say one should apply the cautery in the middle of the ulcer; and I always think this isn't good because I fear it might lead to inflammation and corruption. I've already decided against doing that several times; and a more correct method is to apply the cautery around its edges, using the cautery named 'circule', as we have described earlier when speaking about various types of cauterization.
of swelling that cannot die
When someone has a disease called "adubelati", and it doesn't want to die, either due to its overgrowth or because of the old age of the illness when the body is too weak (meaning the person is very old), having little blood, or due to tension; then you see that it hastens towards death: in this case, apply small cautery treatments using several rounds; after that, leave them be. For it will hasten its own demise.
And if you see it pierced through with all the cautery, heat the cautery as shown here:
And put your hand in the middle of that disease called "adubelati" while both cauteries pierce through the head, and make sure both cauteries are such that the patient feels them going out to a degree where the process of decay is stopped. After treatment until it becomes completely healed.
The fire cure by iron
Another way of disease is called "corrodens", and it is nothing else than an infection of the body part because it eats away at the limbs like dry wood burns. If you see this disease in a limb that can bear heat, then heat up both the iron cauteries to be small and large according to what suits the limb where the illness is; after applying the cautery all around until you remove all corruption, leaving nothing behind, ensuring no remaining corrupted part remains. And then leave it for three days, and while the burns from the fire heal with oil, take care of any remaining corruption. After that, apply ointments that generate new flesh for three more days. If after three days there is no sign of healing, start applying heat to the infected parts again. And this disease can be cured in one go using medicine against fever instead of the iron cautery; however, iron cautery is more powerful aid. I have already explained the medicine against fever in its division: take it whenever needed.
Of the roots coming to stones
There are times when stones cause a disease that we call 'clos' according to our understanding, and it is a large lump that irritates the foot. And for this illness of clos there are two ways of treatment. This means fire cautery and hot water cautery. Fire cautery is that you heat one cautery like a feather from a goose, and make it out of good iron at the size so that it can envelop all sides of the nail, and ensure fine margins; after that place everything heated on the nail, and twist your hand around the nail completely until it reaches to the end of the nail; then leave it like this for three days until pus begins to form; then make a plaster from pounded wild marjoram mixed with oil, and leave the plaster overnight, and the nail will detach from its roots. Then cure the area with ointment until healed.
And if they have been turned inside out by the stone and it happens many times both in hands and in stones, then it is necessary that you apply hot water cautery; and here's how to do it: take a reed or iron rod, or a feather from a goose, place it on the nail and althelul, which means warts, and place the stick such that it touches all around, then put a little hot water, hold your hand well and twist your hand as the edge of the stick reaches to the root of the nail, and then find the hot water penetrates deeply until reaching the root; let the patient endure the burning from hot water for an hour; then leave it like this, and all roots will be uprooted. Do another application in the same way until you remove all those who are within the stone, then treat with ointments that generate flesh.
The treatment for shaking
When some shake due to cold or nerves, or a quartan fever or otherwise, it is necessary that you apply four or five cauterizations on the spine of the back. And one cautery between each vertebra; and one on the skin, and one under the stomach with the olive cauterization; if this continues to cause shaking, hasten his recovery from the cold illness.
puant sores
When visible through openings the body, or pus-sores that come from large corrupted matter, if it is necessary at first when they appear, to apply a fine cautery to each head of the pustule: a delicate faggot of myrtle wood, whose tip is taken by fire, or from the long root of aristolochia, or with the lenticular cauterizer. And never should it be burnt at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they do not grow out en masse, but their excess is dissolved which causes them, and are healed; but it should be done after bloodletting.
When the artery has been cut Many times great variations of blood from the artery that has been cut at the wound come out towards the outside, or during incision of an abscess, or with the fire on the limb, and similar situations; it is a very vexing thing to stanch.
And yet when this happens to any of you, if you quickly place your index finger on the wound of the vein, and hold it very tightly until the pulse subsides under your finger, and no drop passes anymore; then light several small and large olive oil cauteries until they are all red. Then take .i., or large or small depending on the wound and the location where the artery is located, and place the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery there until the pulse is fully congealed.
And if it jumps out when you remove your finger from the vein, and the cauteries are extinguished, take quickly another one of the cauteries that are at the fire.
And do not stop performing this one after the other until the stump is completely burnt; and beware that you don't burn the nerve underneath, and that no harm comes to the patient; and know that when bone leaves the artery, it can be hard to properly reattach it yourself even if the artery is large, as long as it isn't treated by one of these four methods: through cautery, or extraction when not yet treated, or with strong string tying, or using medicines applied that have power to stop bleeding; and bind and restrain it accordingly.
Who will administer the reattachment, by tightly binding with cloths or placing hot things on, or other similar actions, if it doesn't benefit them.
And if this happens to anyone and they have neither tools nor medicine at hand, should place their thumb on the wound of the artery as we have said, and stretch them out until they are completely burnt above the wound and above the artery; and don't move your hand but keep it moistened with cold water often while it is very cold until the bone becomes frozen, swollen, and burnt. And prepare to do the tasks that require cautery and medicines for this situation.
We have spoken in the first chapter about every disease where it is necessary to use a fire cautery, or medicine that burns, and we discussed their causes, tools, forms of the cauteries; and I placed that chapter up until here, and I will go through this chapter using the same path so that one finds them more easily than before.
And as I start this, it must be known that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first chapter of using the fire cauterizations, and for this reason, more caution is needed.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and treating wounds, and extracting arrows, and cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I advise you not to embark on folly. For many ways of people come into cures. Some come from those who are so affected by their illness that they die lightly due to the fear and panic they find in their disease, and the severity of their malice; and for these one should have fear. And among these are those who give you their sense and say: "Wait, I am a coward"; illness is unkind. It is not fitting for you to agree with those who come to you in this manner, but place more constraint on your honor than on your covetousness, do not act rashly but wisely of those whom you are certain about, and of whom you can take and know; use prediction and guidance in the cures of your ailments that lead to health; and this will help you acquire good reputation, glory, and lasting memory.
Dear son, Our Lords give you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to inspire by the holy inspiration of their hand, Amen.
Or I have instructed you this chapter by considering it in parts, according to what is before or the section about cauteries that I have discussed up until the foot, so you will find it easier to understand for those who need it.
the head filled with water
Know that this disease comes so often in infants at birth, and when the mother holds the head of the infant too tightly; and it happens none of those times due to a cause that we know.
And I never see this disease except in infants, and among all those that I have seen, it hastened their deaths; and for this reason, I think it is worth mentioning that I will divide the work into sections of treatments.
And I saw one of their children the shoulder was full of water, and the head swelled each day until it could no longer bear it; and believed so much in the moisture that he died, and this moisture is assembled around the bone in the syphac region, between the heart and the bone; and the veins are thus arranged when the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, you cut a large gash through the head until it's wide; and so long as the moisture flows; and see this shape of the syphac:
If the moisture is more abundant, and the abscess is larger, then make two cuts in a cross-shaped manner, according to this form:
And if the moisture is around the bone, and you see the corners of the head opening from each part, and water spills out when you press it with your hand internally, and this does not stop: then it is necessary that you cut through the head in three cuts according to this manner:
And after making the incision, extract all moisture. After stopping the oozing from cuts and powders, apply wine and oil, and leave this manner for up to a fifth of days; then release it, treat the wound through changes and applications, and allow the head to heal similarly, and finally feed the patient dry meat from a small amount of moist until the limb is strengthened and healthy.
And another method of incision is that you look where the opening of the abscess is large, and gather water; for it is not always in front; nor always behind; nor always on the right; nor always on the left.
Therefore cut where the abscess is open, and fill with water, and make a wound according to what you can do; and be careful not to cut the artery; and watch for blood flow, so that the patient dies from the bleeding and the evacuation of moisture.
In reference to cautery using fire, command the patient to allow hair growth until it becomes long and uniform; if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they fully grow.
When it comes to any illness that is called 'catarrh' in the eyes or at the bottom of the nose and such diseases are old, and the cure from medicine doesn't bring benefit, then the final treatment includes cauterization along with cutting off the two main arteries.
Therefore, when you cover the eyes, let the illness operate behind the head; after this, rub the area with a coarse cloth until the arteries are visible, then pull out the illness's neck to both sides using one cloth. Then look where the vein lies and check the positions of both eyes from front and back after the ears, ensuring they have returned to normal; then mark both eyes with lime, then cover each one with a sharp knife blade up to bone for two parts, making sure it goes along the width of the head.
And if you see it, pinch off the sperm on both sides of the artery and vein above, cut them also as two inches through.
And when the veins are incised, let the blood flow out continuously from up high.
And if the artery does not open upon feeling it, you should measure the length of the space as three inches and then cut until you reach the bone; and what needs to be taken out of the blood is about seven parts per cent, and by chance a little more or less according to how the patient can endure it and the filling of the artery. Then look at the wound: if there remains a point close to syphilis under it, or if our incision does not reach that point, then heal the wound and bind it, and apply the salve until it is healed.
This line seems to be incomplete in the provided text, so there isn't a clear translation for "de emigrainne". It might need more context from following sentences to properly understand its meaning or purpose within the medical treatise. However, considering "emigrainne" could refer to something related to grain (as medieval texts often covered agriculture and farming techniques alongside medicine), it might be suggesting instructions on managing grain storage, planting, harvesting, etc., but without more context this is speculative.
When old age arrives, and severe coughing comes along, due to moisture from tears and heat in the temples and elsewhere throughout one's aging body, as well as similar things. The treatment is done through ways of medicine cure techniques and all such methods do not benefit it fully; we would extract the arteries in the temples and cauterize them, just like what we have recounted.
And the method of extracting them is such that the patient feels through their temple hairs, and listens to the artery opening at the temple, for it opens well by its pulsation, and responds only in some who are too cold; and if it responds, then strangle your neck with a few cloths, then rub the area with a hard cloth, and raise the area with hot water until the artery clearly appears. Then take the sponge that has this form:
Then slightly peel the skin until you see the artery, then pull it up with forceps, and remove well any membranes that are off from each part; and if the artery is subtle, then turn it at the tip of the little finger. Then cover that part according to the size of both shoulders. For if it isn't covered, then don't let anything cut everywhere.
And treat the bleeding from these two places until this point. And if the artery is large, it must be tied with two threads of a thick silk thread so that there won't be decay before the healing of the wound and so that blood doesn't accumulate thereafter; then cut off any excess between the two threads at that very moment, and then, if you see fit, cauterize gently along the cautery cut until reaching the bone as long as the joints are cut. And this is a minor procedure, provided the patient does not have fever and they have a warm constitution.
For the cauterization is help to finish off the wetness; because it provides more effective assistance against wetness. When it is necessary for the extraction of arteries, one must fill the hole with old cotton and place well-made tents there; and once they are removed, cut them with dry medicines that produce pus and tents until the wound heals; and if you don't have access to this, cauterize along this cautery trenching in two parts, but ensure the trenches are well spaced to allow heat to last longer. If you do not have this available now, put your tool inside as long as the tent is frozen, and remove it with cold water until the tent stops, and apply according to what is necessary; and that which is minor and more suitable for extracting arteries is when you cauterize along this cautery trenching in two parts, but ensure the trenches are well spaced to allow heat to last longer. For when the instruments are too tight, they hold less of their heat. And it must have between the two knives, one should have a large gap. And when you intend to heat both ends, and place the hot iron until it reaches up to the bone, and cut the vein in two places; and let them be distant from each other among the two shoulders because there is no welding of this cautery everywhere; and this is how the cautery should look:
Of tears
When the tears from the eyes are draining through the veins that lie under the nose of the head of strength, and medicine cure doesn't prove useful, and you see the skin turn red due to this, and feel heat on your forehead as if there's a pulse; and wherever they are damp and moist such that paper hairs fall out, and the papers are heated, and scorched by the heat of the tears, then it requires this remedy.
And they called the old "bruise healer", and you should instruct the patient who has this disease to grow hair on their forehead, then make him three slits or cuts evenly across the forehead according to its length; and let one of these cuts be as two in going along the entire front until it reaches halfway up to the eyebrow, and the others two each at the ribs above the eyes, and keep clear of the incision of the arteries that are above the eyes; and keep your hand away from the continuity of the two jaws, and let each wound have the size of three in going through the joints;
After the incision made behind the temple up to the second incision; and scrape off all the bone in between the two cuts right down to the bony surface. Then make another cut from halfway through this incision up to the other second one, and then extract that dressing.
If you insert a tool in the first crack that is called "cultellaire", and it has sharpness on one side, and on the other side it is hard, not sharp, and this is its form: And place the tool cutting towards the inner skin of the ear, and the hard part towards the bone, and insert the tool until it reaches halfway through. And remove all vessels that descend from the head to the bones up until the continuous incision meets what opens into the ear canal, and then continue further in the middle crack until reaching the other opening; and remove blood evenly, and express the wound for the taken blood; then place a patch of old cotton in each crack, and place cloths soaked with wine and oil and vinegar above it, and ensure that no pus comes out; and on the third day, loosen the bandage, and apply a large amount of water dressing, then administer treatment with basilic ointment mixed with rose oil, and other treatments for wounds until it heals.
from the pus of the bones
When it comes to severe and recurrent fevers, and you see the eyes tired and small, and weakening of sight, and burned paper; and the hair falls out, and one sweats profusely in chills, and the body experiences external pain, then by these events you should know that those substances and that fever do not come from many veins, and with this treatment method, it is as follows.
And thus you instruct the patient to look behind their forehead, then make a large incision in the middle of the forehead, and another one wide. Begin from the left temple incision to the right temple incision, and when this cut reaches the bone; keep your hand away from the nerves in the temples that move with chewing; once the bone is exposed, drain all the blood using a sponge, then clean between the two lips of the incision and place old cotton and linen cloth. Then cover it with cloths soaked in wine and oil, while avoiding to cause an abscess; when it has been removed, it is necessary that you rub the bone until cartilage begins to grow, then treat it with desiccating substances, as they quicken cartilage formation.
In this manner: take two parts of the oat flower and four parts of colofon, and make plaster; then administer it on these wounds to speed up cartilage growth everywhere.
Of the treatment of ear-sticking injuries
Everything that causes injury to the ears is one of the four things: or grains, or beast, or mine stone or similar thing like iron; or seed, like beans, peas; or flowing thing like water and oil and similar things.
When it causes injury to the ear with a stone or any other thing that does not fit in the ear and does not grow in the ear, place the ear under sunlight. If you see the stone, if you can distill a drop of violet oil or sesame oil, then proceed with extraction; and have them sneeze out camphor, and when sneezing begins, stop up their nostrils, and put pieces of cloth or wool into the ear; and hold the ear above. Many times this treatment brings relief; and if it doesn't bring relief, then you proceed with extraction using fine forceps, which is described as follows:
If it comes out with forceps, that's good; if not, proceed with extraction using fine silk thread of small thickness; and if it doesn't come out this way, make a thimble from catgut or pull the end of the thread near the ear canal quite firmly, and stop up the space where the wick is in beeswax so that the thread cannot enter with the wax; then press the glue onto the stone or whatever it may be, and pull forcefully. And many times this brings relief; and if it doesn't bring relief in such manner, then take the glue out and replace it with a tool suitable for this, and put some cotton inside; then press the glue onto the stone or whatever it may be, and pull forcefully. And if none of these things we have said cause her to jump out from all this, hurry to cut the ear in such a way that pus and blood drain away, and twitch; and the method of cutting is that you first make a surgeon's incision on the auricular muscle, remove some blood according to the measure of its strength, then let the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small cut at the root of the ear where the fat hangs down; and let the cut be as round as a crescent moon until you reach the bone, then break the bone according to your power, and suck it rapidly into your mouth; and treat it until it is healed. And if it is gravel and it inflates, then administer extraction; and if it cannot come out, then administer one small spatula tool according to this shape:
And make an incision on that grain. But do not do this when you think the grains are moist due to moisture in the ear, until you have made many pieces; then remove them with delicate tweezers and a suction tool, as we said before, so that the extractions become easy.
In hot water then, when the patient sneezes in the ear, instruct them to perform an expectoration of cold fluids and generously stuff the ear with old cotton. And lie down directly on that same ear where the heat resides. If it sneezes out forcefully through this method, that's good. If not, take multiple stones according to their length and softly place them in her ear; then heat each slightly over a flame; and place one or two pieces of these stones into her ear, and have her lie on the other foot from another side, and strike another stone against the stone inside the ear; and continue this procedure of one stone after another until all of the hot water escapes completely out, so it will all sneeze out completely. And if you notice, take a single reed, place the larger end in her ear, and light the other end with fire until the larger end of the reed becomes burnt; then repeat this process of different reeds until all the hot water has escaped, as we have explained for stones.
In the extraction of small beasts such as fleas and similar things, treat it in the manner we have described for removal; but if they are of large size that can be felt, then perform the pinching extraction; and this is the easier thing to remove that is found inside the ear.
In the extraction of worms tangled in the ears, when you are treating it as we have described for divisions and distillations, and if the cure does not help, then you must examine the ear with the sun: if there is no worm appearing, extract them using fine pincers; and if they do not appear, take this form of sugar here.
And make it narrow below and wide above. And take the most subtle part of the ear according to the amount of suffering from the patient's illness, then apply this all over the ear; do this often until all the liquid comes out. And if they do not want to come out, you may numb the area with cotton like I have mentioned in the case of the stone; and if they don't protrude as we have said, administer distillations that the old ones have proven effective for worm cuts, and you will find them or a guide on distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with this instrument, following this form as you see:
And it should be made of silver or of tin with small perforations on the bottom and top for distillation; and to press inside the distillation use a properly made tool of tin suitable for this task. Take one piece of raveling cotton wrapped around the tip part, then pour your oil or juice into it, and let it be in the ear; then fill the raveling with all the cotton and gently press your hand until the oil is distilled or until some drops come out from the ear; and listen to the patient inside, and know that after such a distillation, the medicine should not be too cold because otherwise the medicine would not be as effective.
Regarding ear piercing
No child is born without any intact parts in their ears; and this same thing happens to people due to wounds or birth in the ear, and these injuries happen inside the ear sometimes, if one cannot see them; and they happen only once inside the ear, when you can't see them. And they never occur twice, where one can see it well.
That which happens inside and cannot be seen comes from the injury of healing in various stages, and in this situation where one can see that you should place the ear under the sun; and look inside: if you see the evident swelling, if the work has become completely filled with pus as described here:
And let it be so that you cut in front and behind completely flat, so as not to irritate the ear; if the swelling is due to newly formed flesh or a bump of the ear, then use subtle pricks on it, and gently scrape it until all the flesh is removed.
And if the pustules are in front of the ear, take one fine, light razor and warm it a little over fire, then place it inside the ear. If you feel the pustule that causes pain in the ear when touching it lightly, do so carefully not to injure the nerves in the ear; afterwards put into the ear a plug according to its size at the tip, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Do this every day until the wound heals or you take a plug and moisten it with rose water, and dust it with powdered vitriol. And if you see swelling in the ear, it must be that you remove the plug and put another one moistened with candle wax made from rose oil and beeswax, until the swelling is gone; then treat it until it's healthy.
And if bleeding occurs, immerse an sponge and soak it in cold water, then place it on the ear, and perform other treatments that stop bleeding which include remedies for distillations.
From the substance of the papers
When handling wet and dry hairs in papers, it is necessary that you spread them using tweezers and forceps. Then, take a piece from its roots; afterwards, place sulfur on the part of the paper.
And if you don't peel it off, cauterize it with a narrow lens cautery, and after the incision, it will start to move; and many times, there are no remains from its roots. And when they are cauterized by fire, those roots burn completely and never return.
Regarding ice or cold treatments
Many times in papers, there appear some things that seem to gleam by their form and hardness, and because of this, this illness is called "granuloma", and it's a collection of large moisture on the surface of the paper. The operations are as follows: watch if the granuloma moves from one side to another, and this is a simple thing to know; do it then broadly, then lightly sear each part, then take them with tweezers, and remove them. If you cannot remove it without piercing a bit of the paper, or causing any harm to the patient; and if the rupture is large, and there's one seam, treat until it's healed; and if it's small, don't exert much force, because ointments will soon restore it and stimulate tissue growth.
And if the granuloma descends into the ear towards the upper part, turn the paper, and place the granuloma under tweezers, then remove and press from both sides; and if the paper is moved by the incision, it does not harm anything; and when the granuloma has been removed, wash with salty water, treat the area that stimulates tissue growth until the patient is healed.
of the fat of the lumps
Excrition is a kind of grease that gathers on the surfaces of paper, and this happens more often in children than adults, and causes much distress to their eyes, and they excrete tears during mornings, and cannot look at sunlight because tears quickly affect their eyes; and due to this, they lie with their heads on their arms throughout the day, sleeping while papers beneath them are damp from the excretion that opens in their eyes. And when you press your hand under it with your fingers and feel the excrement between them.
And the method of the process is that the patient places their head in your hand; and then take .i. linen cloth, and set up a tent in manner of a circle according to the quantity that contains excrement from each part, then put it on; press with your fingers on both sides, so that the excrement is gathered within the circle; then cut in the midst of the moisture with a sharp knife a groove wide, and not more than the wound when you open a vein; and let the leather be tight enough until you see the excrement from the groove, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Then remove it all in one piece of thick linen between your fingers at the front, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is dispersed; and make sure you do not mix in the groove, that you do not reach up to the whole knife until it reaches the eye, that you do not hurt it.
And if the incision does not open at the beginning of the cut, you should gently increase the cut size; then pull it as we have said. Then soak it in moist cloths and water, place it on the wound, and strain with bandages.
And if there are such people who grind meal and put it on to ferment the moisture that has remained. Then clean them as they become healthy. And if pus starts coming out at the wound, then treat with plastering until they heal.
of the paper hairs
When hairs grow out of place and become old, they harm the eyes, causing diseases such as habitual tears and paper softening and albugine formation. These are reasons for eye damage; and treatment should follow these four methods: either by a fire cautery, or with medicine according to what was discussed previously in the chapter on cauteries, it can be done through surgery and stitching, or sutures, depending on what I will explain next.
You must place the head of the eye in your good health, then turn the paper of the eye with your left hand; if it is turned correctly, that's fine; if not, take one thread and sew it above at each end of the paper. Then do this along the edge of the paper where hairs grow beneath these hairs, sewing a single thread above across the whole paper, then turning it flat using a razor. Afterwards, cut through the part under the paper, under the displaced hairs, all the way from the large tear to the small one; then remove that thread and place a small cotton tent on top of the paper, followed by placing an 'H' shape figure on the paper, like a bay leaf. Indeed, it must be ensured that this figure matches the size you see when lifting up the paper which is folded over everything.
And if it is necessary for this to require a large quantity of paper according to how the paper has softened; then make all across the surface of the eye drainage above the two lines you have marked, and start from the large tear until the small one; and if there are one or more tears close to the natural hairs in the thickening of about an inch, then place the needle in one of the corners of the eye socket, then scrape it all out. Then join the two lids together with a stitch made by hand using one thread of fine wool on both sides of the whole area, and clean out any blood, and let dry the excess threads above each eyelid where glue-like substances might accumulate if you see fit; and if not, just leave them alone for 3-4 days. Then treat the wound without stitches with drying and tightening substances, because the paper heals due to the adhesion of the wound and the joining together of the paper, but the stitch gets wet (as the old ones said), and it is an operation without fear;
And if there's another way: and you sign the paper with a design that is as similar to the leaf of myrtle, as we have described, in 1.5 inches cut according to the form which is here:
Then, cut those that are above evenly according to the shape shown here:
And if you are unable to hold the forceps and they aren't even, take a needle with two threads instead, and put it in the figure. Take another thread of the length of the larger vein, and then place the second thread across the smaller one. Then join together the ends of these threads evenly between your fingers; lift your hand evenly as well, lifting all the skin over where you have marked out, just like we described before. Then stitch the two edges of the wound together neatly; and while it is still healing, treat with ointment if an abscess appears at your incision site, soothing it with balm remedies.
And it is not the case that paper hair transforms; so you should use what we have said about incisions; but the stitches in one and another are more artificially done.
The treatment of canines follows this form: and you should convert the paper and cut inside according to what I have said, and then create four canines by art, and also two fine strings as long as the paper and as wide as the tip is; and place the tips of the two parts on either side; then assemble both finely above where the paper covers the eye, and tighten the two canine lines from each part formed; and leave it like this for a few days, and the skin that has been tightened will shrivel and turn black and spread, until it escapes by itself.
If it takes longer, and if the healing process progresses, then treat until it is healed properly; and when the wound has been stitched up, and if the paper lifts off, and hair will no longer grow; and this is the form of the two canines that you should create according to this figure, and in accordance with this length and width:
The surgical procedures are such that you need to take a fine needle, and attach one end of two thin silk threads to it. Then combine the ends together finely, making their lengths about a handspan long. Next, prepare another short thread of silk and tie the head to this thread. Proceed by placing the patient's head in the healthy position and ensure that sunlight illuminates everything during this process; for these are delicate and small procedures. Then insert the needle into all parts of the stitches at the base of hair until you reach natural hair above, performing this action swiftly on top of natural hair. Next, remove any hair up to the needle's location, and insert the natural hair into the needle if there's more than one or two hairs; then take out your hand ensuring that all hair is extricated from every part of the paper with natural hair.
And if the thread has been treated and no hair comes out with it, then pull the thread off at the other end until you've used up all the thread you have arranged. Do this until the thread is pulled out beyond what's normal and can be seen by your eye; thereafter, remove the thread and the thread itself, and close the cut for two or three days, until the hair returns to its place and grows flesh at that spot. And if the hairs are small, then accompany one long hair of natural animal with it, lifting it up together while you let it down, ensuring it's extended properly before lifting it.
Regarding eye infection
When this disease, known as "aleacrati" or gangrene comes to the eye, there are two ways: one natural and the other unnatural. It occurs suddenly from wounds, cuts by a tailor or cautery, and through similar things.
And the method of the operation in this is that you cut open that seam, and open the lips of it, and insert linen bandages inside, and bind them until it heals; and you must not use things in its treatment that dry out and restrict. For if you do this, the disease will return worse than the first one; but work with softening substances, like fenugreek; and soak water or boiled linseed oil and linseed seed oil into it, and apply butter to neither of the eyes, and wrap a linen bandage around it, and treat it with such.
And the treasures of your cure are that you must be careful not to stitch it back together in the same form as before; and all these operations we have mentioned are only remedies for this disease, so that it does not return in the same form as before.
The flow that comes to the eye
This disease that is called "axacrati" truly is natural and accidental. Accidents come from wounds, splits, cauterization, and similar things; and the path of this disease within it means you take a needle, which has two threads inside, and insert it into flesh. And the thread passes through the left tear duct as far as possible so that the threads lie in two parts of the flesh; then the flesh lies above all along the needle, and there is space for two small pieces to fit.
And if the paper figure comes out as it should, that is good; if not, take a razor and place it in the slit, then turn the paper, and make two slits inside the paper. And let the flesh of the two slits be at the corners of the incision you made, and make angles so that when they are assembled, the figure looks like a letter with two Greek strokes "γ". Then remove this flesh according to its size and thickness compared to the paper, then adjust the two removed parts symmetrically, using thread. Then perform the treatment of what we have mentioned about mollifying medicines and applying them until it heals.
And if the illness comes from a wound or stitch or cautery, it is necessary that you create an opening full of hair along the paper cuts, and according to what was mentioned previously; then cut between the two skin layers like I said; and must perform the operation according to the shape of the illness as they are very diverse in form. And the surgeons prepare for every surgery so that they can understand how to return the figure to its natural shape; and even the patients themselves, according to what is appropriate for the operation and instruments in various arrangements.
immediately from the paper
When this seam occurs in a way that the paper is joined with the white of the oil, and it cannot move or perform its natural operations, then it is necessary to place the tip of a razor under the paper, lift it upwards; then stretch it using forceps, until you reach a fine wisp of the thread, not too thick nor too sharp, so that the patient does not suffer from excessive harshness and oiling of the eyes; make your incision, carefully removing this joined part, without causing damage, in such a way that the paper regrows according to its natural form; and heals all that has been joined together, avoid making any cuts with salted water, then wash it with gentle freshwater and clove water; afterwards place between the paper and eye a linen tent, cover the eye with wet wool, and after several days use soap and other healing substances until it is healed.
Of the edge of the eye
Know that the edge of the eye is in two ways: it's nervously and resembles one hard texture, and another which isn't nervous but resembles a white moisture frozen, that when touched with iron and treated with hot pincers, they can't; both appearances start near the large tear duct, and grow gradually until they cover all vision and light and movement of the eye.
And the method of incision is such that the patient positions their head in your well-being position, then expose their eyes; lift the eyelashes with your hand first, and then hold the edge of the eye with small pinches, and place them above; then take a needle, and insert two horse hairs or calf hair, or cow hair, and one strong thread; then slightly bend the needle's tip and push it into the edge of the eye, and pierce all the way through with the needle, and bind the edge of the eye with the string and place it above, then burn all the hair on the side of the edge that surrounds the tear duct and silk to the root of the hairline until you reach the fine inner layer of the eyelid, and leave the natural eye or tear duct in such a way that through the incision does not leak the usual body fluids; and only once the edge is set halfway above with the string, as we have described; then burn off all the fine inner layers from where this description ends here is how it forms:
And make sure the cautery does not touch the fatty tissue and damage it, and that the tip of the instrument doesn't pierce; after incision pour a bit of broiled fat in the wound, and then make a collar with silver and let it stay until another day; then cure him as necessary until he is well.
And if the nail isn't sensitive and you can't drive in the needle, and the cuticles don't enter, this condition of a nail-like thing from medicines is treated many times; and it grows just as I mentioned in division, and if you see it get thickened, let that be done by the eye of the patient, and take the cautery with light but sharp force according to this shape:
Pull the nail gently from above, and if you see that it doesn't thin out at all and it presses against the reason (the wound), then apply a collar made of silver into the eye, and a red collar and some broiled fat; leave this in until the other day. Then start another operation in the same manner, until she is entirely healed.
If nothing obstructs your view, such as pus-filled sores, then proceed, and first treat the pus-filled sores until they are clean. Then resume the work procedure just described, until they are clean.
And if there's an appearance of the flesh around the eye that disrupts the view due to great harm, then suspend it on a string, and take only a part of it, not all at once, making sure tears don't seep; then apply red collyrium from litargy powder into the eye.
Of the flesh that grows near the pupil
Of some individuals, a red flesh may be born only once and covers the pupil, restraining against the eyelids and appears outwardly like a rose of balsam; and in such an instance you must ensure that your hand is steady during the operation, then remove these eyes, and all this flesh with uncinate instruments suitable for the task, and hold them with force; then cut out the first piece of flesh, continue cutting until you reach the edge, making sure not to damage the eye during the operation; and make an incision at the spot where we discussed earlier in the chapter regarding the nail incisions and small forces used when removing a sebaceous substance, as demonstrated after this chapter.
And when the incision is completed and all the flesh has been removed, the eye uses the oil of burnt seashell or you distill a red cloth with similar corrosive medicines, and puts on the oil outside cotton with an egg's content to ensure there is heat; if it stays in place without any pain, and if the skin doesn't heal and you doubt about the presence of an abscess, then leave the oil and cure the abscess by things that soothe hot abscesses; then return to your work as long as it remains healthy, and thus make several incisions under this semblance in the oil.
But nevertheless, it is necessary that you treat each weak channel of the natural way; and of accidental ways, in iron work; and do not insert your hand into any of these works until you see that this limb endures that operation.
of veins and eyes
When the veins appear red and covered over the eye, and endure strain upon sight, weakening the eye for several days. Therefore, it is necessary for the first person you examine to look at his eyes, in which this symptom occurs; there is no other disease except that symptom. So treat as follows: instruct the patient to place their head on your healthy side, then suspend all those veins along the entire neck according to their wisdom, and let the neck muscles be subtly doubled according to this shape:
And let there be two inches by degree in one side according to this shape:
Then, with this treatment, gently force those veins, and let blood flow out an hour later, until you see the veins leave the eye; and be sure not to pierce the eye at the points of the lancets. Perform this operation at noon in front of the sun, and be very meticulous in your work so as not to disturb only these veins. And when you have done this, apply a garland of green and red cologne to clear out what remains from the symptom.
And if you don't have the ability to do all of this at once, then make a dressing with things that calm the pain in the eyes and leave it on for some days until the eye pain is soothed and confirmed free from pus, then start again following this method as shown until they are healed; and this is how you strengthen them.
of the tear duct of the eye
The treatment for what is called 'arissati' fistula: when you cure it with a cautery and with hot water medicine as I have described before, and if it isn't healed, then be careful where you incise over the abscess, at the point where it should die off, and drain all the moisture that's there, until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed, and you will see the corruption and the darkness, if you take possession of all the tool of which this form is made; and it is called "hard chief", and should be made of iron in the shape of a .i. chief's horn, and it should be pointed like a razor as it is in the current form:
And place the corrupted part of the bone on your hand, then press your fingers into it until you know that this corruption has stopped; and do this once, then return the part to its original position.
Once the wounds are healed, and the cartilage starts to grow, and the body of the bone is still healing, it remains like this for forty days, and it doesn't reappear and isn't an abscess again, and no bad incidents happen, then you know it's healthy; if not, there may be another method than bringing back the fistula at the site of the knee according to this shape: and then uncover the bone a second time with iron and medicine. Once uncovered, take one metal rod according to this shape, and place the iron shoulder with three angles, and let the shaft be thinned down like an arrowhead as you see here:
Then place it on the bone of the shoulder blade and move away your hand from the eye. i. poche, then return to fully stretch until it pierces the bone and allows you to feel through that passage where your wind travels if you hold your hand on your nose; and then restore the limb with dry medicine as I instructed, and when the body appears and strengthens your limbs, then the substance goes to your nose; should be lighter matter at the patient's experience.
from the exit of the eye
When the eyes open fully and completely, and there is no disturbance in the neck or diminution, it's necessary to bind the patient. Then heal them, then place suction cups or tourniquets without piercing for draining, then place on the eye. A bandage made of castor oil and aloe and incense and sarsaparilla should be applied to the eye, and then drain the eye, and plaster it with strips and cloths; and the manner of the cloths is that you take cloths that are quite soft, double each one in four layers, and then place them one on top of another according to how many inches the eyes need. Then apply a hard binding band over this for draining without piercing, and repeat using suction cups for draining. Then remove the suction cups and allow the eye to be drained day and night, and if the bandages loosen, it's necessary to tightly drain them again; then remove the band after day and night, and if you see that the eye has healed, it is good; if not; continue applying the plaster and cloths and bandage and suction cups until they are healed.
of the breaking of a woollen bandage
When disruptions occur in the woollen bandage, it opens up, and comes with bits of paper like a grain of resin, and is observable; therefore, if you see it covered, the operations are such that you pierce into the root part at this point below it, then pierce another hole with a double thread from this part near the tear; and make it penetrate, and leave the first needle according to its position; then cut off a part of the bandage with the double thread and tie it around the edge of the wound, and tighten it well, then remove the needle and place on the eye a moistened wool cloth in abundance of egg; and leave it until the yarn becomes detached with the bandage, then cure the eye with comforting things until the wound heals; and in no way should the wound be allowed to heal by itself through one part of a circle of linen, until it is healed.
And if the eyes show great appearance, then pierce at the subtle pustule which comes through the eye, and draw out the watery humor and drain down the eyes, and enter in immediately; then tighten it until it is healed.
By the power of the eye
This disease known as "alcunnati" is not healed by oil that is gathered in the eye, resembling a drop falling down, and it is not a drop; and the way its symptoms appear is when you make the patient lie on their side with one hand behind their head for half an hour, then place your hands around their head, applying pressure until you see drops come above their eyes; then insert them, don't let them descend and remove any cloudy matter, and observe the condition of the eye as before; and if they do not descend themselves, know that it is a drop, and when the passage of the drop doesn't happen as described. When you have the patient lie between your hands, take the thin spatula and make cuts through the corneal membrane about one part along the continuity with the corneal surface and crown until the oil comes out; and once it has come out, pour in a hot drop of oil mixed with honey, or a hot drop of fenugreek that's been boiled with honey, then treat with another cure until she is healed.
From the drops of the eye
We have experienced the sensations of waters during division and what needs piercing; so do it according to the situation. You need to place the patient between your interlaced hands, away from sunlight, and hold the healthy eye tightly while compressing it very firmly; then position the paper next to the eye on your left or right hand depending if the diseased one is on the left or right side; after this, take the tool named "almagda" in your right hand if the diseased eye was on the left, or vice versa. Now, place the point of the tool under the eyelid about as wide as a finger near the lower part of the black part of the eye, then use the tool called 'almagda' to pierce through the paper and bend your hand until it penetrates into the tear duct area; you should feel that 'almagda' comes to an empty space. The length of the path of 'almagda' should match roughly with the length of the space from the lid to the edge of darkness, marking the position of the eye socket; if see bones in the paper because of the transparency of the cornea, then place the tool up until where the water is or ends, and express it through another passage. If the water is flowing downwards now, you'll see the patient looking directly at their eye and the tool within it.
After a short rest, and should the water ascend through the second passage, apply force with the tool, and once it's firmly in place and no longer rises, gently remove 'almagda' while twisting your hand back and forth; then slightly reinsert some sebum into the eye, and take out the eye from this. Then place under or in ointment-soaked wool or oil rose petal generously with egg whites, and bind it with a healthy eye. Now, and those like us, let's apply a poultice with plenty of eggs on top.
And if 'almagda' can't enter the eye due to its hardness, for there are people with very rigid eyes, then you should take the tool called 'alberit', which has this form:
And then pierce only the conjunctive, do not go too far forward but make it .i. subtle; then apply balsam of almond as we have said; and upon completion of this work provide to the patient another dose, in which he rests on his back for .j. hours; and remain free from all movements, eat light meats, and do not move your head either to the right or left, and bind him according to his position until the third day; then release him within the same dark room, test his vision, let him see some things, and then reapply the bandage until the seventh day; and it should not be that you do this in the time of the cure or after an incision now, but it should be that you take care of this because the fever rises quickly.
When cutting pus sacs comes out, that you release the eye before the seventh day, and prepare for the one who relieves pus. And when it is calmed, then release the vision and place two corners on his face for covering a day each, and remain within this dark room. Then leave the house gradually, and turn back to his place; know that no students should interfere in this case.
And one came to us who was from Ireland, who told us that people there used almond oil, through which the fever is drained, but still I have never seen anything like this in our land, nor have I ever read about it in ancient books; and perhaps it's a new thing.
And these are the appearances of the forms of magda, because those who do not know them see them; and they are properly of araign's nature:
And their head is from this same subtlety, and the tail at three angles on each side.
from the flesh where the nose is.
None of them are born or have noses like various joined carcasses, some of which resemble scorpions at the mouth; and there are also those with a red color on their flesh, and those with good-colored flesh. In this case, for these chars that are good colored but not red, it is necessary to place the patient between your hands facing the sun; work on their nostrils, pour ash onto those carcasses, and remove them; then hold what you can bear at the fine sharp tip of the nose on one side until you know that this char has been completely burned.
And if there remains any part we cannot correct, when you open the entire body with all necessary instruments gently and lightly, ensuring no obstruction; and if it's not obstructed or an abscess is sealed, treat it as necessary; and if it's an infected abscess, act quickly and cauterize until the pus is expelled and all flesh has been removed completely, then clean out with water or wine.
If it is the nose that's injured, and moisture leads up to the palate, know that it's healthy; and if moisture doesn't penetrate as intended, know that there was new flesh inside the bone, where the instruments didn't come through for cutting: then you must insert a thread of linen somewhat thick, and hold its ends with your hands, and place each knot about an inch or less apart; and lead the patient by this thread in their nose towards their mouth, and pull it gently until it comes out through their nostril; and many times do so when the children are at school, and it's a simple task for those who want to perform it; then hold the head that emerges from the nostril with one hand, and the other head that emerges from the mouth with the other hand, and distinguish them one after another by our presence. Do this until you know that the knots have corrupted that flesh, then remove the threads, cleanse the wound, and moisten the thread in Egyptian ointment, and place it back in their nose as before; do this for three days or longer, until all the remaining flesh corrodes away; and then use pine sap for several days if it's healthy, and if you need dried medicines, apply them; and this is the method of the instrument to purify the head, which involves distilling oils and medicines into the nostrils:
And make it of silver or copper, resembling an open lamp, like a rod, and guide it in the same way; and if you see fit, make a closed rod, and have your instruments filled to purify the head; and hold both ends of the head when heating oil or any liquid.
of the flesh near the nose
Many times a disease is born near the nosehead, which is called "Telul", it grows and becomes large until one can see it; thus, at the beginning you should cut it, remove all bone, then place the fire cautery or hot medicine on it; if one delays cutting it until it's big, beware if it feels hard, changes color, has poor sensation: do not touch with metal as it's an infected abscess, for when one cuts once, it causes great harm to the patient; and if the abscess is due to heat touching, not just changed color, and you see that everything can be cut, let the patient remove and treat the area with drying and restraining substances.
When the nose has been cut and sewn.
Know that when the solutions of continuation reach into one of these venous conductions, they provide little benefit, in many cases. Therefore, it is necessary that this happen to no one, so long as their wound is fresh and full of blood; then adjust the two lips to a stitch, proceed with treating until it's healed; if the lips are already dry on both sides, you must cauterize all parts of them until they heal, then join the two lips together again, tighten them up, apply dragon's blood powder, and incense. And place the powders over a piece of plaster or another welding plaster, and leave it until it discharges naturally, then treat with ointment until healed.
The method of the stitch involves joining the material: either by needles, as we have said in the stomach stitch; or by thread, which I have previously informed you about.
removal of lesions from lips
In the hands of one who knows, within the wound there is a hard part that resembles grains sometimes, both smaller and larger. So it must be that you return to the mouth of the wound and incise each node, then take them with tweezers and remove them from every part; after this, use the hand following the vitriol cut, until the parts are cleansed; then drain the liquid and cure the hand of dry things until it is healed.
from the pulp of the gums
Many times, a mass arises on the attached gum tissue, which the old ones called "albulus"; it must be that you hold it with forceps, cut it at its root, and leave out the wound or blood. Then place it under the vitriol powder, or other drying and desiccating powders; and if this mass returns after cutting, and many times happens again, then cut it a second time, and cauterize it: if it does not return even after cauterization; these are the forms of instruments to cut.
Of cautering with fire, instruct the patient to allow hair growth until long and even; and if they pierce at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
In every instance they are gathered at the chief of the teeth, behind the mouth between the gums, and skin which is ugly and rough; and in each case the black tooth and citrine tooth along with worms exist until corruption reaches the gum, and then the tooth becomes stinky; it is necessary that you place the diseased person's head between your hands, and have their teeth or the scabs visible, until nothing remains; and do this for blackness and greenness, and yellowing and other colors, until they are all removed; if what was extracted was at first reason, it's good; but if not, then start again from the second day to the third, until you have everything removed; know that teeth require various tools of different forms to be extracted, according to how the work demonstrates it, for those who extract teeth outside the teeth have other forms than those who extract between the teeth; and these forms and others should be prepared with you.
When you are treating a tooth for its pain and delay the extraction as much as possible, it should not be done; because this is very rare. It must not happen that one removes too quickly because of this. Therefore when the patient is compelled to extract teeth, you must be certain about which tooth hurts. Often during pain from the tooth, you should ascertain if it's a tooth abscess and drain good pus; and in all cases do not depart entirely with the pain until the bad tooth has been extracted, as we have already seen fit for these soldiers; and when you are very certain about the tooth causing pain, it is necessary to sear around the tooth fully through i. spatumile strongly so that the gum remains intact from every side; then move it to your hands or to the fine tongs at each attempt, until they are well disinfected, then firmly secure the tongs; and keep the head of the tooth between your knees with the handle well in place, ensuring it does not move.
After extracting the tooth straightly without breaking it, and if it doesn't spring back, take none of these tools and gently push inside each part, then move it as you did first. And if the tooth has been pierced and broken off, it is necessary to fill it with cloth at the points where they are; and when extracting finely with tongs, make sure not to break it during extraction; and it must be sharply opened around the gum in order to remove the tooth.
And see that you do not break it or leave a part of it, and warn the patient about the increased pain from the root due to its malice after the first extraction. And take care that you do not act like ignorant soldiers who break it every time out of haste and rashness, and fail to follow what we have told; but they cause such illness once by the opening of this great disease through its roots or the bone they break, as we often want; and when the tooth is extracted, wash the inside with wine or salt water. And if bleeding occurs, which often happens, fill that cavity with vitriol paste; and if that does not work, cauterize it.
The shapes of the tools you use to pull out teeth should have long points and large handles. They should not bend when you are pulling on them; these are the desired shapes.
And let them have large parts that do not bend when being pulled, and be made of very sturdy iron, and should have teeth to hold the pieces in place.
from the root of the teeth When the root remains during pulling, it is necessary to place inside the mouth cotton soaked in butter for one or two days until the gums are softened. Then remove the forceps called "algefri", making the shoulder appear like a doctor's beak; and they should also be made as smooth as a file, this is the desired shape.
And if the roots do not want to come out with all these forceps, it is necessary that you uncover the entire mass right up to the root, and then place an instrument known as 'althali', which is essentially an awl, as depicted here:
And make it so that neither breaks and is large enough that it does not break at all, and if the root jumps out from this, it's good; if this doesn't happen, assist with all instruments you have, as their forms are shown here after:
And if assistance is taken from the instrument that has two points, as depicted here:
and other tools that are in front according to the size of teeth, and from this tool which seems like large forceps, as depicted here:
And let this tool not be able to break it, and know that very few of the tools are made of metal; and also other tools which are not counted; and the skillful surgeons themselves find their own instrument according to what their work and illness show them, because there are parts of diseases for which old teachings do not provide a tool due to their variety. If they break anything from cartilage or from the other bones, or if they rot, so they seek out the tools that suit him, as I have told you, and help with gestures, which is what this form represents: And let them be large and well suited to hold the bone so that it doesn't escape but can be held and removed; and then restore the place with medicine suitable for this, and if there is decay in the bone and it is small, if you find all this tool:
When the tooth appears not according to its natural form, and its shape is ugly, and especially in maiden women, you should know whether the tooth was born after it or isn't properly placed, and one can neither file nor grind it: then remove the groove; and if it's alongside the tooth, take this tool as shown here, resembling two small beaks, and let it be sharp at its tip.
And the hole is made small and smaller in my hands by its hardness due to tooth, and because you do not move others, and if it becomes apparent that one can shave it off, then I will shave with one piece of file as this forms:
And it is also like the file used for making needles; and I gently shave in my hands slowly by tooth, so that it doesn't move until it's done; then make it completely flat with no rasp at the end. And if the edge is too sharp causing blisters on the tongue, it's necessary to shave off the roughness as much as possible, so that it doesn't blister the tongue or harm speech.
When the tooth swells
When the tooth in front of the jawbone, or through percussion or impact, and the patients cannot press this upon what they eat that it does not produce feces, then you have cured them with medications restricting it; these are not effective so bind them with a gold thread as silver threads turn green and decay, but gold never changes. And use threads neither too thick nor too thin according to the space between teeth. Should you see the need for joining of teeth, take the thread and a pair of tweezers between two healthy teeth, then insert diseased teeth between the diseased teeth if there are more than one or several, until you can see properly up to the other side's tooth. Then resume the covering until it reaches the part where you inserted it, and pull your hand finely and skillfully, until it does not move. And bind your tie at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape. Then clip off teeth with the thread using tweezers, then join them together, and place them next to a healthy tooth, make sure they do not irritate the tongue; and leave it like this tightly as long as possible, if it comes undone or breaks, bind it with another thread; should it continue in this state for all its time, this is how teeth are joined and the arrangement of two healthy teeth and two diseased ones, as you see:
And when the tooth has shifted, should you set it back to its place, day by day as we have said; and do not interfere with anything that is not safe or endures suffering, and never make the shape of an osine's tooth, and place it in the spot where the defect exists, and bind it as we have said, so it stays there for a long time.
To cover the tie of the tongue
No once does it come from the glands situated on the tongue or in nature, that we are born with; or by accident due to injury healing; and the procedures consist of working within the mouth towards the ailment, having its head aligned with your healthy position, and lift the tongue; then cut out the nervous cord at length until the tongue is dislodged from its place. And if there is stiffness or swelling and it's due to sudden healing of injuries, then pinch the hook and cut at length that knot; and ensure that the wound doesn't become too deep down center because of blood vessel under it; and when you finish, raise it up in a pinkish-red or slightly swollen state, or in cold water, then place on tongue a piece of linen. And each night, wash this diseased person thoroughly, so that the tongues don't stick together. If bleeding starts occurring, then pour vinegar inside the mouth; and if that doesn't work out, then cauterize it with a slow burning cautery which is good for this purpose; then treat it further until it heals fully.
And if you see that it is of any other color or blackness or hardness such that the patient doesn't feel it without touching, then don't touch it as it's a sore; and if it's fading towards whitishness, and there is moisture, then apply the hook until it gets cleansed and then cleanse from both sides; and if the pus fails to drain through your procedure, then pour vinegar over it until it stops bleeding, then proceed with your task until you exhaust all the means. Then raise it up using cold water and salt, and treat further until it fully heals completely.
Extractions from the throat
No matter how many times blisters arise inside the throat that are called "godath", and they're correctly named as the two almonds, whenever you treat them as we explained in separation, and if they aren't abscesses, then take caution: If these are small, tender, pus-filled lumps of a reddish color and with a needle-like consistency, do not touch them with metal. And if they are red and have a large root, avoid touching them with metal as well due to the potential for blood discharge; instead leave them until they're healed, then you will remove them, or they would dislodge by themselves; and if they are whitish in color, their roots are slender, then prepare your instrument to fit, but first ensure that these pus lumps have settled down and calmed. Then have the patient sit under the sun with their arms extended, and let their palms face towards health, and guide them to open their mouth while you press their tongue between their hands using all of the tool, in this manner; and use silver or finely made copper as delicate as knives:
Can't you press the tongue with all this tool? And when you see the pus lump, take the scissor and insert it into the almond, then pull strongly more than you can. Do not remove any threads, then cut using the tool; in this way it appears as a forceful process, that seems like pressing. Once the head is pressed from one place to another, it's very sharp, and made of iron or brass:
And if you don't have this tool now, take scissors instead; in this way it is formed:
And make incisions on one side and the other; and when you have performed an incision in one of them, do the same for the other according to the same manner, and after the incision gargle the sick person with hot water, or both cold and warm water, and if there is bleeding during the recovery, then gargle them with water or pieces of cooked cherry tomatoes, or leaves of wild rosemary, and similar things, until they stop bleeding; then complete the treatment as long as the body heals; and let no other abscesses arise in the throat besides the two glands, so perform the same procedure on them accordingly.
And I treated a woman with an abscess that was within her throat, one small in size. The entire throat had been so closely closed by it that she could neither breathe nor eat or drink through the blocked passage, and died after about one day or two due to this condition. The abscess was so far up that it had pushed aside two inches on each side of the neck. I acted quickly, inserting an inch of thread into one and pulled it out, with a large portion of the throat being exposed; then made another incision at the other nostril area, and opened her mouth forcing her tongue down; afterwards inserted the thread in these abscesses and removed part of them, only letting some blood come out. And thus cleared the passage in her throat, began drinking warm water and eventually wine again, not stopping until I continuously cut away from this abscess for a long time; it grew back immediately filling up the space that I had emptied completely, reaching quite large size. Then I covered these areas and treated them with a cautery inside her throat: she remained without growing anymore; I left those places, may God do something good of her afterwards.
Of the eye
When the urine comes out of the eye, and it is swollen and long, then it's called "perpendicular"; and if it's distended and round, then it's called "eye". When it’s treated as we have described in the division, but the treatment doesn't work, and you see that the incision from pus has healed and become subtle, then it should be handled; and this one which is round assembled and not long; and it’s red or yellowish or black in color, then it should be avoided with an incision. For there is great risk to the patient. Therefore, when you see it, according to the way I have said, by its size and length, you must make the patient face the sun, and press their tongue onto the tool we mentioned previously; then insert the thimble into the eye, and pull it outwards, and remove it with one or two tools that I described in the incision of the two glands. And it should not be removed too much beyond its natural boundary; because if you remove more, it harms speech and language; and after the incision, use what we have said about the incision of the two glands, and treat until she is healed. And if your patient becomes afraid upon removing this one, then it must be handled with an instrument for cautery. The way to do cautery is by a sharp tool. And let that patient put their head into your healthy area, and then press their tongue onto the tool we said about in the chapter of cautery, and hold it firmly without being too thick or thin; and use the movement of this tool which has its form here:
And have our head with a hair or we place the medicine on it, as if with the movements of a spoon, and put the tool onto all the medicine over the eye; and that patient should lie still on their side, so that saliva and mucus flow from their mouth through the medicine inside, without reaching their throat and the wound; then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it on to the eye for half an hour, as long as you see it working and the effects of the medicine have subsided; and if you notice, take cotton and wrap it around any tool, moisten the cotton with the medicine, and place the tool onto the cotton in the wick above, so that the cotton burns on the eye; and do this often until the cautery is perfect, then let it dry, and rest for four or five days afterwards. And if you need to repeat the medicine cautery, then do so, and after the cautery clean around the eye with gauze soaked in butter, and clean off anything left of the medicine; and rinse with cold water, and gargle until healed.
This cure is safer than incision, or rather the cautery; if it is treated with fumigation using this method, take valerian and sage and oregano and rue and chamomile and spinach and similar herbs, and combine all of them or some of them in one pot, and put them inside, then let it boil; and ensure that the pot is well covered with strong earth, and in the middle of the pot place two sticks according to this method: And make it of silver or arsenic, and let one of the shoulder bones be placed in the mouth under the rash until the vapor rises to the eye via the nose, until the eye is dead; after that, repeat often, until the eye dries out. Make sure not to do this at the beginning of pus formation from heat, as many things can happen; and don't perform this treatment when the pus starts decreasing in heat. And if this tool isn't present, take a stick and place an eggshell inside your head so that the mouth under the rash doesn't get too hot; for the eggshell won't allow the vapor to burden the mouth, it is a good combined cure for healing.
Many times it occurs in the throat bone or spinal area of fish, without any specific thing; so it is good that you remove whatever you can see and press your tongue against the sun with all the tool so that you see something move. And what doesn't reveal itself and remains in the throat should be induced to vomit out the rash until the meat is cooked in the stomach; by chance if it escapes through vomiting; or if the rash ingests a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of lettuce, or half a piece of dry bread. And tie this sponge with one thread and then swallow it again. And when she comes to you, if she ascends, and then proceed to vomit. And if what we said did not bring it out, take one tool of snuff according to this shape:
And make the tools curved at the tip so that they can more easily enter the throat, and have the head lifted high above it; and guard not to touch the epiglottis, making sure no part of it moves or pushes any bone inside; and move such that the patient is forced to push the tool down because movement is necessary or if something is obstructing air flow; if they swallow it, or pull it forcefully until all parts are pulled equally out of the tool, as long as force is applied.
of the windpipe
No treatment of the windpipe has been done, as I have explained in division, through medicine therapy; and if this doesn't help, then look into the throat at the patient's complaint, after pressing their tongue with the tool I've told you about. And when you see the windpipe, pull it back by a little fraction of an uncia or use fine forceps that suit for this task. If this fails, take a thready hair and insert it in the throat at the patient's complaint; then pull until half the length of the hair is inside, and do so often. And if the patient smells water all day, take a full glass of cold water, work their mouth with it, pour it into their throat without swallowing immediately, and move it around frequently; and as soon as the windpipe feels the water, it will expel.
And if it does not expel as we have said, subfumigate the patient with aloe, using the tool I mentioned in the incision of the eye; do this many times for she will expel without any discomfort. And here's how to perform the fumigation: take one pot that contains charcoal sticks and place it covered with a lid in the middle, with an opening at its bottom where the tool's head is placed; then pour your fumigation, stick the end of the stick inside the patient’s mouth, seal their mouth so no smoke escapes but goes up until reaching the veins; and blood will now expel. If it does not expel, restart the fumigation several times; allow the patient thirst and consume salty things, do not drink water; then eventually she needs to leave forcefully through this method.
And the shape of the tool used to expel blood is such that when you can see it, it resembles curved scissors for cutting into the throat; and it has the appearance of a doctor's beak, and it has grinding roughness like a saw, so whatever she takes, she cannot let go. And here is the form:
The chapter on abscesses
No descriptions of discharges are, according to what memory brings forward from one and another in this book, and they vary in perforation and in cutting; and this is done in two ways, one being in its own appearance, and due to the moisture it holds. And the second way is for the bones within the body. because abscesses on the head are different from those on the foundation, and abscesses on the inner flesh are different from those that come into joints, and each has their judgment in action.
And if it's an abscess that shouldn't be pierced, as long as the body is healthy according to its completion; and for those ones which need to be pierced when they are matured, and don't complete their course of healing, such as abscesses beneath joints. Because when abscesses come beneath joints, if left until they are partially decayed in there, perhaps the ligament and nerve of the joint get corrupted, causing a contraction in that limb. Or it's beneath the main body part, and if you delay piercing until it is dead, it will harm the principal limb; or it's beneath the foundation, then pierce it accordingly when it is dead; and it should not be pierced an immature abscess without its digestion completion, except for the one that's beneath the foundation which doesn't rot all through, and stays inside, and produces a fistula; and can't heal properly in large scale.
And you should know the time of piercing the abscess which is dead according to its completion, and this is when the pain has subsided, and the departure of fever, and the reduction of pain and redness, and the movement and sensitivity of the head of the abscess, and other signs; and you should have the piercing positioned above the abscess or as low as it opens, and where it appears; and make the piercing along the length of the body, and if the abscess is at the arms or legs, or joints and nerves and arteries, and all places where there's no fold.
In cases where they bend, according to the same member. And when abscesses are within the fatty tissue, if you wish to move it, wait until digestion is completed and the puncture is confirmed, as we have said previously. For should you puncture it prematurely, the pus would spread throughout the body from the wound, filled with much filth; and might harden the lips or the deeper parts of him. And for any abscesses that are punctured across the broad part of the body, according to what the limb requires. And it is necessary to handle small abscesses with small pricks; and in large ones, large pricks, and many incisions according to the size of the abscess; and for those types where it's required to pierce through the bone, and cover them; when it becomes as thick as one piece of cloth, and has healed, then it is necessary to do so similarly to how you would handle milk blisters: and for those that are split into three angles, and for those whose handling is like the leaf of myrtle, similar to abscesses from angles; and for those where you make a round cut, and other cuts and shapes when they're handled accordingly.
Those without a head, such as superficial abscesses, it is necessary to fully pierce them; and when the abscess is large, and has built up a thick wall, if you puncture it, do not drain all the pus immediately, but only some part of it; then cover the abscess until another day, then leave nothing directly over it; perform this multiple times from larger to smaller sizes, until all the pus is out; especially when the patient has weak strength or a woman in her pregnancy, young children, or elderly and decrepit people. For the spirits jump every time with the release of pus, that by chance kills the patient, and you might not notice it. Therefore, treat this chapter with great caution, and when you have punctured your abscess, if there's an opening, check whether the wound from the abscess is small; and if it's a full cut, apply linen or old cotton to it; and for large abscesses, and many wicks are there inside, it is necessary that you tie one in each so they stick together; and if you have cut into the abscess partially through the skin, and tied it internally, then fill it with old cotton or linen wads without moisture, and hold it until the third day; then dress it, and cure with ointment until it heals.
And if there's bleeding in your vein work, it is necessary to apply cold and moist cloth, and one piece of cloth, and place them on the wound multiple times. And if the bleeding persists, then it requires control and treatment, and the powders that I have mentioned in this book for your hands, and if it involves iron and the blood is very nervous, it's necessary to put wet cloths and linen soaked in wine and oil; and if it's a wound, and the body is fatty, then it's appropriate to place linens moistened with water and oil, or wine and cold oil until the third day, as we have said; and then remove the abscess and clean and cure it appropriately until it heals.
And it is necessary to know universally in treatments of abscesses: now I have told you how one should proceed before the treatments of abscesses, and here comes the chapter.
regarding the surgical treatment
For small abscesses on the head that appear and are like those made by bees, such as a nodule from a cat, there are many similarities. Some of them contain moisture along with pus; others have hard ones that feel stony to the surgeon's touch, and there is no doubt they will cut off an artery if one cuts against them. The process of cutting consists of using any tool called 'entromissoire', which has this form below: whatever it contains, if it contains moisture, one must make a long incision above it. And once the moisture has been drained out, one should scrape off everything without leaving behind the skin that contained that moisture; because it will return immediately if nothing is left behind. Then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment if available; if not, use water and vinegar, and apply this to the wound, leaving it until the next day; and let the night heal whatever is still there. And then resume using the cotton as before, for the second day, and the third day, until you are sure that it does not stay overnight; then treat the wound with ointment as needed until it heals properly. And if an abscess contains a fatty lump, cut along its length and drain out all the pus; scrape off from all sides and apply your entire cure to the cloth where it lies; and if the artery causes contrary action, do what I have instructed you after that. And similarly treat any abscesses that feel stony with both knife and treatment as I have instructed you.
And for the operation on stones and moisture, it is lighter because there is little blood. And if in any of these abscesses or head or it has no moisture, and from two of these abscesses that I observed or head from an old woman; and found the abscess as a soft stone, rough and white, and could not be broken; and even if one had pierced none of them, one would have made the incision just as well as on a stone. In other abscesses coming out or head, it was that those that come from the heads of children and the roots of ears, the opening should always stay as tight as possible depending on how far they are within, for the bowel to be able to exit; and treat them accordingly.
Of scrofula
Many times there appear abscesses at the neck, and among lymph nodes, and in angina, and never anywhere else or on the body, they are round and clustered together. Each scrophula is properly contained within its node, like a nut and an abscess from the head, as we have mentioned; and there are many appearances of these scrophulas. Some contain moisture, and others are malignantly disobedient to treatment. In this one that you see with good disposition at the surgeon's touch, and resembling the color of the neck, silent from all sides and is not sensitive under the neck or on the artery or in the conduit, and it is shallow; then you should handle it from above, and scrape off each part, and expose the two lips of the wound to the curette if necessary, as we have said about abscesses from the head; and work slowly and carefully, ensuring that you do not cut the nerve or the vein, nor be too aggressive or trench deeply, so that you do not remove more than what is required.
And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not allow for opening, place vitriol broil or any powders that stop blood in the wound, and restrain the wound; and leave it until the abscess is soothed and the wound begins to heal. And when the blood has stopped flowing, return to your task, as long as you fulfill it; then let your skill judge if there are any small pustules left, remove and clean them out. And if in the root of the pustule vein is large, it would not be right for you to cut that pustule from its root, but tie it with a double thick thread, allowing it to fall away on its own; then treat the wound using old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, and proceed with the healing.
And if you remove the entire pustule, it is necessary for you to assemble the two edges of the wound and stitch them now. There should be no remnants of surplus due to the size of the pustule. It's necessary that you take heed in removing its root, drain pus, and stitch it as we have previously described. Those pustules with surplus matter, puncture wherever they open; and do so like we had instructed before, hanging down, then apply dressing and similar things to allow them to heal from the corruption. And when the wound is well cleaned out, proceed with ointment treatment until it's healthy again.
"De squinance" in this context refers to treatments or procedures related to diseases or deformities of the neck and head region. This could cover a variety of topics such as injuries, infections, tumors, dislocations, and other medical conditions affecting these areas. Without more context from the specific text you're referring to, it's difficult to provide an exact translation for each line in this term. However, generally speaking, "squinance" implies a focus on neck-related ailments or surgery.
The old ones spoke and told of the art of cutting the throat; but I never saw anyone do it in our land, and this is written down from their words.
For those with squinting vision, it is necessary that the slit of the throat known as "epiglottis" be excised; and one should not attempt this operation by oneself, because all the airways and the windpipe are in these who have phlegm either in their mouth or in their throat or between two bones. When the disease is in the channel of the windpipe, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to prevent loss from strangulation.
Therefore, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, we must make a cut in three or four small cuts across it, between the two circles or by the size of the cut's depth, not into the cartilage.
And those lungs are suitable for the section of the epiglottis where there is no flesh, and the vessels are long under it.
And if the master is fearful, it is necessary for him to extend the throat skin to all the inch, then cut through the cheekbone until it reaches the jaw; and avoid the blood vessels, should you see any sign of them, and then shape the syphoid sinus as we have said;
and it is demonstrated by the section of the artery that flows through the broken limb, and by the loss of voice;
and leave the wound open for a while.
And when the hour has passed since one doubts strangulation, gather the two sides of the wound neatly together with care, and seal it entirely save for the cartilage; then administer medicines that cause growth to occur, until it becomes healthy.
Albucasim insists that one should not stop this process until the throat is completely swollen and the patient is pronounced dead, and until all deficiencies are met. Therefore, one should cover the epiglottis because the patient can't breathe properly, and they are breathing through the wound. This way, they will be protected from death.
And because of this, the old men were commanded to leave the wound open until the disease's mischief passes, and once it has passed, it takes three or four days. And then they commanded to stitch up the wound and treat it, until it was healed;
and I will tell you what I saw. I saw a maiden take one knife, and she stuck it in her throat, and cut part of the windpipe.
and I was called to treat her, and I found her as dead.
I discovered the wound and found the blood coming from it, indeed, she did not have a cut vein or artery leading there but the veins were flowing through the wound.
I hurriedly dressed and treated the wound until it was healed;
and she didn't suffer anymore from her hoarse voice, and came back to herself afterwards.
I swear that in the surgery of the epiglottis there was no need for it.
From the large throat
Lumps called 'neck hernia' are referred to, and large lumps of a dark purple color, and they occur frequently in women.
And it occurs according to two ways: naturally, and by accident; or natural doesn't have any disease.
And the accidents occur in two ways, one of which resembles fat within us, and the other way resembles an abscess that comes from us through an artery. And there is fear, and it does not mean to make cuts elsewhere than in that which is small, and the proof and search must be done for every introduction: if you find it as small as the tip of your nail, and cannot make any incision in all veins, then cut it, like how one cuts nails, and apply treatment to every part, if there is any point; And search thoroughly first, and treat as appropriate until it has healed perfectly.
after nails
Many ways are before us, so I will mention all of them;
And it is fitting that I explain the entire difference between what we have and what results.
I say that issue is characterized by heat and fever until the ebullitions have passed and putrefaction has occurred; thus, then rest ceases from the fever and heat.
With the new there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and contains one pus, which is its own sack and is according to the color of the body, and begins also like a boil, and becomes large;
And these are according to two appearances, or oily, or moist, and no color is as I have said in the division.
When you begin the treatment for a new case, it is necessary that you first examine and inquire about all the tools which are called 'jointer', according to their shape or the chapter that follows.
And the method of probing abscesses in our case is that you remove as much moisture as you find inside the abscess, and twist your fingers little by little until you know that the tools have pierced the pus, then according to the size of the abscess;
Then remove the jointer tool, and be careful not to rupture it.
When moisture is involved, whatever its color, if it makes a cut as I have described for other abscesses;
And if after the incision no moisture comes out, know that it is fatty, then cut it crosswise, and take it with tweezers, and gently burn each side of it and remove the coat where it was lying, so you can extract it whole with the help.
And if you cannot extract it whole, then remove it piece by piece so nothing remains.
For if nothing is left behind, it will recur through many times;
And if it stays a little longer, and the pain is not severe, then use some corrosive wet powders for the wound, restrain the wound, and place things that soothe and heal abscesses around it. And treat with other remedies until it becomes clean.
And if it's large, then lift the two edges of the wound, and treat those who are bleeding from it.
And if the vein is thicker than expected or any other situation that requires urgency, then use the opening of vitriol and let it sit for two or three days, as long as the wound heals, and rest with blood boiling; then return to using what has been applied during the first treatment.
Here are the forms of the instruments for puncturing, and there are three ways: large, medium, and small; and if you have four squares which are called "albaret," and one which is called "breb", and there are three more forms: large, medium, and small, to encircle the abscesses.
And they are also like the needles from which one removes the thorns, and made of citrine amber or iron or silver, yellow ones are valued, and those that are more skilled in black glue serve to encircle the swellings of fistula.
And there are three ways: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the width of the defects.
The forms of the plaques resemble sheep's faces, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and if there are two swellings in this manner on the plaques as well;
And if there are plaques with two swellings, they also come in these three forms; and if there are plaques with two swellings each, as well as plaques with only one swelling, all of which come in three forms; and all this is necessary according to their location.
The head of this to whom one makes it sharp, and among these there are who do not cut with force from one side only, of which we burn the skin, because in them one does not cut into the vein or nerve;
And of these introducers are the needles placed in gloves, so that the patient does not feel them during the opening of abscesses;
And there are three ways: large, small, and medium, as you see;
and do not use force in the legs, arms, nipples, and similar areas;
And no other small instrument is made, resembling twigs of chestnuts, according to this form, onto which blood has been applied:
And it is placed only once at the sound position of veins and arteries, and never following this large form:
Never do the breasts of some men swell when they begin to become corrupted, until they seem like female breasts;
And remain ugly and swollen, and if one wishes to treat them, it should be done according to this form of this line b. up to g: Then scrape off the fat, and apply medicine to the wound that stimulates growth of flesh. Then join the two edges of the wound for sewing, and treat it until it is healed.
And if the breasts are hanging down and flattened by their size, like it happens in women, cut them into two halves above, through two similar incisions; So that one is held by the other at the end of each, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. up to the line .g.; Then scrape off the skin that is between the two edges, and remove the fat, and apply what we have instructed about sewing and powders, and what is necessary for treatment, until it is healed.
And if it is not healed, or the incision has not been completed, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to blood flow obstruction, then you must fill the wound with wet cotton in a corrosive dressing; And let it be until he nibbles it and returns it along with the fat, then treat it until it is healed.
removal of abscesses from armpits
Abscesses that occur in the armpits are ways of hard scrofula or where there have been nodes, and if any contain moisture.
Those who contain moisture need to be cut according to this shape, from line b. up to line .g: And when all the pus in the abscess is drained, fill the wound with old cotton and let it stay until the next day. Then remove all the cotton and continue applying ointment until healed.
And if the abscesses resemble scrophula sores, make incisions as we have said for cuts on scrophula sores, and if the wound is filled with pus, apply a cautery as we have said earlier.
regarding the rupture of an artery
When the artery is opened, and skin is sewn above it, many times abscesses develop. And similarly, when there's lacerated vein and abscess appears;
and if one knows this much that it is due to the artery, then the abscesses are long and precise; and when you feel it with your fingers, if you sense resistance; and when it's due to the vein, there are clear marks appearing;
and it's foolish to cover this abscess, and similarly when it's around the joints and muscles and in other areas like neck and many others, and they are very large. It is necessary then to avoid the iron treatment, and that which affects the head should also be avoided. In the case of swelling due to arterial bleeding, one performs this above the skin for as long as needed.
It is necessary then to avoid the iron treatment, and that which affects the head should also be avoided. In the case of swelling due to arterial bleeding, one performs this above the skin for as long as needed. Then work on the size of the incision, and beautifully sever the artery from the membranes, until it is exposed.
Then insert a needle through it, and make a hole up to the other side, and restrain the artery with two threads of the length required, as I have instructed you in extracting the two arteries from the temples;
Then introduce a tool into the gap between the two threads until blood starts flowing out from where it was stopped, and then release the abscess;
Then proceed with the treatment until the patient sweats. Then treat that area with ointment as long as it is clean.
and if the abscess is due to the size of the vein, it is necessary that you apply what you can of the pus to all the skin with your hand. Then insert the needle through the area you hold with your hand, and make it pierce, and let there be two strands of thread, so that you draw it from the other side. Then remove the abscess, just as I have told you, or link one end of either piece to each shoulder with a thread;
And if you doubt whether the threads will withstand the force, then sew another needle with both ends of each thread all across the entire abscess opening from the first hole, and secure the threads in four turns;
Then cut off the abscess as much as the surplus comes out, then cut away the excess neatly and leave what is tied up;
Then place a damp cloth soaked in wine and oil on it, then apply various treatments and ointments until the wound heals.
from the pus of the nerves
Similarly, just like pus flows in the artery and vein, pus enters the nerves when they are cut, or by too much labor, and similar things.
And this happens more often at the shoulders and the arms, and everywhere there are joints, and it's one cause of pus, and its appearance seems like the color of flesh, and can be in various positions with pain;
And when one constrains it in form, the patient feels the body's pain, and it is not exactly at all parts of the body, but over the surface.
And move well in all directions, and does not go forward or backward, neither to the side nor upwards, and that which is in joints should not be covered by metal: perhaps it would lead to constriction;
And that which is on the head or forehead, makes the skin to thicken. If the abscesses are small, then take hold of them with your forceps and cut at their root;
And if it is large, then suspend it by its edge, and cut, then scrape, afterwards the bone, and sew up the wound with stitches; keep treating until it heals properly.
Of large boils hanging No occurrence happens in the belly and nowhere else, it's a disease called "fungus" by its appearance, and it has a subtle root, and large lumps; and there are small ones and some of varying sizes;
And I saw two homes where there were two bellies that looked more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, they were white, had a small root, and were cut open, and it corroded even with moisture.
I copied them and found in one eighteen ounces weighing, and in the other five, and the organs in the incision are such that when you look at it, the diseased part is moist, and the color of the fungus is white and moist with a subtle root;
If you encounter a large spot, and have the fire cautery in your presence. For the surgeon experiences many times excessive blood losses, and if it goes beyond your control, then quickly use the cautering instrument;
And if you see the patient frightened and fearful from the cut made by the iron, then take a well-made lead thread, and tie the knot as we have said, and let it be for two days;
Then hold it in place, and do not cease to pull on the lead thread until the knot comes out, and there is no effort through it; and if the roots are thick, then be afraid when you feel them especially for the stomach, but you can well remove half of it.
Then apply the cautery so that it doesn't heal improperly; then treat the wound, and make sure you don't remove the wax that is of foreign color and has little sensation and milk secretion.
For this is an abscess, and I will come to the treatment of the sore afterwards.
When the buttock burns, it means
When the appearance of the abscess comes from a fire-caused wound or tear in the scrotum, and it is on the belly, and there are some testicles affected, just like when other tears occur, or bleeding from veins or arteries as described above, or due to wind issues;
And if it is due to the tear in the scrotum and from the discharge of pus, then its appearance resembles that of flesh-colored pus, and it is a minor thing with little pain, and opens up from various exits. And if it is due to the issue from the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses on its fingers if it returns and then comes back again, and by chance if it is squeezed and expands much at the entrance of the bath and through strong labor.
And if it is due to moisture, it is a minor issue, and it opens well when you press it with your hand, not constraining; and if it is due to blood, then it will open by these signs, the abscesses are large and hard, and they occur in amounts.
And if it is due to windiness, it has a specific smell at the toucher, and the veins show that you look to see if their appearance is like blood from an artery, or vein, or windiness. If it is necessary that you allow the treatment. For there exists doubt and fear, as I have said in chapter on abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
And if its appearance is on the intestine or in the bladder, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to prick their urine, and have it extended all straight, then pierce it completely around the opening. then command them to heal by sweat between your hands, then go inside the wound you've indicated across the whole surface, Then half of the abscess is above all the large hook;
Then work so that half of the abscess is stretched over the binding, and place your index finger at its tip, keeping hold of the intestine; If you find it caught by the binding, release it and place the intestine behind the belly.
And if you find the boil, take it at the root, and scrape away the excess.
And if the artery or vein causes a contrary effect, or if there is bleeding internally, then go back to your work and take two needles, and put two pieces of thread each, and place those two needles in the area where you pierced it, crossing it as you made the puncture;
Then extract the pus in four days above the needles, and if you see that it has healed, remove the needles, and let the wound dry until it heals, and discard the dead flesh by itself; Or you should remove it when it becomes tender and healed. Then treat it as necessary, and drain the pus just like we have described;
Or you should remove it when it becomes tender and healed. Then treat it as necessary, and drain the pus just like we have described; And remove the blood or moisture you find, then treat the wound according to what's needed, and stitch up the wound.
and the sore
We have discussed in the division the appearances of gangrene and how to operate with medicine, as well as how to avoid iron treatment. We say that gangrene spreads when cooked meat is involved, and great caution must be exercised during treatment. According to old people, if there's gangrene on skin you can scrape it off like gangrene in breasts or in similar locations; and all of it should be removed at the beginning stage. If it's large and old gangrene, it shouldn't be approached as I've never cured any such case, nor has anyone been cured by me before.
And for operations where it can be removed from the skin or body parts as we have discussed, you should not purge off any black mucus in the diseased area. Then let a surgeon check for obvious fullness, and then cut open that diseased area till there's proper skin exposed to perform surgery. Next, remove all tumors or gangrene, and cut hair everywhere, and bone everywhere without leaving anything behind; and let bleeding continue freely throughout, press well on the wound with your hand or any object, and if it starts to bleed in contradiction of the incision made in artery or vein, then cauterize until the bleeding stops. Then treat it further until it heals.
Of cautery with fire, command the patient to let the hair grow long and even; and if they prick at their root, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow. We have discussed the symptoms of erysipelas in the previous section and how it is formed, as well as the signs for each symptom and the treatment provided with medicines, and that done by iron: these are only described; and should one use iron against these four conditions? The answer is yes, specifically those named tympanites and yposarche because they can be fatal. So when you're using medicine to treat erysipelas called "eclites" through medication, and the treatment doesn't show improvement, if you notice that the patient's condition is weak or there might be another disease besides erysipelas, such as stomach pain or similar symptoms; then do not apply iron, for it is uncertain. And if you observe that the patient has a very strong coloration, and he only has erysipelas and his age isn't too young nor too old, then one should proceed to treat accordingly by opening the area. Lift the patient's right side towards your hands, and have the ministers press the abdomen at the lowest part of the backside as they apply water to it. Then take a pricking lancet in this form: And make two cuts each about .5 inches long at their pointy ends, but not so deep that they could reach up to the intestine when inserted, without being able to bleed;
Then look to see if the dropsy is pressing towards the intestines: should be that you cut beneath the belly .iij. inches horizontally above the navel; and if the dropsy is due to liver disease, let your cut be on the left of the belly .iij. inches; and if it's due to kidney problems, let it be on the right side, and do not have the patient lie down upon the cut so that excess fluids don't flow into the weak part.
Then cut through all the skin with the instrument, and push it inwards, lifting your hand fully between the skin and flesh as much as you would when searing an area of size equivalent to a fingernail or more; then pierce the flesh until the pus comes out at least five inches, which is the level of the water, then force it, and use this instrument of which I have described above: It resembles a thin silver rod, made of tin or lead alloy, and has parts that are .i small parts on one side; and where it exists on one side, it's .iij parts; and .ij parts on the other side, and .i part elsewhere; and cut off the joints as if they were feathers, this is the shape of the incision that the writers describe when cutting the feather.
At the top is the amelum, so that when the instrument reaches the water, it begins to push downwards on the instrument; drain then half or one-third of it, for if you remove more than necessary at this time, perhaps the patient dies from the resolution of his spirit due to the weapon's action, or he loses his strength, or approaches death.
but according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue denote in the sick person, and their pulse; then take the tool and hold the water, and it is held back now by the cure that stupefies the pertus which is above the syphilitic condition, about which I have spoken, that you puncture according to this manner; then resume using the tool again on another day, if you see the sick person suffering from this, and draw out a small quantity of water.
Do this every day, and refrain from drinking until it does not remain but a little water. And if you doubt about the sick person, and leave much water in them, if the cure of burial or sand is heated, and by some sweat or bath and under the sun, and gets tanned; and drink as prescribed. And let the cure of drying medicines continue until it becomes healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after extracting the water, as I have said before.
On the operation to close the penis None of the times that children are born who do not have testicles, or whose testicles are small, or they are not in their place. If it happens to be so that it doesn't pierce through to both sides of a tiny soft spot according to this form: then put one thin metal ring under each testicle and secure them for about three or four days; and when it wants to urinate, remove the rings and let urine out, and then put them back again. And by chance nothing happens because the urine that comes forth doesn't leave the rings closed. If the testicles are small, if there is a medicine of metal rings of lead, as we have said, should they expand. Those who don't have their testicles in their place are lame, for no one is born with testicles at the head of the penis, so they cannot urinate before lifting up their penis; and they cannot ejaculate because the matter cannot come to the prostate gland, and it's a male disease.
And the method of the opening is that the body lies on its back, and then the head of the penis and the scrotum are placed so they're as wide as a feather's width, so that the testicles lie in the middle, just as it should be; and guard against bleeding that comes out many times, and if this happens, stop the blood with those who stop bleeding, and treat the wound until it is healed.
The eruptions of the penis Many times lumps appear on the penis, and there is an ugly appearance; and among them are both benign and malignant ones; it is necessary that you take these at one ounce each, grind and clean them all, then place Egyptian ointment-soaked cotton on them; then cure with diafinicon ointment until it heals. And if the lump is malignant, with its color and discharge, it's necessary that you apply a cautery to it. When you have extracted it, and if the lump is within the penis and has part inside the skin and part outside, it's necessary that you remove the lump that is inside first; and when it heals, then cure from the outside. For when you cure them together, there may not be enough assurance that the head of the penis will not be pierced, causing blackness and corruption in the penis and around the anus; it's necessary to remove all that is black and corrupted, then coat with an ointment made of almond peel and sugar, which is prepared from walnut shells and cloves, then cure with other remedies until it heals.
And if bleeding occurs, you should apply the lunar cautery according to this form: The cauterizations help in two positions together: that is, during bleeding and corruption; and if the head of the penis has become corrupted and removed, it's necessary that you insert a stick of opium into the penis, and let urine pass through. And when the skin becomes dry on the tip of the penis which belongs to those who have not been circumcised, or it occurred due to injury or abscess, then it is necessary that you burn with one tool of hair until all the ligatures are released, and remove the head of the penis from all sides;
And if this is something you wish to discuss with me, then you should burn it at the tip of the penis and foreskin until it becomes red. Then cut properly in between and I, take one fine linen wick that has been dipped in cold water and let it smoke slightly without burning it right away.
Regarding circumcision
Circumcision isn't like other injuries; nonetheless, when we perform this act voluntarily and on children, it's necessary that we do the best job possible and cause the least harm to their health.
I say that the old ones didn't mention circumcision for their children, as they didn't use it in their law, and all we have about it is what we've acquired through experience.
For I have wanted the largest part of the masters and surgeons who performed circumcision between one day and two days, and during that time, and for all a novaculum; if it was done correctly because there are two flaps, and by chance if this one is above and the other remains below.
Or they receive the cut, and pain is doubled, and in the shaving where it's one day isn't secured that point of the member; and in the trimming of the nail by chance the tool escapes from the work, and runs out, and many times grow like that which doesn't need trimming and I have wanted.
From the shaving done during that time throughout the length of the thread I have found the goodness of experience, for the strength cuts just as well above as below.
For when you press your hand, if cut in halves equally across .i. all stretches are tense; but that the thread be well inserted between the skin; and adopt the manner of the first surgical operation so as to make the child think, if he hears, that you are only tying the thread around the shaft of the penis just like this, and then let it out in all manners that you can. Then make it stand between your hands straight, and keep the strength between your hands or under your feet that the child does not see, nor any of the instruments; then push your hand towards the penis and blow or correct, and pull it up until the head of the penis is inside; then clean it well from the dirt that has accumulated, then tie its opening with a double thread, then tie it under every second at .i. point and another loop; and hold it against the second band to the pouch and the first index finger, and fit between the two loops, then lift your hand quickly and pull the head of the penis.
Then make it stand between your hands straight, and keep the strength between your hands or under your feet that the child does not see, nor any of the instruments; then push your hand towards the penis and blow or correct, and pull it up until the head of the penis is inside; then clean it well from the dirt that has accumulated, then tie its opening with a double thread, then tie it under every second at .i. point and another loop; and hold it against the second band to the pouch and the first index finger, and fit between the two loops, then lift your hand quickly and pull the head of the penis. Then let the bleeding drip slowly and gradually, because it's pus; and put powder on and over the powder .i. layer spread with a yolk of boiled egg tempered in rose water, mixed with olive oil well and fresh, and leave it for another day, and treat it with other treatments until it becomes clean.
The shape of the forces at creation is thus: let there be two heads, they shall face each other and cut each other, and let the heads also be as large as hands equally:
The error of creation occurs when the bones inside escape during incision; therefore, it is necessary that you spread them to your nail, so they produce pus; and cut equally, and if you cannot hold them at your nail, then use tongs, and then cut.
And if it breaches for three days, and the one that is under the penis swells, let him wait until the pus from the wound subsides, then lightly scrape; move as you can, and refrain from touching the part of the penis, which will not harm him.
Then treat the wound with powders as we have described in our treatment of powders. If you apply too much to the bone and it goes beyond, it will not cause harm; therefore, treat it as we have said until it is healed.
holding back of urine
Retention of urine is due to the presence of stones, or frozen blood, or a bladder tumor, or new growths, or similar things, which we have mentioned in the section;
And if the urine is no longer retained, and you notice that retention due to stones in the kidneys or at the neck of the bladder, it is necessary that the patient be on his knees. And have him place his feet under his back, and stretch out his belly from above the part of the back, and restrain the patient so he can't move; then forcefully constrain the neck of the bladder to allow expression of the stones above, because this allows urine to flow freely;
And if it does not come out, as we have said, and the patient feels intense pain, it is necessary that you administer extraction with all the instrument which is called "syringe", of which this is the form: and be made of fine silver wire, like a bird's feather; and let its handle be one palm long and half, and be fine at its tip.
And the way in which urine is expelled is as follows: take one double thread, and tie it around the head with .i. loop of wool or cotton, then insert the head of the thread into the syringe; remove any excess wool and make sure that the bunched part reaches up to the top of the syringe. Then smear the syringe with oil or butter and aubin from an egg, have the patient sit upright, and apply moisture with olive oil and vinegar to the bladder and penis.
Then gently place the syringe in the penis until it reaches the root of the penis. Next, double over the penis towards the mouth (I assume this is a mistake or misinterpretation and should refer to 'mouth' as in the opening for urination). Then position the syringe so that it goes before up to the bladder, and when you feel the urine coming up until the empty thing (meaning the urethra), and this isn't done according to this order because whoever is leading does it incorrectly. Then remove the thread piece by piece from all the wool loop by loop, and the urine follows the wool. After that squeeze out the urine and make sure the urine flow properly.
And continue with the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and comfort the patient afterwards.
About diseases of the bladder
When burns or blood come to the bladder, or putrefaction is assembled there, and you see waters and medicines distilling, if make everything for the tool called 'clepsis' (an ancient water measure), and its form is:
It is closed and you have three parts: two on one side, and one on the other, just as you see; and the middle one through which the medicine comes out should be such that it numbs well down below without addition, if it can remove moisture, and expel when necessary;
And when you see your medicines flowing in the bladder, put the wetter's head near the moisture, and pull as you pull him; if you remove the moisture to the wetter, and then apply strong pressure where you pulled; if the moisture enters there, it will now reach the bladder, so that the patient feels it;
And this is the form of the subtle bladder stone, which we cleanse out from the bladder through catheterization: thus:
And it is made of silver or lead, and the head is positioned higher; and you insert one inside up to .i. fist's length or until it reaches the urethra; then take a sheep bladder and place it in water as if you were preparing to cleanse out the bladder, then fasten the other end between the two fists using a thick thread double, and heat one end of this water in fire; then insert the stone into the penis, then press your hand on the bladder until all the water has been used up, ensuring the patient feels that the water has reached the bladder;
And if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment and make one circle, then poke holes evenly around it. Then insert a strong thread through these holes, join the circle as you would join two pieces of wood together, put inside what you see that is liquid, water and moisture, and fasten it in place; do this as you did with the bladder, press with your hand until the water reaches the bladder.
Of the stone
We have discussed in the division the methods of stone extraction and combined medicines, and we have explained the difference between stones that pass with urine and all the signs, and on which stone one should operate by size; and within the bladder, and the penis; and I will tell you openly and briefly.
I say that the stone that is in the bladder often occurs in children, and this is a sign that the urinary tract infection jumps like an infection with its subtlety; and you should open the urethra and cleanse the patient's penis several times, and then repair it; and at many of these infections the base is involved; and until the child reaches four years old, treatment for young children is rather light, and it becomes much harder in adults, those who are between youth and age; and it is more straightforward to treat those with large stones than those with small ones.
And when we come to treatment, the first thing is to cleanse the patient via urine, in order to drain all the toxins from the intestines. For it obstructs the urinary tract at no time during stone extraction.
Then hold the patient by their elbows, and lift them up and move backwards until the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, exiting once past its top. Then have them sit between your hands with their arms under their legs, so that the bladder is fully hanging down inside; then you inquire and touch it from there onwards.
If you feel the stone in space, hurry now to cut on the stone. And if it doesn't move throughout with touching, moisten your index finger of your left hand; if the patient is female, or your middle finger, if the patient is young and fully grown; and hold it at its base, inquire and touch it from there onwards; then when you feel it on your finger, take it up to the neck of the bladder; then press with your finger, and push outwards towards where you see to cut.
And instruct the assistant to press the bladder with their hand, and command them to extend their right hand up to their chest, and with their left hand hold the skin which is between the thighs at the part where the cut will be made; then they should push out the stone cleanly, which has this shape:
And make the cut between those who are between the kidneys and the foundation, not in the middle but at the side of the left snow; and be straight on the stone, and your hands should be close to or against the foundation, and its size should go through so that it is wide outside and narrow inside, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large.
By chance if the press that is at or against the foundation should jump forward without effort; and know that there are parts of the stone with angles and margins: they can be difficult to break through; and if there's a part below it seems like a walnut, round, where its exit is easy.
Above all, where there are angles and margins, make the cut larger; and if it doesn't jump forward, you must apply pressure using tongs as sharp as a file to force out the stone so that it doesn't escape. Or you might use a delicate curved tool at the tip; and if you can't engineer it like this, widen by one or two narrow pieces of rough material, and if it's hard to disintegrate with them, you may crush it with vitriol.
And if there are more than one stone, first remove the largest from the bladder's neck, then cut upwards, then force through with the tool, and later the smaller ones should be done if there are any more. And if it is very large, it may need to be fragmented, and make a larger incision. For two things happen to the patient: either they die, or urine starts coming out from where the stones were removed while their legs cannot join; but still try with the tool or the pliers, as long as you remove it piece by piece;
And when you have completed your work, apply the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, then bind it, and place one wet cloth in oil and wine, or oil and cold rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then set the patient upright at his neck, and do not untie the bandage until three days.
And when you untie it, wash the area well with oil and water, then apply the dyafinicon ointment and basilico ointment until it is healed.
And if abscesses or infections reach the wound and blood congeals in the bladder, and it is due to this retention of urine that we are aware happens when urinating without stopping: hence you must apply your treatment to the wound, remove that blood, because if it remains, it will damage the bladder and corrode it;
Then heal the wound from water and salt and sand, and assist him in all ways that you see fit, until he is well; it's necessary that every time you treat him, you tie his two legs together, and gather the medicines around the area.
And if the stone is small and it's located where the penis goes in, and is blocked inside, causing urine not to come out; when you treat this as I have said, cut several times, and allow for some relief from this treatment with each cut. I already know this works like this.
Take one iron twig according to this form, and have it with three points stuck into one stake:
Then take one thread and tie it around the shaft of the twig so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then stick the iron twig into the shaft gently until it reaches the stone; and twist the iron twig in your hand near the stone little by little, until you can pierce the stone from the other side; if urine starts to flow immediately, then press your hand on the one left behind at the stone inside the twig. If the stone breaks immediately, let the urine flow and prepare for medical care;
And if you can't do this for any reason that prevents it, tie one thread around the stone and another above it, then place the shaft of the twig in between these two threads near the stone, then pull forcefully on the twig, untie the thread, and clean the congealed blood from the wound; and treat until it is healed.
From the stone of women
It happens that stone occurs in women, and if it happens once, the treatment is difficult, and it's forbidden for three reasons: one reason might be that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second reason is that there won't be any woman who can reveal herself to lookouts, even when she is pure.
And the third way is that perhaps we can't find any woman who truly knows this art of medicine; and the fourth way is that the stone in a woman's body might be more prone to come into contact than a man's stone, which means it requires deeper incision, and there is great fear involved.
And if necessity demands this task, you must seek a skilled physician and find someone to guide you. If you cannot find such a person, trust in a well-known pure consultant; present them with an understanding of the life of women or a woman who knows part of the medical art and instruct her to do as you ask about the investigation of the stone;
And carefully observe if the woman is a virgin: then she needs to push her womb or its foundation and seek the stone; and should she find it, make her grasp it from under her womb, and advise her to push her womb or where the malady lies with force and press her left hand onto the bladder in form.
If she finds it, she should move it gradually from inside the bladder to underneath until she reaches the root of the thigh; then press against the stone at the root of the thigh opposite the middle of the womb, where it is likely located and feels the stone in that area; and not move her hand above or under the stone, and when cutting, make the first cut small.
Then press the stone in the waist; if you feel the stone, increase the wound until the stone can emerge forcefully, and know that there are many types of stones: these being small and large, hard and smooth, long and round, and with grooves. And understand their characteristics to know their exit.
And if the fire isn't enough, place sulfur in it, and keep it for an hour until the fire extinguishes. Then return to your work, while the stone is still hard, and prepare all the tools I have instructed you about for extracting stones within your craft to assist you in your task;
And if the fire isn't enough, and it's an artery that has been cut, sprinkle the powder on the site and tie it with bandages for several days without repeating this method, and leave the stone alone don't try to remove it, so as not to accidentally kill the patient; then treat the wound.
And when the heat of blood has calmed down and the limbs have returned to normal, then return to your work, while the stone is still hard.
From fatty hernia
Watery mucus is nothing else than a gathering of moisture or white pus, which is found in the coat of the kidneys that contains the egg; and it is called "pus," and it is not properly inside the egg's membrane if one thinks it could be another egg; and this refers to the skin of the kidney between the white pus we have mentioned. And this does not contain a hole.
And the formation of this mucus is due to weakness that affects the kidneys, and spreads this substance.
And it never comes from striking the kidneys, and this moisture has many colors: sometimes it becomes yellow like jaundice, or without redness, or black, or watery white, and these occurrences are more frequent.
And these are the signs to recognize this assembly, because if it is or whiter than mentioned, then the abscesses will be long, that is as long as an egg figure, and they do not open, for there is moisture throughout.
And if there is moisture in the proper area, then the abscesses will be long with part of an egg, and because of this we think it is another egg;
And if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and this white whitishness, you will perceive it well; therefore when you know the color of the moisture, you must examine all inside that square area, from which its shape was previously formed. So according to what comes after the introduction, judge about what is inside it.
So according to what comes after the introduction, judge about what is inside it. And when we treat it with iron, the patient should be cleansed as much as our ability and the restoration of their body allow; then apply it above their back, on a spot slightly high, and cover them with wool.
Then sit to their left side, and instruct the minister to sit on their right, extending the rod to one of the two ribs under the navel;
Then take the spatula, and cut the skin of the navel through him from long to below the belly button, and make the incision all straight while working on the skin of the navel until you reach white flesh, and gently burn it carefully according to your ability;
Then pierce the meat deeply with water to the size of half an inch, and remove all the water, then place your fingers, and position the meat upward; and do not touch the belly button but only the meat. Drill it completely or in pieces by his side carefully, for if you don't drill it properly, it will return the water.
And if the egg jumps to your task, you reset it in its place when you have completed the work of extraction; then assemble the two parts of the keel from the navel area into one seam, then treat it as other wounds until it is healed.
And if you find the egg corrupted by another illness, it is necessary that you tie the vessels that are suspended, while wondering about blood flow; then cut everything above the suspension, and extract the egg, and treat it as we have said.
And if the fever is assembled into two parts joined together, you will know that these are two stumps. Proceed to cut the other part in the same way as you did with the first equally, then let the blood drain out and put moistened wool in the wound with rose oil;
And take another wet thread soaked in wine and oil, and place it on the two kidneys, and put folded cloths on top of it, and bind it all up with a bandage according to this shape:
Then take two cloths, and sew them with torn fabric according to this pattern so that they are stitched together in the gusset of the breeches. The first shoulder is placed on the foundation up to the back, and the others near the area of the elbow; the other two shoulders above the two corners, and all should be gathered together by constriction in the loop of the braces;
And then the rod of the cautery is treated like iron size once it has been medicated with oil, and you take a delicate fire cautery tool and scrape off the skin of the kidneys, and heat it as we have described so that the white liquid contained in water is revealed;
If you use this fire cautery according to its form, then make an incision at the bone like it says, and apply it with this fine-grained cautery:
And apply the heat in all possible ways until you are thoroughly done; and make sure the fire does not touch the egg; know that this work is more beneficial; and when preserving blood flow, be careful not to cut open the veins, and ensure the cuts are made precisely.
And if anything goes against you, or if pus comes out or there's a disruption of blood or something else, treat the thing that goes against you as instructed in what was previously said.
And if the patient is afraid and cannot wait for this work due to its horror, then provide a puncturing treatment as I have instructed you, and know that once you are well assured by the explanations we have given that the watery branch is there,
Sit the patient upright on one seat; then puncture the abscess in the area below at all the pus-filled spot wide, and place the incision along the length of the body; and make the openings large enough so that any liquid can flow out completely.
Then place cotton on top of the area, and secure it in place, allowing the removal of the water. Cure until the wound has healed completely.
And if the white cloth does not allow water to escape from the wound's mouth, you should pour it with a feather or the tool used for treating water in dropsy patients, as shown beforehand; and make an incision of about half a palm around the wound, and know that the water will return, and gather together after approximately seven months or a little longer. And once it is gathered again like before, then those days will pass with the affliction of the patient.
Of the pus in the genital area
Know that in this part of the anatomy there are many fears, because I think it's better to leave it as is;
and I will tell you about the work and appearances of pus.
So I say that many abscesses come from or near the skin, and indeed in the genital area; and this is due to various causes.
This is to know about excess acidity and fever which spreads among those who are weak or through beating;
and the color of the abscess matches the color of the flesh; and there is no pain, it's an abscess that causes grief;
and by chance there is a hard and bony abscess with an off-color; it doesn't come from a vein or swelling of the artery.
When it's due to blockage of an artery, if you can recognize by the formation of an abscess when you press on your fingers; and you should not touch it at all.
That which is due to swelling of the vein can be recognized by its position during the palpation with your fingers,
and one can very well measure this in relation to this structure, and on other bones; And it is that you should hold the heart of the liver, then place the egg above, and pull the white string from top to bottom, and release all hitches of the egg in every direction.
If the egg is already bound with these strings, then you should pull the egg and the heart out accordingly.
And if it is towards the white or inside the vessels, then you should release all the strings, and take out the heart roundly.
And if the birthplace of the child is behind or in front, then you should remove the entire heart and take out the egg as we have said.
And when your tasks are completed, if you apply the wounded area with wet wool in oil rose and wine, then continue other treatments until it is healed.
regarding the discharge of testicles
This is about an abscess around one and a half inches in size, covered by an envelopment resembling a half-yard, with the swelling of the testicles, and the patient experiences severe pain when it moves;
And the treatment for this illness is also quite meticulous like the one just described,
Yet we shall tell you about its work according to what the old ones did.
It is necessary that you make the patient sit on a raised seat, then put the testicles up using a sling under your hands, Take all the parts near to the penis, and guide the surgeon's hand, and spread them out neatly.
Then cut deeply with the knife across the vessels, as long as they are exposed.
and then burn from each side, just like we have said in the extraction of arteries which are in the temples;
then put an awl where there is one with a double thread, and tie it to the first bone where the pin came out, and tie it straight away to the other end. then cut straight through in the middle, according to the length of the body, and remove the corrupted humors;
Then treat the wound like the others or by bandaging it up, so that no blood flows when any of the intestines are being sewn back in.
because this does not bring any harm, and if all the blood vessels are involved, then you should drain out all the intestines from all the blood vessels. so that the patient does not lose its contents due to cutting of the vessels, and they dry out and cannot be revived.
from the rupture of the uterus Events of this rash are due to the section that comes from bleeding or stretching on the abdomen in the area of the glands, because the intestines descend through that breach into one of the kidneys;
And this rupture is from bleeding or stretching, and these two ways of animal cause arise: from impact, or jump, or roar, or lifting a loaded pack, and by similar matters.
And the signs when it is from stretching at bleeding are that they happen little by little over a long time, and do not come suddenly. And the abscesses are equal until around the waist, because bleeding accelerates the intestines.
And the symptoms are when it's about internal bleeding, she brings on a sudden sharp pain at the beginning, and various abscesses appear, near the skin, and this is due to the discharge of the intestine and the body outside the site of bleeding.
And the glands often descend with the intestine, and are retained within, causing great suffering to the patient when pressed, even if they're close by.
And in these iron treatments for fear, it's necessary to avoid them.
And the way of this treatment is that you command or instruct the patient to guide or direct their intestine into the wound with their hand from within, if it can be inserted. Then surround his neck with your hands and lift up his legs;
then stretch him out above, and cut all the skin around the genital area as long as necessary; then cut across the belly's width according to your skill in opening wounds, and do it so that he can pass through;
then scrape the scrotum until all the white testicle is uncovered from all sides;
Then place your thumb index in the one that marks the heart, in the one between the white yolk which is under the egg skin, and between the second yolk.
And remove the one that is behind the egg, and between the second yolk; then move to the right hand inside the cavity of the ovaries, and place the white yolk above your left hand, and lift the egg towards all the yolks towards the waist. And instruct the assistant to extend the egg upwards, and free the one that is behind the connection point.
And check with your thumbs if there is any wrapped intestine or hard white yolk, and if you find nothing, remove it from the belly upwards.
Then take a needle with a thread of .i. thickness made from .x. threads, and cut it behind the testicles where the skin is thin; after this operation, then remove the testicles that appear through the threads, as many as there are .iiij. threads; Then join them one on top of the other in a manner of a cross, and tie the testicles together, as we said it's underneath the skin of the testicles with a strong thread of .ij. parts; Then wrap the testicles with threads, and tie them tightly in two parts so that none of the seeds that they carry can enter into it, preventing an abscess from forming. And make the stitch directly across the first long line of two inches in length from this. After these two lines leave a space equal to one-third of this length below on the right side of the knee's crease, which is about an inch wide;
And after everything else according to the roundness that he wore; then cut in the area where the skin of the buttocks is, as long as it can be done without damage and bruising, just like we said before.
Then apply moist wool in oil, and place it on the wounds, and bind it with the stitch that we have mentioned. And afterwards, cauterize the white fold as we have said after incision, due to concern about blood escape.
For this happens many times, and let the bandage on until it bleeds from him; and if he delays in bleeding, then be raised with hot water, and place upon him what we have said, until he bleeds.
then treat the wound with other remedies, until it heals perfectly.
of fatty hernia
In this branch, I never see anyone who dares to do the iron treatment.
And the old ones said it is done like a branch that is assembled in a vine, in such a way that you bind the vessels, after cutting them lightly over the arteries;
Then proceed with me, and treat the abscess of him who works, until the vessels bleed; and treat it in the way that we have said, until he is well.
No breach occurs in anger, as we have said, and open the limbs; and do not let any of the intestines come out at all, and if they do come out a little, it's okay, and fix them every hour;
And yet if it stays too long at this point, then suspect a wound or pus formation, as the intestines descend;
And this happens through the widening due to pus which is in the joints, just like what we have said, because it's extended, then it gets softened and swelled up the limbs and opens;
And the treatment is done using cauterization, as we have previously mentioned; and there are no times when it's treated with iron in this way:
And indeed, when the patient lies prone on their back between your hands, then grasp the place of the inflamed wound across as wide as two fists;
And then remove the fat that is under the skin where it follows, take the edge and place it into the exposed area of the fat.
And press it forward to the belly side, then sew the two visible edges of the fat onto the surface of the skin near the fat, and stitch both of them.
Then remove the skin of the fat, do not cover it with the fat or extend the egg or any other substance, as I have told you about in the treatment of removing bile from the intestines;
Then he heals by treating wounds. And when you cut the children (infants), if you cleanse and treat the wound, until it is healed.
The syphon (a surgical tool) must be constrained and has no visible mark in the incision, and the cautery is heated at this location, closer to the recovery.
from softening of the skin around the anus
Many times the skin around the anus becomes soft in some men, because what's inside has become softened and can be seen; it is necessary when you want to treat it that you make the patient feel relieved on their back, then cut away the softened skin from the natural skin. Next, join the two buttocks at a seam, and if desired, stitch the excess of the softened skin with three or four stitches firmly. Then cut between the seams, and treat this wound as any other until it heals, and remove the stitches when it's healed, and let it heal completely.
Of discipline
Know that chastremens are proscribed in our law, and because of this, I would prefer not to discuss them in this book; they are necessary only for two reasons: one is that you must be able to respond when asked about the application of chastremens and how to treat afterwards; and the other is because we often have need to use chastremens on animals to assist us, such as sheep and goats and cattle and others. I say then that chastremens are executed according to two methods: either through attraction or by making a cut.
Of Hermaphrodites
Hermaphroditism occurs in two ways: one way is that between the two openings are open similarly to a woman's figure, or it has hair, and sometimes contains urine. And the other manner is in women, with one on the wrist resembling a penis and two openings.  And the treatment for this involves tying all the connected parts together, treating them like any other wounds; in the second way, for men whose urine jumps through the skin of their openings, there's no need to treat it.
from the cheek area
Tentigene is a connected part on the natural body, so long as it's too ugly to see; and some women have it as large as a hand, and this needs treatment. It is necessary that you color the excess of tentigene with your fingers or nail clippers, and remove it lightly; do not go too far in cutting, lest blood flow, then treat it again until it heals; and there's another kind that emerges from the mouth of the marriage bed, and the penis, and by chance jumps out, resembling a cow, hence they called this old ailment "cow disease". It must be treated as we have described for tentigene, and treated until healed.
Of cautery by fire command to the sickman to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Erratic is if the nature of the woman is not discovered or understood, or if certain parts are small; it can be due to her natural state at birth or as an accident caused by illness that has come upon her. It could also be due to being stuck together by a union, or by an obstruction, either fine or coarse, and is performed under the heart, in the ribs, in the back, or anywhere else; and you should understand how it occurs during conception, childbirth, or by chance leading to flower-bearing; understanding this comes from observing the symptoms. If the injuries are close and obvious, they can be felt with your fingers or on your side. If it's an obstruction caused by a finer substance, and if they are close to the two lungs, hurry them like this: place your two fingertips together, and have the woman lie on her back, spreading her legs; then form the two lungs until they cover the finer substance and overlie the injuries; then take the wool, oil it, and place it on the area, having the woman rest every day, so that she can't bond. And if this obstruction is hard and coarse, you should use a stick resembling an ivy leaf under the skin. If these injuries are from birth, lift them with your thumb and index finger; and apply stoppers to bleeding substances such as wormwood, dragon's blood, incense, mixed in abundance with eggs; then place a large piece of poplar bark so that the wound cannot bond; and do this for a long time, then cover it with a linen tent; then continue other treatments until healing. And when there is birth from the womb, if you have to apply according to this manner, where there are abscesses in the womb, they must not be touched by fire.
Regarding piles (hemorrhoids).
Cutting wounds are incisions in veins which require skillful execution and care, especially when they have aged leading to a condition called thrombosis. We've discussed these in detail during our division of sections on them, their symptoms and signs; now we will talk about those suitable for treatment. I state that the cutting wounds and thrombosis become evident when they are inside the uterus, not by touch, but through iron cure if needed. The ones which can be felt near the mouth of the uterus are what you can treat. Thus, it must be that one puts the woman in a cold house; then, set the thrombus on forceps, and extract with the roots of the uterus, afterwards sprinkle with medicine to restrict blood flow such as acacia, dragon's blood, and incense among similar things; next, place her feet in cold water for an hour, then put her into icy cold water. If blood excretions continue, you should make her rest in a decoction made from sumac, peel of pomegranate rinds, galls and other similar things; afterwards prepare corn flour with honey and garlic and make two poultices on her back. And if it stops bleeding, that is good. If this does not happen, apply suction cups to her back and nipples without using iron tools; then take wool and mix it with sap of plantain or from elderberry in aged wine, and let that burn onto the body.
The contents of the uterus
Various types of abscess arise in the uterus, such as gangrene, puerperal abscess, herpes, cystitis and fistulas, piles and hemorrhoids, and other diseases I've discussed during our division. Therefore, it's necessary for me to explain here about the self-healing process that takes place inside the uterus. If you have knowledge about iron work, observe whether the abscess is inflamed at the beginning of its development or not, full of heat and fever; if it turns red, you can see this change occur.
During childbirth
Craft is first in the dance when she knows the form of natural childbirth, and these signs appear when you see a woman rush to deliver, and desire to smell it: then the child急于 to come forth; know that this birth follows its natural form, and occurs through his head, and the second stage with him; and when you see these signs, it is necessary to gently press her belly, so that the child comes forth quickly; for when it descends from his head, the second stage comes with him, and his excesses are cleansed by good delivery; any other way of birth does not occur naturally. For it occurs only on its feet, and comes forcefully through the body or the shoulder, and hands, or it comes to her belly, or stomach, and is turned unexpectedly from his neck, and by other evil forms; there must be wisdom and subtlety in this for those who dance, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the forms on how they should assist.
When the child comes from his head by natural exit, and the woman is in severe labor, and her strength is weak, then make her sit on a stool, or women hold her; and let her drink out of what is cooked from fenugreek, and then have the midwife place between her fingers the small spatula described below: And cut the second one, and scrape until the moisture inside is gone; and pull out the womb of the woman as long as the fetus descends; if it doesn't descend, you should give a castor oil enema to the woman with fenugreek seed oil; then have her drink and snort camphor, hold her mouth and nose for an hour: if the child comes out now. And if the two hands come out forcefully, you must gently pull them little by little; and if they can't enter, put the woman on a stool, and lift her feet up high; then take off the stool from the ground, cut underneath the woman to prevent urination during childbirth; and if her hands can't enter, and the child dies, then grab her hands with the knife placed here before, extract the baby, and pull equally.
from the delivery of the child on its feet When the child comes down on its feet, it's necessary to lift it up. and then turn a little bit by little bit, until they are even;
then take one of the joints and extend it a little bit by little bit.
Can't he jump up to his thighs, if commanded, and let himself be exhorted with consideration; if he could jump, may God will it.
And if it is not as we have said, if you gently turn it bit by bit, until it is according to the natural figure. And then it should be done lightly.
And if it does not come out as we said, take a mixture of honey and saffron oil, and gum resin, and melted gum, and grind all in one mortar; and apply this ointment inside the woman's body and outwardly as well. then make her lie in cold water until under the ribs;
and when she is moistened throughout, give her one spoonful of myrrh, and put it in, and leave it for an hour; then make her sit on a stool, then have her sneeze and hold her mouth and nose, and gently press her abdomen, for the fetus is jumping now. from the issue of the child at its knees When a fetus comes in this form, if one puts their hands gently and gradually;
from the birth of the child which comes with one hand wide open It's necessary to engineer a way to bring back the hand: If one cannot bring it back, then lift the woman and walk her around;
If she cannot walk, make her lie on a bed, and lift her legs into position;
then follow the massage that I have described;
and if she does not give birth, make her sit on a chair, then try to bring back the hand; and guide the baby according to its natural position, and make her sneeze, and instruct her to push until the child comes out.
From the birth of the child on its neck, and it spreads its hands, and its face turned towards the back of its mother's. It is necessary that you scratch his hand, then turn it little by little, and gently stroke it;
And when they are even, place them on the natural muscle movement of the arm and oil, just as we have said, then you should command that it moves little by little;
And once you have done this, make her sit on a chair and command that she pray; and make her sneeze. In this same manner for all the second part
In this same manner for all the second part When it comes to handling it in this way for all the second part, if the second part reaches up to your finger's nail, as long as the moisture is drained;
And if it extends up to its face and neck, when you cut through the throat, ensure that it is not held back, and let the child die;
Then pull out the child inside, as long as you place it correctly and according to what is necessary, command the woman not to try again once:
from the issues of twins Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or even four; this is not an uncommon thing, it just happens. Two are exceptional things, and do not live long, if they occur at all.
I know these, they are multiplied, and are removed by the fire that devises them, which is bound to the blood;
And let them also come out naturally like all of us below, as we have said.
And if they come out painfully, if the treatment is as we have said, and let the delicate parts take care of it, and do what she does quickly and gently. And do so as it benefits for health. of many children
of many children They are made in marriage once or twice, three times, four times, five times, six times, seven times, eight times, and so on up to fifteen times, and they are all formed like a child by the measurement of their stature.
and it is necessary that the boy knows all this, for perhaps such a thing has happened to him; If done according to what is necessary.
Of the dead child
When you treat the woman who has lost her dead child or is miscarried, as I have explained in the division, and if it does not come out, and you are forced to operate by hands; It is necessary that you know if the woman has good health and did not have any accidents or fear of death;
It is necessary for the woman to lie on her back, and have her shoulders turned towards the head, and the legs lifted;
and the minister applies a hot ironrod of two parts, or that she be bound to the bed so that it does not descend with the birth of the child;
then rub the wife's mouth with moist olive oil and almond extract mixed with fennel seeds and flaxseed; then smear her hands with these oils and spices; then support the wife lightly, then let her lie for an hour until she can bear to hold herself up,
and take care so the child is properly prepared before it descends onto its head; if the hair is stuck in its eyes or around its neck or mouth or on its palate or under the chin or at the throat or near the sides,
and if it descends onto bones, it should be poked or gripped and its middle ribs should be targeted;
and it is fitting for you to hold the hair with your right hand and place the bend between the fingers of your left hand, and he should apply force gently with all his hand, and insert the hair into none of those places that we have mentioned until it reaches the hollow part;
then match up another shinbone, or the third if you need to, so that the extractions are equal;
and then make sure they move equally on both sides, so the bones can fit together properly, and ensure that the shinbones have their teeth to hold in place as this is how it should look:
And if there remains a part of it, and covers some of his fingers with it, and place them in that part, and drag the other part.
And if there's no remaining part, place this incision or higher up on the body, and do this until everything comes out completely.
And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be brought back due to being restrained, And you should cover with a piece of cloth as large as two arms until it comes out completely;
Then apply the treatment at the connection of the foot or at the cut, and similarly you should do on the other hand, and for two feet.
And if the head of the child is large and it is compressed at the exit, or if it has an overly sharp assembly, then you must press the spiked sack between your fingers, and make the head and extract the sharp one; or you will have it with the instrument called 'almidach', from which its form comes with the instruments or chapter after this one;
and in this way make the child's head naturally large. and then extract the bones with force using tongs,
and if the joint pops and it is held by force, if it breaks, as long as there's moisture or worse inside it;
and if it can't come out, cut it piece by piece according to what you can.
and if it is swollen in the abdomen or around the ribs, it must be that you pierce it as long as there's moisture flowing.
And if the child is on its feet, there's a slight pull, and the connection to the mouth of the umbilical cord is also slight.
And if it's in the belly or the breast, you should extract it at about one-and-a-half to two folds wrapped around your hand; and keep the belly or the breast moist until all moisture is gone.
And if another bone is broken and the head of the shoulder stays in place, if you need to burn her hand at the palm with a hot iron, then I apply the hot metal for one, or three times, and force it;
and if the mouth of the wound is constricted by an abscess that came there, then it should not be cleaned out, instead, it is necessary to apply wet and greasy substances; And he applies plastering, and then uses it in water that is softening and moistening.
And if the child is on its side, you can place it evenly, if you apply what we have said in the case of live infants;
And if one cannot do so, let him treat it piece by piece, and leave nothing of the remainder.
And when you have done this, apply what we have said about treating abscesses that come in the middle;
And when bleeding occurs, then it is placed in water for restriction, and other treatments are administered to him.
And I saw a woman who had borne an offspring that was dead, and then another one on him, and he revived the other. After a long time, an abscess came in his belly, and it swelled so much that he opened up, and began to have severe pain.
I was summoned for the treatment, and I thought for a long time, and could not accommodate the wound.
I place under a strong attraction, and out comes one bone, and after some days another. I was greatly amazed, for this stomach has no bone.
I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
I sought to heal the wound, and with my hands I found bones, until the woman was in better condition; And caress the woman long and thus, and thereby obtain a little blood from her.
And I have only recorded this chapter for when a master finds an unfamiliar thing, so that he may know how to provide aid.
to bring the shoulder back to its place.
Next comes the method of the pressure, which is described in the books; and at two turns for each of the four limbs. Always, let the horns be more subtle than a reed's, and made of ebony or boxwood;
and let the mouth of the furnace be two inches wide, and the edge of the trees should be one inch, and in length half a palm; and in between the two beams, let there be two joints of this same furnace, which should be firmly joined on both sides, about half a palm or slightly more in length;
and these two joints are fastened into the opening of the furnace so that when one turns the two horns, they can open.
Another form, with greater subtlety and lightness, may be made of ebony or boxwood, according to the resemblance of the forceps; and has four prongs, as you see, as long as one palm and two fingers wide;
and when you see the cervix opening to its entirety on all the instrument, make the woman lie down on one bed, with her feet hanging and her legs spread open, then insert the two prongs together into the cervix, and hold the handle of the instrument under her buttocks; Then use your hand on all the instrument, just like you did with the equal forceps, according to the amount that you see opening the mouth of the furnace, until the coal does what it wants.
All the instruments are fully mounted and multiplied in semblance; and when you have them arranged, then your work is faster, and your movements higher according to their quantity.
Do not hesitate with the instrument until you have arranged it, for its necessity is not excusable.
When the second stage of labor is being retained during birth, it's necessary that you instruct the patient to hold back her urine, and then have her breathe through the nose with the aid of exhalation. Place your hands on her mouth and nose afterwards; And if it jumps over this, it goes well.
If not, take one pot and make one plug or cover, then put in herbs that can open the mouth of the marrow, such as calamus, rue, anise, chamomile, citrus leaves and mint;
All these herbs, or any of them, should be cooked or steeped in water on the fire; then put a reed or plug from inside the pot, and place another piece at the mouth of the marrow,
And let the steam go inside the marrow until its vapors start to come out; then make it sneeze as we have said. If it jumps the second knee quickly. And if it remains after this treatment, and is not strong, so instruct the patient to moisten her left hand with poppy oil or rosemary ointment, and then use the bottle in its natural state,
And when she finds the second one; and once she has found it, if she catches and extends it slowly and straight, so that the husband does not feel during extraction; But it must be moved gently to the right and to the left, and then pull; if it will come out and relieve.
And if the mouth of the patient is bleeding from marosis, as we have said, the treatment involves coughing therapy and herb fumigation;
and if it does not follow all that we have said, then be careful not to touch the wound unnecessarily;
but it is necessary that the person at the mouth of the wound should be tied to the woman's thigh, then apply ointment from the four remedies enemas.
if it heals and there's no smell; but still, if an unpleasant smell reaches the stomach and head and irritates the patient.
Then it is necessary to use suitable fumigations for this: none of the old have proven effective fumigation with watercress and dried figs.
The shape of the tool used to fume the woman during the retention of flowers and the afterbirth is this:
And it resembles a cane in appearance, and one places its subtle head into the fire, and its ends wide above the flame.
And let there be fumigations over the coals, and the fumigation until it is exhausted, and then start another one.
of piercing the base
Many infants are born who do not have their base pierced, but rather their understanding is stupefied by a subtle sickness. So it is necessary for the child to pierce that sickness according to its nature, and do not pierce her with sharp metal tools, and guard the incision so that she does not touch it;
Then apply a wetted linen in wine and oil, then the application of the ointment until he is well.
And if you doubt it will not resurface, then place or insert a tallow stick and leave it in for several days, and remove it when the child wishes to go indoors.
And it is important that this sudden occurrence of wound or abscess rupture does not happen; if you need to handle this suddenly, then follow the treatment we have mentioned about the tallow stick.
from the fistula near the foundation Fistulas coming from near the foundation are congealed and grow larger than those that come from further down or within the space of two parts.
If there is a fistula or more than one; and when this lump is old, it may operate, and often produces moisture that appears white or thin.
And these fistulas are always present; and they can be identified when there is discharge or gustation during the patient's release, and by chance in their movement towards one side.
And if there are fistulas that penetrate up to the bladder, and up to half of the penis; and they reach up to the ankle joint, and up to the root of the testicles.
And thus one can recognize a persistent fistula at its origin, and not persistent: And it is that you bend your little finger or base, and insert a subtle needle of spider or iron into the fistula when there is no curvature.
And if it has curvature, if you insert a subtle tentacle, or .i. horse hair, until you feel the tentacle or hair at your index finger;
and if you do not feel it, and there is no full evacuation nor suction nor worm, as we have said: you'll know that she isn't puncturing; so hasten to cure.
And when the fistula extends up to the bladder or up to where urine is conducted, if it causes urination and cannot be sealed by medicine.
And if it penetrates up to the joint of the leg, there is a vein coming up to its head; If there is no twisting and the pain is contained internally, then it can be considered as being in a state of inflammation, and it does not respond to medicine or binding with a salve;
And for these internal fistulas, there is no effective treatment other than labor and the vain efforts of those who interfere.
In cases neither Persian nor ancient, there's hope for healing through iron, as I've experienced.
And when the patient lies with their back under your hands; and you lift their legs up to their hips, and incline their hips towards their stomach; Then apply a spider's leg, or a toad if there are twists, until you know where the remedy comes from.
If the patient feels it under the foundation, then you should press your index finger there,
You then sense that the tool has pierced it; and if revealed you feel between your fingers or flesh, then know that it is a long way in. If there's no disturbance, one cannot heal it.
One can still hope to treat many others, but such occurrences are few;
And when helping someone, if you warm the delicate cautery according to the size of the cyst, as was previously said; And heat it completely in the fistula until it emerges from the base; and perform this twice or three times, until you know that these burnt spots resemble a bird's feather.
And then heat the wet wicks with butter until that burnt spot comes out, then apply ointment to stick and fuse it.
If it is done correctly, that's fine. Otherwise, it cannot be properly cured;
And if the attempt is made inside, and it doesn't pierce until the proper foundation or base, and you have an ample covering of tissue or wax between your hand and the tent, and you can see the hole where the covering meets clean; If you start with removing the contents of the abscess, then place a wick inside before setting it alight, and afterwards apply the cautery until it reaches the top of the wick.
Then release the pus, and drain it; subsequently remove those charred parts that look like a bird's feather, ensuring none remain.
And if the wound doesn't heal, and cuts you instead of flesh, then apply a fire or an ointment to it.
For fire cautery combines two things: these are to know, the burning of those joined parts, and the bleeding off of blood and the drying out of moisture;
Then when treating wet limbs with greases or ground substances, as long as the limb's oil flows, and smoke escapes from the fire;
Then treat the wound with fast-setting sooty applications, and use dry medicines.
For when it is restored, if it heals properly and does not recur.
And if a fistula comes just up to the full depth of the wound bed, and is far from the body, you should fill it with your own finger or its depth, and check this.
If you feel the urge and there's between two it's mesh or fat or muscle, or it is almost piercing, should only have left a path of faith and hope, through administering one of three ways:
or you cauterize it as we have said, or you operate until the bottom, or if you can withstand the urge then place a stitch and use a cure as first;
and don't go too far in the operation, that you don't cut through the foundation and let the evacuations come out involuntarily; then suture it, as we have said;
then suture it, as we have said; If by chance it's well, or you remove that covering and cleanse it since it has been peeled from beneath the foundation, or through trial or with another instrument aimed at it; then cut away that flesh which is in the wound as much as you can;
then endeavor to heal the wound and keep open the incision in the lower part of the foundation: if it is easier for the patient.
And always make incisions in this manner: and when you open the tent in the incision, and it is on or near the base beneath the skin above, if you take a tent piercing through the head like this: And attach one and a half twined threads, and insert the tent into the entire length of the thread in the duct until it reaches the head.
If it is straight down from the edge towards the foundation inside, then extract the thread from that one, as you would bend your finger or foundation;
and pull the head of the thread, and join the two heads together, and tie one to the other, and let it hang one or two inches;
And hold it no time, until the threads have woven these cords that are between two, and stick together;
Then treat the wound until it is healed and clean.
If the fistula does not burst, make it burst in all possible ways that you can, as long as it is not too far apart.
For it is not suitable to sew it up when the wound is too deep and then treat it as we have said, until it heals.
The shape of the spike form which we make the fistula is much and of one kind, being cut; And on another side not, for that which we should not do as well as which we should not refrain from doing, as you see here:
Wounds occur in two ways: or they are within the tissue, like bits of tar, and if there are small and large ones, and internally they cause blood loss, And if there is one or more of them, they are removed from the base and to the root of the head; but those that are removed have little moisture,
and in addition or a bit of yellow water or a bit of blood, and they have the color of flesh.
And the treatment for those who have them within the base, you instruct the patient to spread it outward through chambers as long as the foundations give forth and the threads become visible. If you are in hurry, then pinch it with tweezers or hold it with your nail, then remove it from its roots.
And if they can't hold their nails because of the moisture, then take them at one point of the nail, or on cotton, or with a piece of leather; and pull them out with your fingers, then press and sprinkle some hot powders that are used for the cautery on them; or you cauterize them as it is said or in the chapter of cautery, then treat them with other treatments until they heal.
and if the foundations cannot come out, then cauterize the patient with a caustic that burns and is harsh to wash what is in or around the foundation, so that it might come out freely;
The patient's body fails to heal, and if their blood vessels are strong at their base, so is the treatment light; And when you take them with your nail or forceps, and cut them, then treat them just as we have said, while they are clean, and fear the incision by metal.
It is necessary that you suture in this manner: take a single twisted thread and insert it into a needle, then pull the thread from above and make the needle pierce through from the other side, and twist the two ends of the thread around the needle. And if it's wide enough; and tighten the thread properly, then knot the thread, and remove the needle, and do so with all others, and leave one for removing excess blood;
Then place on the foundation .1. greasy cloth in oil rose or in wadding, and place on the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest;
and then leave him until he has cooled down, and when they have settled, if you treat with ointment and other treatments, until he is healed.
this means "by drying out or the ground" in modern English. The sentence seems to be part of instructions on how to dry something or set it on a foundation. Many times, there was the drying effect of earth in the intestines, and by the body's natural condition, and when the illness is old and medicine no longer works.
If it is necessary for you to reset at the tip of a spur or at your nail above the skin, which does not allow it to get wet; then treat it until it becomes firm just as it should;
and if it cannot become firm, then start the scraping again with more strength than before, until it heals and becomes scraped; then treat it until it is healed.
When the fire cautery instructs the patient to let their hairs grow long and even; if they prick at their base, hold steady until they fully grow. Antelopes are small, fleeting forms before the body, and they go many ways.
And whenever the vein hardens, and one feels it as a death tremor, and it is sensed throughout the body, and more in the hands than elsewhere.
And the treatment involves taking a stick made from a goose feather or a strong vulture feather, and placing that stick on the tremor until the purple circles eliminate the tremor completely. Then turn your hand to all the cane until you grasp it completely by its quiver and put it in place, and root out the quiver from its source.
And if you see this, do as with an arrow or iron in the shape shown, and make it both slender from beneath and piercing above:
nor allow it to pierce, as you will hold with both hands and press firmly. And if you see this, cauterize the quiver, just like it was demonstrated in the chapter on cautery.
of the shape of the bladder No single time is there use of silver or lead needles, or melted spiders; and no time are these small and large tools made, according to their intended use.
Therefore, when it comes to treating infants and those who are weak and in pain, they need small ones.
The shape of the small and large needles is made as follows, or when binding the abdomen according to this manner:
and there should be an opening so that the abdomen can be bound in this manner, as you see, and the head is pierced within; and have one side with two points, and on the other side one point.
And for the belly, place the medications from a beast's bladder or parchment, and pierce it entirely through many small holes,
And place exactly one inch of space between each hole, then insert a strong thread made from woven linen fiber into these holes, either ten inches long or to the edge of the belly, and sew up the belly as you would stitch a goat. And once the medicine is inside, seal it with a strong thread in front of the tool, then proceed to embalm. This forms the shape of a circle:
And ensure the medicine is neither too hot nor too cold, smear the embalming area with oil or yolk of egg ointment, or something similar, then apply it gently;
Then the surgeon directs his two hands together, until both are fully stretched out, then removes the gallbladder, and lifts up the patient's legs to the chest.
And if the medicine is seen to come out, let it escape as much as possible; and if he sleeps through a whole night, that's when you'll see more significant improvement.
And if you administer it during a condition of belly obstruction, and the medicine begins to come out quickly, then continue until it's relieved.
And if there is bleeding from the anus or its base, or an abscess, then use a cathartic as subtle as for one child;
And this is the form of a subtle lump under which the skin may be constricted:
of wounds
We have spoken about the treatment of wounds in our previous sections; now we will discuss the treatments for hands and medicine according to their development.
I say that wounds are various depending on how they were made, and where they were made on the body, and for what reason they were made.
The things through which wounds are made are by dint of stone, and size of sword and knife, or spear or staff or axe, or similar things;
or those that are made according to the bones of the body, such as a wound that hits the neck, or the head, or the chest, or the abdomen, or the liver, and similar members;
and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and start with wounds of the simple head, because the memory will come to its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes or affects the head, and if no bone is broken, take care whether it's caused by stone or similar things, and the skin remains somewhat torn and the wound is large, And if you slightly doubt the abscess: if there is a slight amount of bleeding from the wound immediately after the operation on the cephalic part, then treat it as healthy in that area. Otherwise, treat the opposite side of the affected part instead.
And let the patients be full of wine and rich meats.
And if they do not want to be treated, then reduce their food intake, and do not give them wine nor meat.
And over the wound, if abscesses are there, place a moistened cotton in oil rose water only, or in restorative wine.
And if there is no abscess, place it on the wound, if it's fresh with all its blood, and isn't disturbed by the air, powder, that I will mention later;
And if it has been burnt, place some remedies on it, as long as it remains intact.
And if the wound is large like that of a sword cut and similar injuries, and the edges cannot be brought together with stitches, then bring them together by suture, as I will explain for wounds of the abdomen, through sewing.
If the wound exposes the bone and is deep, retaining only a little, if you cut it; then treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh instead of skin. And instruct the patient to consume large meats, such as testicles and cooked wheat, as well as chickens and similar items.
And if you find or smell decayed flesh, and it does not reach the bone, then cut out everything decaying, remove the pus, then treat;
And if it has an artery in the wound or vein, which cannot be stopped by medicine, then cut out the artery, and if you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread; And if this doesn't help at all, then apply the cautery.
And if these wounds are small and simple, the treatment is light: and you should apply this powder that heals in such a way that the heat of fire brings it to completion.
And the method of the powder is as follows: take one part of incense; blood from a dragon .ii parts; living charcoal .iii parts, and finely powdered, And apply the wound with it, and press firmly until it dries well and joins with all its blood;
And bind it properly, leaving it without letting it loosen, if it doesn't swell; for the medicine is not removed until it heals.
And always this is done with the charcoal alone, when one does not have the incense nor the blood of dragon, but when the art has healed the wound.
And if the art (healing) has healed the wound, in that case, do not add this powder either.
but apply some easily digestible ointments, or oat flour made with water and honey, until the wound discharges pus; then continue other treatments until it heals properly.
And if bone breakage comes with the wound, and it is small, then treat it with fine needles;
and I will tell you about the breaks in the head later.
from the wound around the neck.
This injury occurs in or around the neck; if it is simple, there should be no distinction between this and that around the head, but if a nerve in the neck or an artery has been cut.
If it's in the nose, if there is no other remedy than to allow treatment, and not to put any restraining thing, because it harms the nose and makes it recede; and do not place anything cold on the wound, because the nature of bones is cold, and the circulation of veins is with the brain, which is the highest part of members;
but use warm medicine instead, such as rose water mixed with sweet oil, and the cabbage leaves also washed in sweet water, and other earth medicines in this manner, and moist applications.
And if the wound is large, then sew it with bends, until it heals properly.
And if the wounds are deep and there's hair and full of blood, then puncture or even lower down.
And if the artery is cut, and bleeding ensues, then uncover it, and order, and apply the cautery as needed;
And if the throat ligament is cut, or the cartilage, or the duct through which the food passes, guard them by keeping them in place; If you apply the knife on the base of the throat, and don't touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape; and then set the protrusion, and let it alone for some days, then treat with dry poultices until it heals;
and if there is an impression in the bone due to the wound, treat accordingly. and if there are bone fragments, you should remove them if possible, and leave those that you cannot remove until the wound heals. And let it be relieved and healed by this measure;
and if the wound is fresh, apply the powder I have mentioned. And if there is bone in the wound and it has a fistula, treat it as described in my chapter.
from the wound of a spear or a knife
If it's a spearhead or knife wound and the injury is deep, if you observe that wind can escape from the wound without causing pain to the patient: then know that the wound is fatal.
And if it is not deep, and all the blood flows freely from it, if you don't apply powder to it at first hour or bind it with a cloth due to bleeding, then know that the wound will heal. And heal in the heart, let the patient rest; but apply an attractive ointment, and bind it twice a day;
And if you don't have ointment, put old cotton into the wound to absorb the moisture.
Make the patient rest on the wound for 3 days, or 4, or more; If no convulsions occur, nor severe heart tremors, nor uncontrolled movements; And when you see the good signs, if you realize that the wound is saved or healed. Treat with other remedies as well until it is healed;
And if it cannot heal or work properly, know that there will be a fistula; treat it accordingly.
And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, and it's simple or worse, or on the back, treat according to what the one in front of you would do;
And if it's large, stitch it up; and if it's small, use powder; and if it's deep in the bone or with fragments inside, clean the wound and remove any foreign objects; And if they are not drained, let the wound fester, favoring ease of extractions;
And concerning other wounds and other limbs, our judgments are as we have said.
From the protrusion of the belly
The protrusions of the belly are large, medium-sized, and small;
From a major wound there escapes once or twice the intestines, or from the entrails of the intestines, causing their intrusion by this means.
And sewing is more difficult, and no time is worse than with a small wound compared to a large one,
because when we put the intestines back in, if we don't do it gradually; since the intestines swell up as soon as they feel cold, so they cannot be put back all at once;
And because of this, it's necessary to examine the incision, for in this way one moves the intestines to their place that are others.
Know that the rupture of the belly occurs according to four ways:
the two common stitches occur at the abdominal seam,
and the other stitch for wounds in the body and two other specific stitches are common to other injuries;
And yet they are more accurate with the sewing on of the belly, and I shall say each one separately and explain them.
I say that when the wound is small, and nothing from the intestine sticks out, and if it's a matter of securing things, this can be done through one of two ways: or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, because the intestines are swollen due to cold.
And when he is cold, warm him in this manner: moisten a sponge or let one part of a cloth soak in water only, or you cook in water with pepper and cypress needles, And let the intestine rise as long as the pus is drained;
And once this has been done with the wine, it becomes restorative and helps to reduce swelling.
And when you see that the swelling is departing, moisten the intestine with water or broth that has been cooked and seasoned. for thereby the entry accepts very little of it;
And if it cannot enter, they make a little cut on the wound with the tool from which one extracts the blood clots;
And the first treatment is to moisten the area that has been wounded. which we should not cut without great necessity, nor if it is unnecessary;
and this is the tool to split it with:
if you cut inside the bend and not outside, and see this shape:
And when the wound is enlarged and the intestines jump out, if you place it back according to its natural shape in its proper location, then do so if possible, for this is beneficial.
When the wound is broad, and it's located on the lower part of the belly, It is necessary for you to heal the patient on their back, and place their legs higher than their head; and if it's located on the lower part of the belly,
and similarly if there is a rupture from the abdomen in one of those two parts, and make sure that the part that has been cut is higher than the other;
and thus, it should be treated in accordance with what I've said about large and medium wounds.
For small wounds, use what you have prepared for them,
then hold between your hands .i. surgeons who sear the entire wound with their hand, and bring the edges together; and this is the common way of stitching,
and this is the common way of stitching, And you take one needle or more, depending on the size of the wound's width, then leave about from the edge of the wound, approximately one inch, and insert a needle or where there is good strong thread; and pierce both skin edges with both thread ends,
Then stretch with a doubled thread around one needle for two threads, Then gather the two edges of the wound together,
and then leave one finger's width, and stitch with another needle; then with the thread like you did with the first needle, and keep doing this according to what you know about needles, until the entire wound is held in place;
and use needles that are both subtle and large, For the sharp needles cut all the flesh, and the too large ones cannot enter well: because they must be smaller:;
and it is not good to have the needles sticking too far out of the flesh and skin,;
so that they do not tear and widen the wound before the stitches are made;
And then remove the pins from the joints, so they do not irritate the patient while sleeping, and place tents or cloths over the joints of the needles to keep them in position, and leave them until the wound has healed;
and this method of suturing with needles is more suitable for small wounds, for there is a pricking sensation from one to two pins.
The second stitch if it is common, and it consists in assembling two pieces of leather and two pieces of silk, then attaching them to a needle with one strong thread in the middle; and when you have pierced all four of these pieces together,
and when you have pierced all four of these pieces together, If you re-enter the needle at the part where you started, in the way one sews with thread;
and leave a space between each stitch as large as a minor do;
these stitches create the fabric,
and I sew up a wound where one had hands or stomach,
that was unskilled with a knife, and had the wound more than a palm's breadth, and contained intestines well two palms' breadth,
and the wound was located in the middle of the belly. I brought back his intestines as long as it had been xxiv hours since.
And the wound was sewn up for fifteen days, and I treated him, and he recovered.
And when they thought he would die, it was a miracle;
and I did not treat him with ointment either, for I was in one place where no such thing could be found, nor any medicine; And apply a piece of old cloth over the wound three times a day, and wash it with honey water until it healed.
Or I will tell you the two proper methods for sewing:
Take the needle, and from the outside part go until inside;
when it has pierced straight through to the heart, leave the head of the needle or place the needle where you have stitched;
And make another puncture from inside the part up to here.
And as for understanding this seam, you stitch it in the same way as the tailor sews fur, And let the thread hang once from one side, and then take it up again from the other, until the seam is fully completed.
The second method of sewing, as Galen properly stated,
if done like what some do, gathering together the two parts naturally, and press one of the ends of the bone against the other end, in such manner:
stitch a needle or the tip of a small knife near the shoulder joint, and pierce only that side. and let both ends of the bone touch; Then turn the needle, and make it pierce from the outer part down to that within. as two shoulders of a bear;
then pierce each from the outer part down to that within, in two other shoulders of a deer that are on the opposite side;
and this is the way to sew and it is the most common method.
Galen said this word, and no one testifies it,
One must stitch the belly with two needles, or where there is thread in each;
and one should insert one needle from one side and the other from the other, in the manner of those who stitch bullet wounds;
and know that when the tear is inside the belly, if it is the stitch is more severe than among others of its belly's wounds.
The judgement on the wound if is like the judgement of other wounds:
and it's that when you find the fresh wound full of its blood, just as the art has made it, if it returns to within the intestine, and the wound; then apply the stimulating powder.
if it returns to within the intestine, and the wound; then apply the stimulating powder. and if the burn has spread, put on no ointment whatsoever until the wound heals; and sew the thread, and stitch the skin, and tie the bandage; then treat the wound as usual, until it heals completely;
And if you do not have medicine, place it, as soon as it begins to bleed, old cotton. And stir it twice a day until it is healed.
For you need no other medicine in various preparations when the wounds are simple;
And if you doubt that the wound will lead to a systemic infection among principal limbs, If you need to moisten with light wool in oil of gently heated heat, or in oil rose, and place it inside the joints, and under the armpits;
and if there is pain or gangrene in the bowels, and this happens repeatedly, if you use black wine enemas, and similarly if the gangrene reaches up to the intestine;
And insert it within, and know that when it's large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small ones.
The intestine which is called "juvenile" cannot be healed when it is injured, And this is due to the positioning of the veins in them, and due to the subtlety of all the body, and the approach of their nature towards nerves.
And if a boil jumps from the wound, then it should be treated in the same way as an intestine while it is fresh;
And if it is old and turned towards or black, then you must tie the part that is black, so that no blood flows from it. for there are veins and arteries;
then cut what is between the ligament, and place both shoulders under part of the over the wound up to beyond it for facilitating the extraction when the ribs are in motion, and the wound is closed.
of the rupture of the boil
When the intestines are ruptured, and the wound is small, If one can restore it in any way,
because I have seen that a nobleman's or belly was pierced by a lance;
And the wound was located on the right side of the stomach, And it became a sinus and turned into a passage for discharge, with both digestion issues and flatulence arising;
I administered treatment according to what I could do, and didn't stop refining until it was healed, and bound the wounds.
And when I saw them bound, I doubted that the patient might have pain in their belly; And there was no harm, but remained in better conditions, eating and drinking;
And it was said by some experimenters that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be treated in this manner: take large testicles, and then gather the edges of the wound together, and when the testicles have opened their mouth, place them on the two edges,
then applies another pressure in this manner as before, until the wound is completely treated;
and finishes the wound. Those who are so consumed by the intestines, and cause no harm to the patient,
and one can bind the intestine with a fine thread that has been cut from an animal's intestine,
in this manner: take this piece of intestines' thread, so that it be from a sheep that is fully digested, And then to the head of this thread .i., a fine linen thread twisted, then knot the thread in the needle and sew it through the intestine, and reset it at the opening;
and this way of suturing stitches should only follow the path of hope and expectation;
and if the wound is large and broad, especially when it is in one of the large intestines, even without injury or sickness, let there be delicacy.
regarding a fistula, or if it exists Know that every wound or abscess, when it matures, is universally called "fistula", and similarly when it is covered and begins to heal.
And a fistula is according to the true nature of the hard, yellowed mass where no pain is felt, And also as hairy as a bird's feathers;
And not once clear and smooth, and another time thick and rough; Not always little, and other times sufficient;
and I have spoken about the classification of wounds; that every wound that is not healed, and there is no flesh, It is only through one of the eight causes:
This is to say, due to the weakness or obstruction in blood flow or wounds; Or because of its inherent wickedness; or due to the presence of hard flesh within and on the lips that prevents new tissue from forming. In this place there is too much blood; or the veins are swollen, and the substance is of bad quality; or the remedy is not good in the treatment; or because it resembles a plague; Because of its property in the area being late, digestion is slow, and recovery is also delayed, and escapes naturally; There are veins or bones:
and I have shown all these causes, and the signs, and the treatments with medicines in this section.
So, it is necessary for me to inform you about the treatment of an abscess which is performed by manual work.
Know that a fistula occurs in all limbs of the body; because there are fistulas that come from large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or at the stomach, or in the intestines, or in the bladder, or in any of the ribs, or in the spine of the back, or in any joint of the hands or feet;
And all the fistulas that are this way require healing, and there is nothing else but labor, and ignorance;
and if there is no fistula that does not end up at the one I have said, and you have taken care of the treatment, and you will know it, if you take an araneus or iron tent, if the fistula is straight, then touch it;
And if the fistula is twisted, then one seeks with a fine needle of thread, for the knots do fold and move within the twists;
and if the fistula is at awkward angles and you cannot find it well by trying with guesses, if you insert the catheter through one of those awkward angles,
for moisture can travel from one part to another, and cleanse;
then inquire carefully according to your ability, that you may know if there is bone or nerve, and feel it all around;
and ask the patient about their pain when you press your hand on them, and where they feel it;
and once you know exactly where it is, and if it's far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery or vein, In any of those limbs which I have told you about, if one follows as I have told you,
In any of those limbs which I have told you about, if one follows as I have told you, and for the extraction of bones and decayed organs that are within; and then the treatment until it is healed,
and if the fistula is well dug straight through, you should dig out as far as possible, just as much as you can. Then I mix wet cloths with medicinal water, and immerse them up to the tip of the pus sack.
Then I mix wet cloths with medicinal water, and immerse them up to the tip of the pus sack. As long as the medicine dissolves the excess that has remained at the bottom;
And then I cover it with clean bandages until it is healed.
If it hasn't healed through this method, then apply the cautery as we have explained,
And if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then he treats it. If a vein or nerve is compressed or affects the main limbs, as we have said;
And if the bone is exposed, and there's corruption and decay, then heal it until all the decay is removed, Then treat it with various medicines until it becomes healthy;
And if it isn't healed, and you guide it back as before, You should know that you are not quite there just until the mark:
if you uncover and desire it, even when you're at the bottom, and remove all the decay, then restore its place;
And if he is thus healthy, this is well. But if not, know that the corruption is too much in perfection, that you cannot bring it forward; if there is no other way except to let it be done by nature;
and if there's a little corrupt bone and you can remove it with tongs, If you extract with an instrument suitable for this,
and if there are many bones, treat them all, do not leave even one;
and if moisture opposes this and causes fear or hesitation, if it is necessary to cut through moisture and flesh, and free the bones.
And if you cannot remove them within an hour, then place something to combat putrefaction on the wound. and let it be until the bones are rotten inside the flesh,
then from then on, they will have lighter the bones;
and if it's a large bone, like in the leg or thigh, if you only release the corruption until all the blackness is removed, then heal the wound;
and if there's a large part of corruption and it reaches up to the flesh of the bone; if it suits, treat and cover up to the area of corruption, and then heal until it is joined together;
And I will tell you of a case involving a fistula that occurred in one's leg. So that you may take it as an example and gain help in your work.
There was a young person of around thirty years old who experienced pain in their leg due to an internal cause within the body.
And as long as the contents reached the leg, it was plagued by a large abscess, and there was no external reason for opening it;
yet they would expose their faces so much that abscesses were opened, and they would corrode some materials, and became a fistula, and much was lost that all complained of pain and the moisture of the body;
and many patients were treated for over two years, and there was no expert in the art of surgery.
as long as I was called upon, and saw his leg and the remedies used to treat him, And that which grows through the narrow passages with great force; And became red on the cheeks like the color of youth, and had a yellowish tint.
I set up a tent in one of these narrow passages, and then searched all the passages,
and found that some came against each other from all parts of the leg.
I hurriedly acted, and cut on one of the protrusions until I uncovered a part of the bone, and found it decayed and perforated, and the corruption was reaching to the interior of the bone;
I was the one that appeared from the decayed part of the bone, and I thought there was no other decay, only what I had taken out;
and began to heal the wound with medication for a long time, but could not stitch it together;
And then I began again, and exposed the bone as before,
and found the continuous decay in the bone, and the screw, and then removed it, and bent to焊接 its place;
but I could not do that as long as I copied the shape of a palm of the bone, and it was set to its full size, then I would treat it with medicine; and it healed and was joined quickly,
And it could not be resumed for lack of strength from the patient, who cannot endure, and because of my fear of death that I have for him. For during blood loss was common, but it was completely healed,
For during blood loss was common, but it was completely healed, And in the place of the bone there formed a hard flesh, and it was well arranged and had no harm or opposite from all to all, neither inside nor outside.
And if there's pus in the head, so you extract the corrupted flesh at once, And uncover the flesh on the limb where you see sinew, that the sinew not injure the flesh; And place one stick or a board over the bone to cover the putrefied flesh; And it should be done as far as one can see and sense the decay, and do it again if necessary.
And if the bone is corrupted, and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, then uncover all the flesh; then put one piece of charcoal there,
and then make the sore extend from one part to another along the corruption, and let the ointment be long as the length of the corruption, just like we have said;
and if the corruption is at the joint, then correct the corrupted joint, and let the bone be on the other side;
And if corruption has spread through both of these joints, there's no other way to fix it besides surgery;
And if corruption is in the thumb or forefinger of the hand, or in the heel bone of the foot, such a thing must be done quite forcefully; However, you should inquire about this corrosion and how it has affected you; And cleanse it in all ways that you can, but do not let the vein or nerve hinder you;
And know that the surgeon and surgeons who work with these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and their appearance, and their size and fineness, and their grandness and smallness, and their hardness; and because of this, it is necessary to equip oneself with each kind of work's tool.
And know that the work will show you the instrument you will need, according to understanding of this art, And the testimony of the methods of diseases; if you consider the tool that you need according to what is suitable.
with fire The shoulder joint gets dislocated either from within, or due to heat;
And when you have healed that corruption through the treatment of the medicines, and they do not benefit at all, Then it is necessary to cover that limb up to its joint where the corruption comes from, so that the disease does not escape through death or by malice, which is greater than the fault of the limb;
so that the disease does not escape through death or by malice, which is greater than the fault of the limb; and if you see these signs, then the limb turns black, as though it has been burned by fire. And after the night, then comes this process of corroding limb by limb, and takes over the entire body; if you hurry with it,
and if it's due to the strike of some venomous beasts, such as sea scorpions and snakes, etc.
if it's at the head of two fingers, if you do so, and do not give it space to come up to the hand.
And if it comes up to the wrist, if you stop at the joint, so that the disease does not extend up to the elbow;
And if it reaches the arm, if surgery is delayed; and if the treatment passes the point of surgical intervention, then many die. And its value can only be determined by the strength of its potency.
And do so as follows when the disease reaches or affects a part: if it reaches the first joint, if surgery is performed after another joint;
And if she comes or a piece, if cut all the piece; And if she goes up in the leg, if cut at the knee joint;
And if she comes above the knee, there's no other way than to make the patient die by killing the limb.
The method of fixing or securing a member is that you bind it above and below, And extend one surgeon to the lower ligament, and another surgeon to the upper ligament above. And you open the flesh that is between the two ligaments up to one spatium wide, until the bone is exposed;
Then cut or slice the skin, and place a piece of linen from each side, so that the healthy limb is not touched by the injured one, And tell the patient to observe any other injury and abscesses as well.
And when blood comes forth as you work, if it is necessary to cauterize, quickly do so on the affected area. or you put some restricting powders on it; then return to your medication until its task is completed,
then bind the injured limb with a reliable bandage, and treat it until it heals properly;
and I will tell you what happened at one man's house in my book:
He had a black mark that seemed to be like an ember of fire,
And this burn appeared first on his buttock and the inner thigh, until it spread across the entire thigh;
And when the patient saw the burn, they immediately covered their thighs, and became healthy;
And for several days after that, the burn returned on his hand, and it came to me,
And I set forth things pertaining to rebounding after purging the body, and cannot cease from corrosion.
And it is that I should pass my hand over it, but I do not wish to have hope for rebounding the matter; I also doubted whether if I cut off his hand, he would die. because the power of the medicine was weak; and he completely lost hope, and returned to his home, And if they raise their hand, and are well.
and I have only included this for when one needs to do something else, in case it is necessary.
No abscess ever comes to the inner flesh, and stays so long as to cause a large collection of pus; And then spreads and perforates, and the pus jumps out, and settles in his veins, just like vessels. And the skin above is as delicate as one linen sheet, and does not extend up to the bone or to the nerve, and such illnesses are called "blind" or "unknown",
but if it extends so far that it reaches the bone all the way through, then it is called "fistula";
And the skin so is that you need to peel it all over, and similarly when it's delicate, like a piece of fabric; and doesn't swell up due to its decay.
And if you've noticed that the skin is heating up and there's no decay, and if the skin is full of flesh, then it requires a colostomy:
Examine if your breasts are large, and the body bearing them has a stinky smell, Then use an Egyptian enema medicine which is prepared here: Take arsenic, oil, and litharge, equally, and cook them in a single vessel on the fire, until the medicine becomes red, and thicken as much as honey;
and then use this according to your need, and apply it both in water and in honey, and administer enemas to the stomach, and hold the rectum steady; leave the medicine in for two hours, then remove it by squeezing;
do this number of times, until the stomach is empty and free of pus.
And never made to be lanced with water from ashes, When this medicine is not present, and you take vine wood ash and pour water over it,
Then drain it, and administer as a suppository until you know that the intestines are well mixed;
And if the patient cannot tolerate this, neither this Egyptian medicine nor water from ash. If you use a catheter of water and honey or has a little bit of stearate; Or you will catheterize with honey and mixed wine where the honey has properties to purify and clean. and the wine causes the soundness to increase;
and when you have done this and made sure that the lungs are well purified, if the colic (pain) caused by what causes birth within them,
and you should apply a plaster of a healing ointment and oil rose, or you will give an enema of certain medicines and ointments, about which I have discussed their properties or written on the use of ointments;
and if they are too small under the breast, and the anus does not allow it to enter, If it is widened by a piece of iron, and then an application of Egyptian ointment is made, or basilic ointment, as long as it is widened;
and if the wound is too wide, stitch it up so that only a thumb or the elbow can enter;
and if the opening of the bow wound is above, let the cut be higher than the elbow. For when the bow is full, I do not allow it to be drawn; and if you cannot cover the breast under it as you see, if you arrange yourself in such a way that the bow reaches as low as possible to where you are.
And if you cannot cover the breast area as you see, so do it in such a manner that the bone slides smoothly downward, and leave nothing of the bone; and take consolidating medicines to place inside the breast area,
and there should be one layer of linen covering the entire breast area; Then direct the application of the force to that area of the breast. That is, push with a hand slightly larger than the first one. Then apply another poultice oil on .i., another cloth according to the size of the force. And place it over the breast where the pain is, to alleviate the stomach ache, and do not remove the large cloth except after several days once;
And that which is on the breast, often needs to be removed for the relief of the stomach. And know what flows from the womb, whether it's venom or pus or enough, or digested, or undigested;
and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not,
and when your medicine has spread in this manner and you see the nature that jumps onto the breast lesion, then know that the breast is now inflamed, and approach with health;
And then dislocate it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you dislocate the wound, if change one part of the dressing, and renew the ointment.
And if after many days the breasts discharge an undigested substance, know that the breasts are not healing properly. And if subtle poisons linger for a long time, do not despair of recovery,
For health is approaching. For there are men who delay healing of their wounds with too much alcohol, and of those who do the opposite;
and if a person has undigested food sitting in their stomach for many days, know that their stomach does not heal itself;
and if the lungs are sluggish and distant, then adjust medicinal preparations of dried wet substances and dry with virtue; such as transparent ointment, because it contains a large part of vitriol, and this is the last remedy;
Take some soft butter, mix it with rose oil, and season it with old wine of equal strength;
then cook it and use it; and do the same thing by making cooked honey richer. when soft butter medicine is not present,
or you take myrrh and aloes and incense, and grind them together, and add the powder to the honey when it has been heated; And then with a glue of one piece of cloth, it is extended over the breast, and every time an administrator or an alchemist administers, And roots of heavenly lilies, which are also like flour from thyme and centauries;
And roots of heavenly lilies, which are also like flour from thyme and centauries; And in using simples or compounds: grind them, make a powder, and place it on the honey I have said, and use it; And if treatment lasts long and is not cured by this remedy,
And if treatment lasts long and is not cured by this remedy, Thus know that corruption enters from all sides, and makes an impact within the bone, or in hard parts, or in ligaments; if dealing with the treatment of a fistula, as we have said earlier.
of the abscess under the nail
Panarice is a type of abscess that forms under the nail of the hand, In the case of bone pain, or if it happens to grow elsewhere;
And when it grows old, and if no care is taken, then it leads to an abscess formation. Then blood flows out continuously as long as it reaches the root of the nail, and by chance it might reach all of it;
And corrosion goes up to the bone as long as there is stinking pain, and the shoulder joint is broad, and the color is disturbed.
When you treat him as we have said in the division, and the treatment doesn't benefit. So it's necessary for you to remove all the excess that has remained of the nail, Then apply a cautery to the wound afterwards. The cautery is very helpful when the bone is healthy, and the nail is healthy;
If the angle presses against the flesh, and begins to poke, and irritates it, Then you should place the force under the angle that points toward the flesh, and hold the knife upright, and cut that flesh finely and gently, and apply on top of the cut part of the flesh hot and corrosive medicines to remove everything;
And if the corrosion is in the bone, you must remove it and treat forcefully because as much of the infected bone there is, it cannot heal;
and if you see that the knee is corrupted, you must remove it in one piece just as was explained before, Then treat until health returns;
And if it is broken, and set back, and he feels great pain, then you must heal him first; then trim the nail at the cuticle by cutting across it.
and ensure that your cut does not go beyond the flesh under the nail, as this would cause too much pain to the patient;
And if it happens, then apply something soothing.
You must adjust what is born in the hands of some people by chance and thick-skinned, And sometimes it has a bone or it lacks one, and often it has a nail,
And none of them are born at the root of the joint, or the birth is in no part of our hands. Those who are born without a nose do not have one, And those who are born with a joint of the knee, by chance they move;
The size of the one who is robust is so light, in such manner: Cut it at its root from a broad spoonful.
Those born at the root of the joint have trouble to cure: if you hold on to copper.
In the one who is born or should be at the end of it, it is necessary that you first fix the cartilage up to the bone. Then fix the bone with a suitable softness for this, and treat it until it is well healed.
The fusions that occur at the joints are due to birth, or by the welding of wounds, or by the action of fire, or by similar things.
If it is necessary that you take care of this healing, so that it must be repaired according to its natural forms; then place between two wet tents or cloths in oil rose, so they do not weld together. or you should put between two pieces of fine paste, until the joints are welded, as it should be.
Welding occurs at none of his joints with the palm, if you take care of this welding just like it should be.
Of cautery by fire, command the sick to let their hairs grow long and even; and if they pierce at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Vessels are large, enveloped veins full of surplus melancholic matter that come from multiple body parts;
And more occurs in legs of those who walk and work and carry things, than in others.
It follows therefore that you must administer one time a bloodletting procedure, and then heal it using basilica.
The iron treatment follows two methods: the first involves cutting the wound and allowing black blood to flow; And the other method is that you open the vein and allow it to be forced entirely.
The operation follows this manner: immerse the first leg in very hot water for quite some time, until the large vein becomes slender. Then hold the leg of the patient from above the knee down to the part below the knee. Next cut the vein either at one level, or at two levels, or at three levels, with a width that is sizable.
Then lift and drain the black blood towards your hand, from one end to the other, until as much blood comes out as the medical properties of the blood can bear;
And then tie it up, and command that he soak the bandage in red meat juice that darkens it.
And restart the evacuation and cleaning when the veins are full, and harm the patient.
The methods of treatment are as follows: lift the leg from the patient, if there is hair; Then place it in water (a hot bath), and lift the leg from a hot water bath until it turns red, and the veins swell;
And if you don't have a bath, heat it over the fire, and then apply heat to the leg along its entire length from the knee down, or in the part below at the ankle;
Then open the skin with the knife, and sear each vein from every side until one can see it when touched;
and you see it red and black, and when it enters or seems like a white string in the skin as well;
then hold the cautery over it until above the skin, and then place it on the knife gently.
then hold it for one more inch above three inches, and then sear the skin over the vein until you can see it; Then lift the lever, just like you did before, and move to another hook, just like you moved to the first one.
Then use a different size, or several if needed, then lift it and adjust to the base of the foot,
Then pull and lift until you reach the second size; then stretch from size to size, as long as all her strength comes out, then adjust.
And if you cannot pull and lift it, insert an awl with both ends of thick strong thread, And you press it and pull it, and squeeze out one inch, and turn your hand from side to side until something comes out; And make sure it doesn't swell up, for if it swells up, then you can neither draw nor lift it, and this causes harm to the patient;
And when you have completely drawn it out, put moistened wool in vinegar and oil over the wound; and continue to treat until it is healed.
And if the face is twisted and bent inwardly together, and it is not straight, as we have said, If it is necessary for you to cut forcefully, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have said earlier.
If it is necessary for you to cut forcefully, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have said earlier. The shape of the iron tool used for drilling is curved, and does not cut but merely pierces, so as not to puncture the vein;
And it has thick curvature because if it were too slender, it would pierce the vein, but made it thick as we have said, and this is its shape:
From the civil vein
This vein is found on legs, at warm spots where no plants or trees grow, and in soil without moisture.
And it might be found elsewhere than on the legs, and this happens due to corruption that comes from under the skin,
Just as if it were coming within the body like snakes and worms, penetrating between skin and flesh.
And if you see the signs of the beginning of this vein, if there is a very large inflammation in the leg, Then change your limbs, and begin the vein to start flowing outwards, as if a root of a plant.
When the shoulder is open, it is necessary that you wrap around a piece of leather of three and a half to four spans until you have bound it.
and let the leather hang down by the leg, and every time it wears away at the end, you should wrap around the leather again and tie it. and if it is too long, cut off a part of it and wrap the remainder again, but do not cut at its root until it has all been used. For if you handle it, it enters into the flesh, and brings about pus and putrefaction or disease, and a bad illness;
Because of that kind of thing, it should be treated little by little until the end, and not leave anything or remain with it;
and at no time when this vein is treated for more than 2 palms long, or for more than 10 inches, and an hour came to me who bore this vein for 10 palms long, and when you handle it, if it yields one or two drops or pus, then pierce until you reach the source,
If everything comes out; and let the substance that's inside be emptied, and administer remedies against putrefaction for several days, then treat it as with abscesses, thereafter taking care of it accordingly.
And never on this vein apply cold hands, and similarly when the foot opens at the joint or foot, and there is much loss, and where it causes coldness; then treat it accordingly as we have instructed before.
Worms that are born between the skin and flesh
This disease is called in our land "calf disease", because it often affects cows,
and a small worm is born between flesh and bone, it travels throughout the body rising and falling, and you can feel it throughout the body starting from member to member, until it reaches the skin where it went, and there it breaks out;
It is afflicted with corruption from some fluids, if they come towards worms, snakes, maggots and roundworms or in the abdomen;
And there is doubt about his illness, because when it travels through the body, and it ascends to the head, and comes to the eye, By chance it enters, and destroys the eye; this happens many times.
When you see him being treated and drained, one cannot but think that as he goes:
Therefore, you should bind it above and below with a strong tie very tightly,
then cut upwards and pull it out, and if there is a fracture in the bone, and you don't find it, if you apply the heat cautery over it, until it heals;
and the greater damages that it causes, if they flow to the eye, as we have said;
And if you see it coming or its head near the eye, then hold fast with one hand to the corner of his mouth, then lift up and pull forcefully;
And it is necessary to use the gland for purging diseases from body fluids due to bad humors.
And if there's worry about meat causing putrefaction.
Of the pain that comes from wind disturbance This disease is called in our land "vakirir", and it is a pain that comes to any limbs, and spreads from limb to limb; and I have seen what I told you.
I was summoned to attend an afflicted woman, and she showed me her arms, and I saw a small swelling in the arm vein;
and just one or two days later, it rose up as high as to the shoulder, Sooner than any other thing, as quick as freshly cut silver when it is taken from its source;
The pain leaves the shoulder and gets stuck in the shoulder;
And then a bit later, it spread throughout the body, until it reached the other arm.
Then I realized that it was tearing inside the body, just as I saw it.
I marveled greatly how she moved from limb to limb in this manner, for I had never seen such an illness conducted like this before. Still, I have seen many that would cause pain in their limbs to move elsewhere, but I had never witnessed this before, as I see it in the case of a woman;
and I wondered that this was due to the fact that her belly was swollen and her veins were exposed, And because of this, there appears that constrained wind;
and does not appear according to this reason among those who are delicious and have moist bodies and veins that respond.
And when you see the treatment of this disease, and if the patient feels pain, if it opens in the way that we have said, If it opens upwards and downwards quickly, then treat until that constrained wind at the body escapes; And apply a cautery to it; and if you cannot see it with your eyes,
if you treat those who suffer from wind debility, like stinky pills, pills made of viper venom, and similar others.
From arrows
Arrows are diverse, depending on their appearances and the locations where they pierce the body.
The variety of them is such that there are those with large points, and small ones, and those with hair, and those joined. and those with two angles, and those with tongues, and those where there are pieces; and the one who defecates in no member, yet does so according to two ways: or within the main member itself,
like the brain, heart, liver, stomach, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar organs. When she gives birth then in no part of these limbs, and the sign of death that I will tell you later, becomes evident: If you have to remove this arrow, for death comes afterwards in various conditions; And when that bad sign does not become evident and the arrow is not fully out, remove it, and treat the wound.
The sign of the skull when the arrow hits and pierces the bone, and jumps out from where it was in the head, when there is blindness and numbness and swelling of the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasms and confusion of thought, and vomiting of bile; and sometimes affects the nostrils or ears; and sometimes there is loss of speech and voice. a white swelling at the wound resembling a boil, and also a burn like that from hot iron.
and if you see this sign, continue with the treatment, and remove the arrow if it is not there already.
The sign of the arrow when it pierces or hits the heart, is that it's close to the left breast, and also feels like it is stuck in something hard, not empty; And by chance the arrow can also stop like a pulse, and brings black blood, and causes coldness and cold sweat, and fainting: Therefore, without doubt, know that death is near.
And the sign of an arrow that never leaves its wound is that without any foam spilling from the wound, and the throat swells up, and the patient's face turns a different color, and they sigh loudly with cold chills.
And if the arrow stops within the thigh's cover, it hits the small bones; and causes great pain and intense agony and sighing; and all body parts from the shoulders move.
And if the arrow stops in the stomach or intestine, by chance if it breaks out of the wound, there's no undigested flesh.
And if the arrow stops in the belly or abdomen, and it jumps out of the wound not through the intestines, there's no hope for treatment, nor is there any hope for extracting the arrow.
And if the arrow stops in the bladder and causes urination to occur, and leaks out, causing great pain to the patient: you know that the wound is fatal.
The other body parts, such as the limbs and neck and throat and shoulder and shoulder blade and back spine and ribs and arms and legs, and similar seeming limbs, are safe according to various dispositions. When the arrow is in the nerves or arteries and it's not poisonous, like what I will tell you, this happened to me because of what you were doing.
It happened to one and a half homes that an arrow hit or pierced the lung at its base near the nose: I tried it, and I pulled it out from the other side through the fat of the ear, and there was no serious injury.
And take out an arrow, when it falls into the oil grease near the paper over the eye. And the arrow had returned, and one could only touch its tip towards the shaft. And the arrow was large as an Ottoman bow, weighing just one fine feather without ears; the hunt was safe, and no ill accidents befell it.
And take out an arrow from the throat to a Christian, and this is the Arab arrow with ears:
I was grooming their eyebrows, and trimming them as long as I was doing it, and it pleased the Christians.
And pulled out an arrow at one's inch, whether from their back or belly, and I thought they were going to die;
and then after thirty days, if it did not change its position; I cut into the arrow, and I aimed it, and pulled it out, and there was no bad incident.
And if you find one arrow which has fallen or been shot through, and there is a wound joined up at that spot;
and wait until the arrow remains inside it, and do not disturb its natural positions, nor does it cause harm in any of its natural works.
And observe another person, who has an arrow through their face and the wound is sealed;
And let it endure like this to suffer great pain; and few other symptoms.
And pull out an arrow from the king's right arm for one and a half days during the service of the princes, as it was stuck in his left arm. and had slightly weakened on the right side; and the arrow was completely inserted.
I was called to treat it after three days when it happened. I found the wound very tight.
I tried very hard to do this but felt nothing; and there was pain and discomfort in his right ear. I thought it might be from the tip of the arrow.
I placed an adhesive and digestive plaster on his head because the ears were not swollen; And I saw the head of the arrow.
And I saw the head of the arrow. I applied the poultice to the wound for days, and quickly resolved the injury, then allowed the patient to rest for a long time.
Until he felt the arrow within his nose; and he told me this. I applied corrosive mercury medicine to the wound for days, until it opened up completely,
And try it, and feel the tip of the arrow which was moving towards the shoulder; then adjust it in the opening of the wound through this medicinal method, until the head of the arrow appeared visibly to me;
and pierced deeply into the inner parts for a period of four months,
then I opened the wound so that my pincers could reach inside, and applied treatment from both sides, but couldn't remove it;
Therefore do not stop refining and devising ways for the tools, until I took one whole day using well-made forceps, Following what its form comes to the end of this chapter, until I treat it, and will restore the wound.
And the judges decide that the cartilage at the nose cannot be restored: So I treated it accordingly, and healed the wound, and was completely cured of the patient's ailments.
And I told you about the quality of extracting some arrows, so that when you apply your method to what I don't say, because books cannot encompass everything;
but the wise masters compare well on a small matter, and on that which is immediate and lacking; find nine works, and the new instrument, for the expulsion of things that happen in this art.
I say that arrows do not exist within the limbs where they are embedded, according to two ways: or by their length where they enter, or from another side;
And the one that jumps when it is at its length as it enters, this is an arrow entering into their flesh, and jumps without fail ever since.
And if it doesn't jump now, let her grow until the wound is properly healed from the inside out, and await the healing of the outside;
And similarly if it's stuck in the bone, and cannot come out, if she leaves her like that for a few days, and removes her each day;
And then it jumps, and if it doesn't jump, she punctures through to the very center of the bone with a fine needle, until the inside of her elbow is widened, and then removes her.
And if the arrow is returned inside the body so it cannot be seen, one should seek it throughout the entire body; and if you feel it, try to guide it with any suitable instrument;
and if you cannot by the constriction of the wound, and due to the depth of the arrow, and if there is no bone, nerve, or vein, then make an incision as long as the wound becomes large; and pull out the arrow if you can, and if it has heads on the shaft she holds,
and pull out the arrow if you can, and if it has heads on the shaft she holds, if the bone is embedded by two parts at the depth that you can reach, and then break or bend the ears of the arrow, as long as you can pull it out;
and then break or bend the ears of the arrow, as long as you can pull it out; do this carefully so that you do not break the arrow, making its extraction more difficult.
And if you cannot do it in one go, till your arm is numb from the effort, then move on, because the extraction requires endurance. And if the blood flow causes you to deviate, then apply what we have instructed about treatment in this chapter of our text;
and be cautious about cutting near the nerve and the vein, and make your movements so as to extract the arrow without risk.
quickly or cautiously, firmly or gently; and guide the patient according to their form before the arrow fell. For this is the greatest aid one can give, and if you cannot manage it yourself, then follow what the sign shown to you instructs.
The arrow that comes from another side, or if it reveals any matter of concern, or if the skin is swollen in a spot where you can see or feel it distinctly:
Cut there up, as long as the forceps can take hold, and then grasp: if the arrow jumps now.
And if it is held in the bone, twist your hand round as long as she enters the bone, and enlarge the bone, then pull her out.
And if it cannot come out, leave it still, and then continue the extraction until it comes out forcefully.
and if there is an arrow in him and he pulls at its shaft, hold onto it throughout its length;
and if he has defecated, and you see it being administered with force, then administer one tool for hair removal; so that the tip of the arrow enters into the hair of the tool; and then apply strength.
And if the arrow is embedded, then I use one or two pointed instruments to enter it, in order to ease the extraction.
And if the arrow is struck, then you should cut all the surrounding flesh or where the wound begins, if you can, Then treat the wound as it should be treated.
And if the arrow hits or pierces or in the belly or bladder or ribs and is close, then you should cover it up if you can, and if you do;
And beware not to cut the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then suture the wound; this is a skillful task. And continue with the treatment until it heals.
The shape of the tongs used for extracting arrows resemble a bird's beak, and here is the form:
And they are made in sizes: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
from the veins of common horns From veins from which we cleanse ourselves are thirty-one, of which there is a head of sixteen.
This means: And the two arteries that are in the two temples, visible; And two veins that are in the sockets of the two eyes, which are called 'aspirers'; And the vein that is within the forehead; and the vein that is at the head under the nose; and the two jugulars which are in the neck; and the two veins that are on the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins that are called 'aeugheirich'; and the two veins that are around the tongue.
The veins which we commonly treat are five in each arm:
One is the cephalic vein, and it runs along the left side of the chest, and they call this "the head's vein"; And the middle one is called "fast", and it is composed of the cephalic and the basilic veins,; And they call this "the heart's vein"; and the basilic is either on the right side of the chest or on the left,; And they call this medical condition "the wound of the belly", and it is located on the flank, and that which can be cured, which becomes visibly open on the side.
And the salve well is the vein located between the thumb and the index finger, and it extends for two inches;
and in the leg and where the feet are located there are three veins: one is below the knee on the left side of the body, And it is the second joint, which is at the ankle on the right side; and there is a vein that is called 'Nesse', that is in the ankle of the other side.
And in the other leg are three veins beneath those.
The health of the veins that are behind the ears helps with the cataracts and migraines; And the qualities of the healer, as I have told you, and that you find relief in helping yourself.
And the qualities of the healer, as I have told you, and that you find relief in helping yourself. And rub the area where the veins are with a rough cloth; then pinch the patient's neck at the base of their head. Until the two veins can be seen behind the ears in two dependent locations near the head: Place your hands thereon, and where you feel the pulse under your hand, if you wish to proceed;
Then take the scalpel and make an incision through the vein as close to the bone, then lift your hand all the way up to the vein above. And cut and stretch the skin and the vein well through two inches, and let blood flow out as long as you see;
then hold and bind it until it heals.
and I have already spoken of the incision and the cautery or in the first book.
The health of the two arteries that are in the temples is akin to an old ailment, And indeed, and ointment used for eye care, and in the case of feverish tears from the eyes;
And that quality which a physician should be is as I say: And they pull their throat until the two veins appear clearly; and feel the pulse all across your chest, and then touch it to see if it beats evenly.
Then lift the knife above the vein near your thumb tip, and hold the lancet downwards, and lift the vein upwards, and press it, just like you did in .ij. other veins, and let the blood flow according to your need;
then release the needle, place your thumb on the vein for an hour, then put cotton over it.
and form the wound after that, and let it heal until it is well; and we have spoken about this in relation to its treatment and extraction, or at the beginning of this book.
The treatment of a vein on the forehead is equally valuable to the treatment of the frontal sinus in old diseases, and for migraines, and for flushes;
And its quality is that the illnesses twist their necks by being squeezed, until the vein appears; Then take the instrument called a 'digester', whose shape is as follows:
And place the tip on the vein, and press with your hand or another tool, allowing blood to flow out according to the amount you see; Then release the patient's neck, and secure the vein until it is sound and without any trace of the operation.
Always, it is not suitable for the flames to be too intense; and the healing is from side-to-side, because the bone is close, and accidentally breaks the flames when it becomes subtle.
The healing of the two veins that are in the two eyelids helps with the eyes, and for the nose, and for the cheek, and around the eye socket in the eye, and for diseases of the face;
And the quality of their healing is such that the patient tightens its neck by twisting through any kind of connection, as before;
Then heal it, and make the healing passage through the skin, slightly longer than the length of the flame somewhat wide, for there is nothing rotten.
And if the flames are subtle, by chance should they break; then make correspondence with the blood, as much as you need to, and then bind onto cotton, and bind it well.
The healing of the vein near the nose is valued for fever, and sudden recovery, and diseases of the face, likewise for migraines and redness that comes to the face, and likewise when it is old;
And the quality of health is such that the sick person narrows their throat, then strains their nose with your left hand. and take the fine long flame, and place it inside the lip in the space that is between the two nostrils, for the vein doesn't open properly yet, and the blood will now start to flow;
and don't go too deep there, and let the blood flow gently according to your need, then leave it overnight, for she is restored very quickly;
The health of the two inguinal glands assists in the tightening of the artery and the beginning of mixture disease, and for many illnesses, and in gangrene, corrosion, and herpes, as well as inflammations;
And the quality of health is such that the patient restricts its neck on both sides, as we have said; And let the masters be above the head of the patient, and the patients lie on one side for half a bed-length.
Then open the vein long enough slightly more than its width, then guide blood moderately, or as much as is necessary;
Then make another incision in the other vein, then release the constriction, and press moderately on the veins. so that the patient doesn't suffocate; and leave it until morning, so that the wound heals.
On the treatment of wounds The treatment of veins above the lips helps in closing them in the mouth, and it deals with gum decay, cracks in the lips, nosebleeds, and tooth pain.
And the quality of this treatment is to have the patient stand in front of you, and hold his neck as I have described; then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one is on the right lip and the other is on the left, And their identification is by their being black, and by the fact that within them there are thin, small veins: Thus treat both of them, and if you do not recognize them, be in doubt,
Thus treat both of them, and if you do not recognize them, be in doubt, If you take the largest one from each side, and do exactly the same with the two veins above and below, for it is the same method.
From the cure of the throat The healing of veins situated near the tongue requires assistance after the healing of the cephalic area, and this is done through constriction of the throat. This also deals with ailments of the eyeball, and diseases of the mouth;
And the qualities of the surgeon are such that the patient's body should be exposed to sunlight while it is in their hands. Then they raise the tongue and look below each side where there may be a black vein:
Thus ensuring both sides are healthy, but not too far forward either, because they are close to the arteries.
The veins of the arm that we commonly treat are treated according to two ways:
If they prick at all one large flame brand or an olive stick so fine like a knife blade, and it is called 'anevil'. And they are wide yet subtle according to the width and constriction of the veins. The shape of the fire brand Mirtin is greatly renowned, and it is quite wide as you can see:
It is necessary to open the large veins filled with visible abundant blood, and containing much blood and turbidity; And this is the shape of olive oil flame:
And it's more subtle and pointed, and it's for purifying the delicate veins, or having subtle yellow blood.
The purification of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are around the throat, and in the neck, and in the stomach, and in the abdomen;
And it is for the doctor to purify carefully, and to be aware of the artery that is around. And if it severs an artery, and blood begins to flow out, should this occur, you must stop the bleeding, as I have said; and it should not be held in the flame, but cut like a young animal would.
And if the basilica does not open clearly, you should extract it and change to another one; Or if you do not want any bone from him, or you cut through his body with the arm's vein: it opens clearly; And the application of heat before it, as we have said.
And if you know where the pulse is, it should be like this: you must stretch out the arm, touching the spot until you find the pulse; then mark the location for cutting, and then tie the arm down, and apply heat to the vein beforehand.
And beware not to cut into the artery when you see the site inflamed, for that is the artery: listen there instead.
And if you see it sticking out as high as a child's urine, and the veins are red and subtle, know that this is a vein from an artery: Hurry then, place your finger for some time, then stabilize your finger until the vein stops bleeding, as has often happened;
Fix his arm and leave it like this, do not move the patient's limbs; and be careful, do not move him until he is healed.
And if the vein doesn't stop bleeding and you need to, and the medicine isn't available, if you find an artery that's open, do so because it can help the bleeding stop; and make sure the vein stops.
And take a piece of walnut shell, cut it, and take one half and bind it well up to the other side;
If there is no bleeding, that's fine; if not, clean it up, as we have said, with powders that stop blood flow;
And the bandages should not be too tight for the small size of the wound and the strength of the arm's connection.
The healing of the vein in the middle is assisted by measures that help control blood flow from above and below it. because it is made up of the basilica and the cephalic part, as we have said;
and it is important for the surgeon to be aware of the nerve that runs beneath, and if he does not go too far forward, and should find the nerve, and it inflates and damages health, and by chance cannot heal;
and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any of them due to its subtlety, then you should heal the wounded with alcohol beforehand; and listen to the nerve through your skill.
And if there is a vein between the two hands, cut it long.
The treatment for a headache, when blood flows from the head, and helps with eye problems;
And it is necessary to use a remedy in the oil flame or in the mint flame, for this is the safest of all veins, because there is neither nerve nor artery nearby.
In short, it's necessary to choose the lightest weight possible and not to worry if one needs to do it first time, and then repeat; And by chance swellings occur in some men at their first appearance, but they cause no pain. The quality of health is according to your thought.
The first thing you need to know about being a surgeon is that surgery is conducted solely for the purpose of preserving health,
and to avoid future diseases; And let healing take place at one of the three veins that are cut: these are to be known as the scalp vein, the facial vein, and the basilic vein; And let healing occur at the beginning of prayers while kneeling, and in autumn and after winter following meals, when the signs of fullness appear;
And let healing begin on the first or third day, after two hours or one and a half days.
The healing for illnesses does not have a determined time, but only when the need is of the day or necessity, at all hours and in all situations;
And it is not good to heal children until they are twelve years old, nor a woman who carries child for less than one quarter of the months until seven weeks. Neither should they heal the elderly who have passed sixty years.
And when someone wishes to be healed, in whatever manner that may be, it is necessary for him to cleanse the intestines with a gentle cathartic. If he has kept some bile back, so that the vessels drain the excess putrefactions harmful to the main members;
Not even one who is too full of meat, or drunk, shall be cured until they are strong and not anemic.
And when the healer deals with colic pain, vomiting, abdominal distension, frequent urination in women, and labor, work, watching over patients, and bearing, as well as what quickly diminishes the virtue, or by something from the weapon or injury;
Then refine the body's fluids, if it is heavy due to food and drinks and medications, if you have the means;
Then in or through a bath, if no defense occurs, to refine the blood,
And heal from the artery near the inner thigh, as we have said;
and protect yourself that day of work, and of pain, and of excess, and similar things.
and be bound and anointed, and let the ointment be higher than where it is applied, and rub the arm twice or three times.
then stretch half of the bandage upwards, for if it is too tight or too loose, it cannot properly heal the wound;
And then rub the area with hands, until the veins swell, and one feels them;
Then moisten the flame of a small piece of old oil, then place your left finger on that vein under the shoulder a bit where you intend to cauterize; So that the vein does not burn and rupture at being touched. For there are veins that behave like strings when they're cauterized, and some have such high winds flowing through them, if indeed when placed over the flame, it retreats to the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus one belongs to these.
and if it opens the vein, the wound is too narrow, for in this case one should be aware of these matters regarding the surgeons.
And if the vein opens for the first time, it's good; but if not, you can try again near the original spot or suddenly, provided that the limb is not swollen.
And if the limb is swollen and the patient feels pain, you should leave it alone for one or two days, and do not bind the arm: By chance it may bring about the evacuation of pus; do not immerse or bathe, then restart the cleansing if it suits.
and if the vessel is small, or the artery is too subtle and you doubt whether any blood comes out as much as you see, so pierce that vessel itself straight down to all the flame.
and then press on it a little faster, so that the limb swells; for this happens often when the wound is small.
If you see the limb swelling, do not restart the cleansing and instead place a little of the olive oil on it; because it alleviates the body from the blood and heals that part where the oil is.
And thus administer the oil in each healthy part that you heal for stopping the flow of blood;
And similarly apply the mustard and wax when you place it on the head; if the oil is too thick, it will be sparingly applied.
And if a large abscess comes about, which often happens, even when it's not healed before because at that time the opening of the vein is small, and if you hurry, soak an sponge in hot water and a little salt and place it on the head for one hour;
And it must be that you do this after the release of blood from the vein, and if it stays in place for any days without turning black or green, so long as it doesn't harm it; And if you see fit, place on anything of Aloes or of Myrrh dissolved into a Calamus juice, a signifier, or something similar.
Many times an abscess and its appearance were seen at the healing of the basilica: therefore place your hand there, and if you find the area soft upon pressing with your hand, then it is that bad appearance. Therefore, do not apply anything from what we have said, for by chance it might cut into the artery; but make one plastered bandage to stiffen the area, then treat with another remedy until it heals.
And treat each person with blood according to the amount of their virtue and the color of the blood.
But if the blood is black, let it flow until it turns red; and if you see that it's large, let it flow until it becomes thin. And if it's too hot, let it cool.
And for the one who is full and empty, needing blood extraction, you should make him have a larger incision, and let the flames be wide;
And for the one who is weak, do the opposite, and let him be well taken care of little and often, and you should take care of him by cutting across instead of straight.
And this method of healing saves from bleeding and nerve constriction, and it is better than the healing which lasts long but not wide.
And for the one whose body needs healing, you must give them juice from ground apples with oil; if they are hot, treat them three or four times by bleeding.
And if they have a cold constitution, they should take the oily food before healing in syrup made from apple juice, or in an aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, with a well-scented syrup.
And if they feel ill during healing, after the bleeding has stopped, it is good for them to inhale a broth of flesh and a subtle-scented syrup,
And apply the other things we have discussed in the division or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of veins.
And if they wish to bleed their arm, and then rest again, should this be necessary, when it has been weakened by much bleeding, it should be bled little by little, according to the strength of its power continuously.
And if someone wishes to bleed their arm after the first bleeding, and they have strong health, they should be bled seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
And if someone wishes to undergo bleeding on another part of their body, they should be bled on the second day or the third day at the latest.
For there is much blood within the body that has already been heated, and this causes fever; if one must draw a large amount, and widen the constriction until it breaks in the middle. Since you have treated all the health conditions, and when it's time for surgery, place your hand on his heart as he recovers, so that death does not occur instead of recovery. And this happens many times when the doctors are careless;
And it should not happen when you see blood flowing out of the arm, and blood is expelled a second time, and if the constriction is closed, you should press strongly; If he is constrained, make him extend his arm quickly, for this would be ill.
but let him until he heals the second time; or you touch it with the tip of the flame, as long as the thing frozen by the cold comes out from the vein. and place half a spoonful of salt boiled in water, and press it gently.
And if the vein is swollen, leave it alone and don't squeeze it, until the abscess is relieved.
And if needing to bleed again for blood, if the health is in that place itself, or in another vein, or on the other arm.
The vein exists in the arm just like the one by the head because it is made up similarly.
And the method of bleeding involves having the patient soak their hand in hot water, until the veins turn red;
Then partially tie it up, so that you can see the vein clearly, then bleed now through it, neither wide nor long;
And if the cuts are wide, and if they're very close to the joint of the hand, and if one can't come out without them, then put the hand in hot water, and let the blood run in the water, as long as you have enough.
And if it's frostbite, don't reset the hand in hot water either, because you put it more at risk than with frost.
And the healing of this vein is safer than any other veins, as there are no arteries or nerves involved.
The healing for the salvation of the right hand is valuable against all liver diseases, and this is how it's done:
Lift your hand, and hold it in hot water, until you see blood coming from the vein, if you can observe it; And if the artery is cut diagonally, and if you hold it completely in all directions, so that no harm ensues;
and do not cut too close to the nerve either, for the nerves are very near to all the flesh,
And then immerse the hand in hot water, since it has been frozen in the wound, and cannot escape.
And when you have treated the blood as much as is required of you, place on the vein where and with a needle to solder quickly, and thus do for each rain.
The health of the left hand is to the disease of the mouse, and do everything as I have told you regarding the right.
The health of the spirit is equal to all diseases that occur in the body, Like diseases of the liver, and retention of blossoms, and disease of the kidneys, and old ailments of arms and legs, and similar illnesses.
And the quality of its health is such that patients are treated with hot water, and rubbed onto the veins until they flow, and above the joint of the foot; and when the veins are at the ankle, and above the foot they go to many kidneys;
Heal then with something broad and dry, or at the ankle, where it suits.
And if you heal on the bone, beware of the nerves that are nearby, and heal in a similar way as when cutting; let the flames remain there.
And if it cannot come out without causing harm, then put the bone in water and ensure that the vein is well emptied.
And if it heals for the first time, then try a second application slightly above once more because the body is salty; Do not doubt a nerve as we have said, and similarly perform surgery on the other leg equally.
The veins of the sciatic nerve are at the ankle joint on the side, and its health corresponds to hip pain, when it's due to internal bleeding.
And the quality of its health is that the muscles expand or contract, and they tense up above the ankle by three inches through twisting,
because otherwise the vein doesn't open; and if it does open, you should treat it in every way possible, and crosswise; And you must move it when you feel for it, because your fingers are inside, and they respond very much to manual handling.
And you must move it when you feel for it, because your fingers are inside, and they respond very much to manual handling. And if you cannot find it, check for any sign of the body that opens or behind the knee, and toward the small toe, and be careful of the nerves;
And make sure the blood flows as you see fit, then release the knot, and place cotton over it and apply pressure; now she is healed.
Cures using suction cups
Blasping devices are made from horns, or spiders, or snakes; and bloodletting is performed in two ways: either by piercing to draw blood, or without piercing.
And this kind of bloodletting which involves piercing is done in two ways: either immediately hot (with the wound still bleeding freely), or without heat.
And two others on two sides of the neck; and the suction cup under the chin; And the suction cup on both shoulders; and the suction cup above the elbows; And the suction cups on both arms; and the suction cups on both legs; And the suction cup on both ankles; and the bloodletting does not aim for blood, but rather for small veins that are scattered in the flesh,
And because of this, one does not weaken oneself, as one does in surgery to veins; And it should not be administered, nor with any fire or sense of heat, in any illness that comes from congestion, until all the body is emptied.
And if by necessity of diseases we must use suction, or due to habits, then we administer it each hour at the beginning of her period, or at the end, and throughout and in every time;
because there are those who, when they need to use suction, become pregnant first.
And for those who experience swelling and redness on their face, and head, and neck, and the eyes take hold.
And for those who notice a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swollen tongues, and they cough up blood; And if there are such cases where they perceive, see through the nose blood and ashes and things resembling death.
And when we observe these signs, especially during the first month, we instruct people to take some air after three hours of fasting each day.
The treatment of the neck assists in relieving headaches... and it involves the eyes, and it should not be after the removal of everything from within the body.
And this suction therapy is part of the treatment for the head.
It should not be used by those with a cold constitution or who have undergone purging, for it causes much harm in such cases.
Nor should this be done by someone who uses the veil or has cold diseases of the head.
And the one who often seeks cleanliness, becomes forgetful, and because of this, it is necessary to place the suction cup a bit further down due to the element of forgetfulness.
Lung suction is situated at the location of the neck and head and in the area of the cleanliness and basilica. Therefore, it suits it to narrow the bottom passage. And in the incision of the channel of the womb, and always, and in repair;
And it is better to hold it a little more loosely, for if she holds too tightly, it may cause dislocation or stomach and heart issues.
The breathing affects the two ribs near the collarbone causing head pains, eye and toothache, and in strangles, and there is pain at the roots of teeth.
And it is in the place of the surgery of the basilica; and you must instruct the surgeon to press his hand during the operation, not to touch the artery, and not to let any blood escape.
The breathing around the chin leads to mouth diseases, and gum decay, and similar illnesses that occur in the mouth; and this is part of the surgeries of the two lips.
The breathing around the shoulders leads to illness caused by heat and congestion.
The ventilation of the lungs is as valuable as three veins of the arm, for it evacuates blood from these large veins;
and commands the soldier not to bleed too much in the wound, for the arm is bare of flesh and there lies skin over veins and arteries.
The suction cup that is placed on the back is as effective for bleeding off pus from the base, and diseases around it, so it's necessary to have the suction cup large, and made of iron, which needs to be well treated; and by chance, if it were thin, it would break; and I make large wounds.
The suction cups on the legs are applied straightforwardly because they draw blood from throughout the body, and alleviate old pains in the kidneys, liver, bladder, and stomach; and help heal boils; and they are located at the two shins and the two ankles, and altogether weaken the body after long use, and cause weakness in various conditions.
The method of applying the suction cup is as follows: you should apply it first while empty and keep it suctions consistently, applying it quickly, moving it evenly, without stopping this action until you see the skin turning red and inflamed. Then remove it, and replace the suction cups, taking care to notice the body's position because there are some with thick flesh and clear pores: it is proper to pierce once only in each area, and create large wounds, a little deeper; and suck gently.
And if the lesion is large, it is proper to pierce twice: the first time to thin out the large blood vessels.
And if the vein is very thick, then it should be pricked three times; and when we wish to drain only a little blood gradually, then we need to prick only once.
And if we wish for some blood, then we often start again; and if the vein is full, then we pierce deeply, and the ends are such that the veins are pierced suddenly.
And for those who have thick and hard skin, with tightly knit pores, you should grease the elbows with suction cups where a stimulating and dissolving agent is applied: if it's in the form of violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil;
And if it's in water, from a place of onion, or lily, or chamomile, or any similar thing.
And if the excess is large and cold, take oil of arnica, or balsam, or juniper oil, and similar things.
And if the condition requires strengthening flesh and large pores, there is no need to apply any oil,
But it is suitable to wash after suction with pink water or cold water, or water of the rose, or water of a cucumber, or water from a porcelain dish, or any similar thing.
And whoever has much moisture, if they rise from rest, or from water of myrtle, and from sumac, and similar things.
And whoever has large excesses rises from old wine, or water of soc, or decoction of aneth or chamomile, or other similar things.
and it is not suitable for a physician to use suction cups before or during the bath, but rather after the bath an hour or two; and one should not sleep afterwards either.
and it is necessary for him to know when he should be suctioned and when he has been suctioned. And take care of him who is being cured and is choleric, and if his body is too hot and inflamed; It's necessary for him to eat cold things, such as apples, endive, and lettuce salads, and similar items;
And he should consume small meats, and meat of castrated animals, and moist meat.
And for those with cold constitutions, he should consume honey syrup and a moderate amount of fragrant wine that is between old and new. He should eat small portions, small meats, and young birds like pigeons.
And on the day he gets suctioned, if he must drink more than eat;
It is necessary to give some men no thyme or muscat before suctioning, or after, to strengthen the main limbs; And season the meat, but it is not good that those who are feverish drink it.
The suction cups that are placed to avoid causing harm are those placed on the liver, and on the kidneys, and in gout, and on the stomach and bowels and the thighs, for this limb does not suffer from being hurt on veins,
And this is done merely to draw blood from member to member, just as we place them on the nipples when the child is born; to remove the viscosity in the body, just as we apply suction cups on the belly and on the buttocks to reduce the size of the limbs;
and soothes pain when there is an obstruction or stone, to remove it by its attractive power as if, or evacuate the stone from its place;
and in this way she does so when placed on the liver and kidneys when there is retained viscosity.
And these suction cups are administered empty only to suck; and never are they administered together with fire, and sometimes they are filled with water.
If it's for diseases of the spleen, and in such a manner that we fill the suction cup with hot water, or with water where herbs are cooked that are useful for this.
The shape of the suction cup administered with fire is as follows:
And it has two inches and half the length of a palm on each side, and at its center there is an incision that resembles one quarter of an inch, as to pierce a needle in such manner,
And if it's from an animal, let it boil so that it doesn't hurt the patient when applying it to the limb;
And have in the middle a rod across of an earthworm or iron, for putting a candle in possession.
And let them be both large and small according to the illnesses and the age of those who take them;
because the suction cups for children are different from those of the elderly, and those for thin people are different from those for fat ones.
And thus one must put this suction cup onto the limb:
Take the wax candle or one line of it, and place it inside the suction cup through the penis which is inside the suction cup, so that the heat remains at the bottom of the suction cup rather than burning the skin;
and then place it on the limb, and you should do so at the location that we have mentioned, so that when needed, if the steam goes up, remove the suction cup;
And trace the incision like before, and repeat it often, if you need to.
In the suction cup treatment for pleurisy disease, during all stages of illness, there should be neither a lack nor an excess, and it is administered only when it is filled with water, and placed on the body solely.
And this is its form:
Thrushes are not treated with suction cups in limbs where it's impossible to place suction cups due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar areas; And on their naked skin from burns, like those of a bull or calf, and others similar;
And this is about water baths: when you find veins that are clean in calm water without infection, take them;
and put them in warm water until they become accustomed and have nothing in their abdomens. and then cleanse the wound and use suction cups, then rub the limb until it turns red, and place the veins on it;
And when they are full, and itch, if it is possible to apply a suction cup, then do so, for this works very well.
If not, raise the arm with ease and water, quite well, and then incision;
And if the arm is raised too soon after the course of the veins, cool it down with one and a half draps of linen in cold water, and place them on it, until the vein turns red;
And if there are multiple veins, place on it powdered vitriol or gall and similar substances until the vein turns red;
You place half of peeled beans inside the body, and leave them until they dry in the body, then it will now stop bleeding.
And if you need more work, take others without fail.
And if the veins do not want to be taken again, rub with fresh blood or you put a needle inside until blood comes out. Then place them and soon as they feel the blood, let them dry;
And when you see that they are bleeding, apply a mixture of aloes and flour or sifted ash to the wound; it will heal now.
Here begins the book on fractures
This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it deals with the restoration and healing of fractures.
Know this, dear child, that the leaves of this chapter are filled with matters not found in any of the old books, nor did they ever read a letter from them;
And because of this reason, the knowledge has been withdrawn from our land, for I have never found any good in it;
And I know nothing of it, for through the knowledge of ancient books, which I have studied so much that I have dealt with the knowledge there, and through experimentation, and by habit from my life;
And I have described in this chapter what is contained, and summarized it at the end, and shown clearly the forms of the instruments that are used, as I did in the previous two chapters.
Therefore, it is necessary for us to outline the essence of this book in its introduction and prologue, and highlight the chapters where wise minds apply their intellect. We should adhere to truth, so that those who have been taught can understand and learn this noble art, and teach it to others as well.
I say that when fractures or dislocations or twists occur in any part of the body, if it is necessary to quickly heal the patient on both sides and parts, without anything obstructing your path, like weakness from illness, or children, or elderly people;
Or if the treatment is too vigorous or too cold; and make fresh hot jugs, that means hot baths, and fat ointments and goat cheese, and do not drink wine, nor consume any fatty foods. And do not fill up with meat that fills the blood veins until you have doubt of a warm abscess or spreading material in the limb. If the patient responds well to their initial treatment as they used it before.
And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary to nourish the patient with foods that cause heavy digestion or are viscous, such as cooked wheat in water, and onions, and leeks, and peas, and cow liver, and eggs, and fresh fish, and heavy wine, and similar items. For at any time of loosening they are moved more quickly and quicker is the breakage.
And know that bones broken in old and weak people do not heal or join well according to their nature due to the withering of limbs, nor also those that are too soft, such as the bones of small children;
but rather apply a cure by fixing the broken bone to its original position, that is through the use of large splints which allow the limb to be joined together, just as it was before; and do not rush its work, for in this situation nourish with large meats, as we have said.
And know that fractures are varied in many ways.
For the breakage of the head is different from the breakage of the foot, or of the leg, and I will tell you all manners of breaking in this chapter. For there are breaks that go to the elbow, and others through prodding, such as the size of a feather for writing.
For there are breaks that go to the elbow, and others through prodding, such as the size of a feather for writing. And if it's a broken bone with an injury, or a break resulting in a small crack.
And each way has its own tool and proper instrument for restoration, according to what memory brings to mind;
It is known as the breaking of the bone by those whose legs are twisted, and opens well outward, and its pain feels upon pressing with the hand;
And when there is no twisting or sensitivity in the joints, and patients do not feel much pain, if there's no breaking of bones;
But it can well have twisting, or a crack, or a small break. If it doesn't suit you to move it with your hand, but apply the remedies that follow, and then gently strain it now.
And know that the breaking that occurred in the arm, and which are the two parts separated, now they should be placed level with each other, so that abscesses reach to the veins;
and if the pus is thick and comes out, if he leaves no day, until the abscess subsides; then put it level with the movement you can do gently and wisely, know that restoring it is easier than in those where there are fragments. Then tighten it, as you will see later on this procedure.
And if in the bone there are broken pieces, if it is divided into two parts, whether they are hands or feet, or by your hand if it's a small limb, or at two strings, or at one string and by your hand;
and position the limb according to its natural shape, so when the parts of the injured member are relieved, you realign them through all your efforts by moving them as far as you can, and ensure that in your work, no harm or pain befalls the patient.
and properly adjust both ends of the bones according to the best shapes.
And feel well with your hand if you think it's not quite right: if it feels good to the touch, and don't strain it too much, don't press like those who bring about abscess drainage and muscle tension in the body as we have many times wanted.
And when the limbs are in place, restrain the patient well so they don't move them, whether awake or asleep, while turning or in any other manner. And ensure that the limb is so secure that no pain is felt. For when no pain is felt, it is not properly placed, and you should put it in a suitable position so that no pain is felt;
For when no pain is felt, it is not properly placed, and you should put it in a suitable position so that no pain is felt; and see to it that it be set straightly, lest any twist or curve remain when it has been restored;
And the quality of the member broken will be according to what I tell you.
Know that limbs broken vary in size and extent, and in shape.
For there are smaller limbs, such as arms and legs and alike; it is necessary to envelop them with soft and subtle linen cloths;
And for those that are larger, such as buttocks and thighs: it is necessary to envelop them with a wide and hard bandage, because the wide bands wrap around the entire large limb, and restrict it equally from all sides, so there is no twist;
Then place light bandages around it, three or four times or two depending on the member, and press your hand a little throughout the bandage, then go above the breakage and restrict less, so that the breakage can move slightly away from the breakage;
And soften that ligament a little bit by a little bit, until you grasp a large part of the healthy side, then take another ligament, and return back and forth on the broken limb;
Then go to the part near the breakage, and gently tighten it, neither too hard nor too soft, as we have said in our first instruction above;
Then place between the heated linen or cloths, until it is perfectly even, then tie everything with one bandage and afterwards put your well made pins on top, if there's no abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or an abscess, then place something soothing over it, that removes the swelling, and leaves it like this for a few days;
Then hold onto your stars, and let them be half the width of a standard reed, or made from the shafts used for making sticks, or from the stems of palm trees, and shape them like this:
but it is necessary that the stars placed on the break be a little bigger and wider than the others;
and let them be as long as is needed for limbs of smallness or greatness;
then hold them on the stars in the same way you did at the first trial, then tie above it an addition string, just like at the first trial on the breakage;
The more narrow it is hereafter, sooner; hence one should have a thread medium in size, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of soft linen.
For if the thread is thick, as with works that bind linens to wooden frames with twisted linen cords, and this is a great mistake, because the binding cannot be uniform if it is too fine, and it does not suit for there to be less than half a do of space between each nail.
And if the patients are sore from the nails of the stakes after the tightening at their healthy parts, then put patches of linen or shoddy wool on them, so they do not blister.
When the wound is inflamed and the joints are broken, I will describe the treatment below.
And know that it is not right to constrain all limbs broken on the first day. For when the limbs are large, it is not recommended to bind them with splints for more than 5 days or 7, or longer depending on the duration of each healing process occurring.
And here is the method of the old plastering to restore fractures, dislocations, and twists: take flour that stands on the walls of a mill, mix it with plenty of eggs, and prepare this concoction not too dry nor too thick, and use it, which is the common way of applying restoring plaster in various configurations, and equally for women and small children, as neither is too hot nor too cold.
Another method for the plastering that restores fractures and dislocations: take three parts of saffron, nine parts of cardamom, eight parts of rue, and one part of asafetida and gum Arabic, in a ratio of .x.3; add myrrh and aloes in the amount of .v.3; mix seven parts of vinegar with this concoction; if the mixture is warm, use this plaster, for it has good composition and heals broken bones quickly, and is beneficial to many people.
Another method for plastering in case of twisting: take mugwort and valerian, each 3 grams; myrrh and aloes, each 8 grams; acacia, 6 grams; boric acid from Armenia, 10 grams, grind well, mix with water or enough egg white, then apply.
Another method for dressing fractures and removing bone pieces, easing pain arising therefrom, and the use of bone cutting and bruising: take new wool, and cook its grease in oil, then place it on the affected area. These dressings do not heal completely but are better for soothing abscesses and properly treating bone pains.
Another method for dressing broken bones that heals them: take dried fig leaves and land beech leaves, grind them together, and make a plaster.
Another method for plastering during the restoration of bone fracture and to promote the healing of the abscess. Take root of vervain, chamomile, flowers of violettes, flour of borage, from each one part; and grind it all together, mix with wine, and if the limb is heated, mix with wet coriander water or just plain water, and use it.
Another method for plastering more forcefully than the first one when an abscess is being restored in a limb. Take roots of vervain and flaxseed, balm, melilot, and wormwood, and flowers of violet and chamomile, from each take one part; grind it all together, mix with salt water or sweet water, or with wine depending on the heat of the limb and its rest.
In his book, Hippocrates states that to restore strength in a fractured limb one should apply a salve made of beeswax and oil, and nothing else more. He says it should be between two layers neither too soft nor too hard.
And it seems to Galen that we should place upon the broken limb for restoration, things slightly moistened but somewhat warm, such as mirr (mastic), aloe, incense and similar things, just as we have said.
Another method for dressing injuries and pain: take the fat and feathers from cooked sheep or goose carcasses, or bird feathers, and ground coriander seeds equally with them. Grind all these ingredients together to create a poultice which you apply to the wound.
Then after a short while, be sure that the patient does not feel any pain and that there is no movement in their bone at its location. If it was not dislocated by hand movements.
And if pain starts at the site, or itching appears, if there's no rest or swelling, then you must act quickly, and reposition it, then apply the poultice; take a light cloth and a wet sponge from the sea, immerse them in water, and hold over his head until the itching stops and the pain is alleviated. Then allow the limb to rest for an hour, then place it on dry wool, moistened with water or rose oil, and tie it up with a bandage until you are sure of removing any pus.
And allow the inflammation to settle on the limb, and alleviate the pain, then resume the gentle treatment, a bit of plaster, and do not exert force as before; continue with subtlety until it is healed.
And if you notice that pus and redness, pain and swelling are subsiding, indicating the injury has healed throughout, then you need plaster and bandaging; start again as you did initially.
And if nothing of what we have discussed happens to the limb, or it does not relax until after three days, four days, five days, seven days; and each time let it rest for twenty days according to observation, as long as the healing process continues, approaching the realignment of the bone.
Therefore, maintain the restraint longer than before, and let his meat grow bigger, as I said earlier. And if you see that his body dries out more than it should, know that no remedies can come from this situation; Let the hot water cure him whenever you reset his shoulder, and do this every third day, and gently clean a bit of the wound;
Through this work, cut out the dislocations from the limb, and hasten what foolish remedies cause, that deform the limb brutally: this is bad, and such operations are useless, and I see no other solution than to leave it alone and operate properly.
Through various methods of breaking up Many ways of breaks exist, and various shapes, and their causes are designated;
For there are breaks caused by the impact of a sword, and injuries to the neck that involve breaking all the bone up to the joint socket at the base of the skull, as with an axe or cudgel; because of this, such types of breakage are called "axehurts".
Or when the sword penetrates the bone from above without passing through, this type of breakage is called "absolute"; and both large and small wounds result from these two kinds of breaks.
And if there is sequential impact, or crack in the bone, or injury from stone, or impact on stone, or other similar occurrences.
And if there is a break that approaches until it reaches the tissue beneath the bone, or above the bone, and this wound can be large or small.
And if there is a wound penetrating the bone as thin as a hair, and this crack is small, and due to this it is called that "hairline" fracture;
And if the wound is made either by hitting with a stone or falling or any similar thing that causes the bone fragment to go inward, and makes the limb bend as blacksmiths do when they are working on pots; it enters the stone inside.
And this happens more in those who have wet bones below such as in an adult's thigh bone;
And occurs through all these ways of breaking where small fragments are lost as with these; and I will discuss them in their own right.
And let us know all the ways of breakages through the diminishment above them, and the examination at stakes, and by the corrupt flesh which is upon.
The appearance of hair can be recognized when one has exposed the bone and rubs it inside, revealing the black breakage.
In treating breakage, beware of adverse effects due to malaise, and if you do not encounter any bad side effects such as vomiting bile, loss of consciousness, stretching, pallor, fever ague, and other symptoms appearing in various conditions, it cannot be cured without doubt.
And if you do not see an alarming mishap, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
And when winter comes first to you, and if it is winter, then it's necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day of the month that you can.
And if it is spring, then you should hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day, in such a way that the pus around the bone is rotten, and accidents occur as we have said.
And if the bone break reaches up to the membrane covering the brain, it is necessary that you split the broken part like this: and when you take hold of the head from the affected side, and expose on the bone in all manners that you can, and more according to the appearance of the wound as much as you can.
And if the flow of blood comes to reveal the bone, or when an abscess ruptures, you use what is necessary, and it is that you fill the wound with wet bandages soaked in rose oil; And let the wound rest until the abscess is calmed and there's no more pain from bleeding; then begin working towards the bone to remove it. This task can be done in two ways as described in this chapter: one way is that you cut precisely at the front, which forms:
And then make another cut larger than the first one.
And the second method is that you have various sizes of knives, some narrow and others wide, and they should be pointed, and made of hard iron; and you use them lightly in your work so as not to injure the head.
And if the bone is too hard, you should drill it internally, so as to apply cuts with awls without going through the soft tissue beyond the bone, and there must be a margin or a circle of about one inch above the point that does not allow the point to go beyond the bone; and you need more than one, so that each goes into its place of the thickness of the bone, so that you have awls for all sides; and this is the shape of the three types of awl cuts.
The quality for drilling through the bone is to place an awl on the bone and twist with your fingers until you know that the bone is pierced. Then remove the awl a little further, and do this all around, then cut out the space between the fractures of the bone, and do it as finely and gently as possible, while still using light force, as we have said, either by hand or any tool you have such as tweezers; make sure not to touch the brain or the spinal cord.
And when you have pierced and treated the bone, it is fitting that you retain the preparation left from the bone to all half inches. However, it must be sturdier and more delicate than another incisor;
and if there remains no little bones or any scales, then gently remove them with tools of a half-inch size; then treat the wound with the gauze and remedies that we have discussed.
And another way of treatment is this, as Galien stated, which is more sparing; and it uses a strong knife, and that is his word. It is necessary first to uncover a part of the bone where the fracture opens and moves. So when you have uncovered that part, place underneath the tip of this ophthalmic incisor, as described here:
And do not cut from one side alone, and have the part divided into two ribs, so that when you are cutting it faces the bone; then with a small hammer from above, so you strike lightly across the entire bone, and be well cautious of the cloth which is nearby;
If it pushes against the bone, do so lightly, because you can feel the bone cause harm and fear.
And if the bone break does not pierce until the cloth and only cuts through from above, with small pieces remaining, then after that roughness, use a fine razor to remove the scales. You must have various quantities of this tool in order to administer the most suitable treatment for each location according to the manual and the appearance of the break.
If you stand before great razors, and after finer ones, and do not stop doing this until it is well done.
In every other hair cutting and delicate breakage, you must adjust your actions according to their direction; this is something that cannot be done by someone who has devoted their study to this craft.
And if it is exposed during surgery, it should be that you take .1 drachm of linen, according to the size of the wound, and mix it with rose oil, and place it on the wound; Then take another piece of cloth, doubled either two or three times, and soak it in wine and rose oil, then place it on the first layer; do this as lightly as you can, without burdening the syfac, then apply a layer of lint over it, but don't pull it tightly enough that it only touches the wound.
And let them be like that for one or two days, until the abscesses have subsided, then release them and apply medicine if it is roots of basil, flour of yew, incense powder, and arisole, and similar things; and make a powder from these things, place it on the wound, and administer antiseptic medicines immediately without causing any irritation.
And see to it that the wound is cleaned immediately, do not leave any ointment behind, nor allow it to assemble in the brain fabric. For when something assembles over the web of the mind, it causes harm and leads to great distress; because when you place a biting thing on the head, it gets irritated from above.
Take care then, so that no harmful events occur to the patient as we have said, in case there is doubt without doubt.
And if death does not come from what medicine we have placed upon it, assuming this has the necessary effect, then you should take one part of honey, and three parts of rosegum oil and one drachm of glue, and place this mixture on the face; Then continue with treatments as needed until it is healed.
Know that neither of the two parts above the nose are broken, or only one if necessary, as these consist of two bones; and the one below is cartilaginous, it does not break, nor will it allow bending or twisting once healed.
And if one of the two parts is broken, you should press your little finger or tip under the nose and make an equal break inside to your second finger, and at the nostril opening outwardly, until the nose revives according to its natural shape; And do this gently, and beware that the patient does not feel pain through your work.
And if the break is above the nose part and cannot reach to its place at the head, then it is necessary that you make it equal to the tip of a stick somewhat thick.
And if the break is in two parts, then remake the treatment, and hasten to restore it on the first day, if you can;
But if not, after the seventh or eighth day when the abscess has calmed down, then apply a poultice of linen to the nose tip, if the break is in one part.
When you pull one to another on the other side, if breaking occurs; and make sure they are as large as they fill the cavities in the nose.
And they say that one should moisten the tents with butter and change each day. I don't think it's correct, but rather they should be moistened in the preparation of egg yolk mixed with powder from grinding; then let the tent remain until the bone is hard and the cartilage is hardened.
And every time you pull out the original or nose feathers in place of the tents, and if it's one egg with an inner layer of skin, and keeps the wound intact, and lets the air pass through; do as you see fit.
And if abscesses come to the nose in the same way as you are doing it, then put a poultice or wet cotton in oil mixed with it, or in one corner of a spoonful of snail juice.
And if abscesses do not come out, you should apply plaster to the surface, made of ash powder and incense powder. Mix it with yolk oil, then place light wadding on top and don't bind it too tightly;
And if the bone fracture is small and broken into many pieces, when you can use suitable tools for this task, then cut along the crack, and clean out the fragments of soft tissue, and stitch them together, as with plasters and ointments that are suitable for this purpose;
And if there is no wound within the bone, then you can clean it out and put on cloths soaked in vinegar, as long as it is sound.
Of the rupture of the jawbone
When the jawbone is broken externally, and there's no wound outwardly, only the fracture is external. It isn't broken into two halves completely; rather it breaks internally as well, which can be discerned lightly.
It is necessary, should the break occur in the right part of the jawbone, to press your index finger into the mouth at the site where the patient is suffering; and if the break occurs in the left mandibular part, you must use your index finger from the right hand, press gently on the break internally, and then proceed with the operation by making an incision externally with the other hand.
And if there is a break in both parts of the jawbone, it must be treated with extension of half parts, until they are equal.
And if tooth movements occur, or rupture, then hold them with a thread of gold, silver or silk. Then place wax on the broken jaw, and place two pieces of cloth on top; and place one large pad well made under this cloth piece, or a leather piece equal to it in length and width according to the jaw size, and tie it on as much as you can. Command the patient to rest, and have light meals.
And if you notice that the figure changes, then reposition it on the third day and thereafter put back into place whatever has shifted; apply plaster to this area, mix powdered chalk with abundant egg or sesame flour after removing the wax; cover the plaster with fine wool, and when the plaster hardens and the patient's position does not change anymore, let them be like that until they are healed; many times it is healed in three weeks.
And if pus-filled ulcers come about, then apply what we have repeatedly instructed.
And if there is a fracture combined with a wound together, reward nothing of the bone has been removed; so much skill in extracting tools needed for this task is required.
And if the wound is narrow, widen it with fire according to your need.
And when you have removed all these pieces and there is nothing left, if the wound is wide, place one plaster over it suitable for this purpose to promote healing until it heals.
with strength The force breaks many times before reaching the shoulder, and each break occurs in three ways: it may break completely and be separated into two parts, leaving fragments that are easier to restore; or there might be a break accompanied by an injury.
And in the cases where there is a break accompanied by an injury, if you have two helpers, so that one marks the shoulder where the force breaks; and the other extends their hand towards the affected part. Then align the break with your fingers, ensuring the shape matches how it should be, without any appearance or movement of the break.
And if you need to extend further, place a round sponge of cloth or wool under the shoulder and side, with its size according to your needs; stretch out and lift the force (meaning pressure), while restraining the sponge in your hand so that you can align the break correctly, as it should be.
And if you cannot draw the head from the strength's force behind it, because it comes forward, then the patient must lie with their head resting on their pillow, and place one of the shoulder's cushions under both shoulders. Have the attendants press the shoulder downwards until the bone of the strength rises.
And then strike the break with your fingers, and if you find fragments, it is necessary to cut there; and pull gently on the pieces. If the bone cannot join at all pressures, then use one of the incisors that you have; but place this instrument against the strength, to guide this surgery:
and make it resemble a spoon, and do not use it in the wrong place, and be as wide as it needs to be, according to the size of the bone and the scale of the work; and have two holes, as you see fit, and one should be wide and the other narrow, as they are the lines of the wound that you made when treating the bones.
And when you are assured of the removal of the abscess, if you suture the wound, and if the rupture is small, or if you doubt about the removal of the abscess, if you cover the wound with bandages and tents according to its quantity.
And when the abscesses are drained, if it is moist, soak bandages in oil rose and in sweat and wine, and place them on top.
The abrasion of the bone, when it is affected by wounds and surgery, involves placing on the bone a plaster made from grinding powder and yolk of egg, and you place light bandages on top. And if necessary, put an eggshell underneath. Then take a very large bandage about the size of your palm in width, then place two double bandages on top of the bandages and plaster. Then take an elongated strip, around seven inches wide and long, wrap it around that bandage so that the end hangs down like the tail of the bandage. And place the instrument on the wound, and turn the bandage around the neck, and under the healthy armpit, and under the diseased one; and manipulate each part separately. And when you see that the cure is taking effect, and you clearly see that the tool doesn't move above the broken bone, then reward each day's effort, and when it heals completely, then he should be restrained;
Let the disease heal on its back, and put him to bed with a small pillow under the armpit to raise his shoulder higher; this will alleviate the pain caused by the broken force, or you tie his arm around the neck, and don't let it move for fear of harmful accidents lasting up to twenty days;
Then reapply the plaster if you see it needs to be done, and tighten him up but leave him like that until he is restored; and she/he will be fully restored at most in twenty-six days, and sooner for some individuals.
From the breaking of the shoulder
Sometimes the shoulder breaks or splits at its end or in the middle, and it might be dislocated by just touching it; if you handle it according to the shape of the break and reset it following its natural form, in all possible ways. Then apply with a powder from the mill mixed with plenty of eggs, light compresses, and place two cloths on top; then place a broad and subtle strip, slightly wider than the shoulder, so that there are no movements around any part of the shoulder. Cover this area with linseed oil wadding evenly; and then tighten everything in one large band firmly, so that the strip doesn't move from its place. Watch the progress each day; whenever it starts to heal, tighten again and make sure the strip is still in place where it should be, keeping the patient's side comfortable. The shoulder will be healed after 20 or 25 days. And when this number of days has been completed, reset it, being assured that it's secure, because what settles is not a bone that can move lightly.
And if a bone fragment is ahead and not at the corner, then do it above, and the wound will open again. Then, follow what we have said about treating bleeding abscesses.
of the breaking of the foot
The foot is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; it breaks more often at the end. And when it's broken in the middle, it gets tilted downwards, causing great pain for the patient, lack of control, and they might suddenly vomit blood, and the movement opens up within the broken bone, and one can clearly feel this sensation.
And in the restoration process, if the patient has been laid on their back, and you place them one and a half cubits between the shoulders, then press the shoulders, and unite both ribs with your hands. Apply slight pressure to make it even in all ways that are possible until the shape of the bone is as it should be; then put plaster and bandages over the delicate salt formation, or another lighter substance, and wrap it tightly in a cloak, tying it around the broken bone so it doesn't move; then turn their back round again, compress slightly towards the sides, and reward each hour with the treatment, if it stretches then tighten. If it seems to come undone due to corrosion or itching that comes with the injury, or pain or abscesses, do it quickly, undo it, remove the plaster, direct the person who has received the treatment according to healing methods; then reapply the plaster and compress until it's fit.
from the breaking of the ribs
Know that the breaking of the ribs only happens after the large bones behind the back, and within the chest, and they bend only because they are slippery; and one can feel it well during examination at the stethoscope.
And for setting it back in place if needed, you should equalize the breakage, just as it should be done. And then apply the plaster, and bind it with a strip, if you need to do so.
And if the breaking of the ribs is occurring internally, one feels great pain and sharp shooting pains, like from miscarriage, because the bone points against the flesh; there are also swellings, aching all over, immediate vomiting of blood, and this is distressing for health, and the elderly have experienced severe agony.
And if there are those who say it is necessary to consume meat that inflates the belly, in order to expel wind from within.
We do not follow this, that pus and sulfur should be introduced if it has not already been there. And if it has already been there, then heal it.
And it is said by none that we apply suckling mounds to the body in order to draw out forms, and this seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the suction cup does not attract excesses to the body due to the weakness of disposition.
And it is said that when one must cover the body with wet wool in heated oil, and to place cloths between the ribs to make the wound equal inside, then follow the treatment of bleeding, of meat and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that it cannot endure through the bone piercing the skin, and there is doubt with the patient, whether or not to cut on the side of the broken rib area, and it is necessary to place an instrument under the injured part; then one must cut into the bone and gently drain it. And then stitches should be applied to the two sides of the wound if it's large, and treated with plasters until healed. And when pus comes out, then wet cloths in rosy oil should be placed on top of the wound, and on the body; and treat while the part is where it should be, until it heals.
Of the breaking of the neck
No break occurs to the bones of the neck, and it does not bend; And when this happens to anyone, and you want to know if they will recover or not, if you notice that their hands are softened, swollen, and dead, and cannot be moved or extended, and when you prick them with a needle, if they do not feel it. Know that they may die in various conditions, and if they remain unaware and do not feel pain even when restrained and released, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient has been cured if care was taken.
And when this happens to the spine in the back, and you want to know if they will recover or not, be wary if the joints are softened, and if there are accidents akin to those found on the hands, and wind expulsion and loss without desire; and when it has been observed on their belly, if it expels without desire. And when it is treated on their back and they want to stand up, if they cannot do so. Know that they may die: if they do not heal with their treatment.
And if this misfortune does not happen to him, then it is a matter of less concern.
And the treatment is such that you remove any pus if it exists, if there is an oil to be applied near the spine or the yolk sac of an egg, until it calms down; then apply a healing plaster and let it dry, bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where one feels pain, until they recover. And if any bone is broken, then cover it with a poultice; and set the bone, then join the two edges of the wound together, if they are large, with stitches, then treat with ointment until healed; and if the head of the bone is fractured, which is called the "broken head of the knuckle", if you have your left hand's bag, place it evenly against your right hand at your power, then apply the plaster and elevation if needed; then compress, and if a broken bone exists, treat it there, and set it, and heal the wound until it heals.
Of the breaking of the hip bone
It happens that the hip bone is broken, and if it does, there may be a slight discomfort at the thigh; and it extends long distances, declines towards the knees, and brings pain to the leg, and bruising where it breaks.
And for the restoration, you should stretch your hand upwards as long as you are over the fracture; and know where the break is and its shape. And if the break is only in the thigh, place it with an equal break until its natural shape is restored.
And if the break extends along or declines towards inside, have the patient lie on their stomach, until you achieve the restoration of that break. And when you have made it even, place it on the plaster, then put it on a stake of wood or charcoal, and hold the wound in place so that it does not move; and apply heat evenly over the back until the wound is even.
Instruct the patient to sleep on their side or on their back.
And if the abscesses burst, do not disturb it until the abscesses are soothed and you place them as we have said before; then return to the process of restoration and tighten properly as needed, provided there is no bad incident; this is how it should be done.
Regarding the breaking of the shoulder.
The assistants are those that lie between the elbow and the shoulder's head, and if it is broken, you must restore it according to one of these two methods: wherein one is that you take a stick one foot long in the middle size, according to this form:
And tie as two bones together, and bend them upwards, fixing the skin on one seat; then let your broken arm rest on the stick until it reaches the armpit, and be bent by half a length of the stick, then bend towards any weight-bearing thing or when the attendants are lifting downwards; then place the broken end equally in front of their hands until the broken part returns as it should.
The other method is that you fix the skin on his neck, and tie the hand to the neck, then command two attendants that one of them shaves the one above the wound with their hands, and the other cuts down to all half an inch, and extend each in their respective parts.
And if you see that the extraction is more vigorous, hold a loop near the incision, and above it, extend each of the assistants to their part. And if the incision is close to the shoulder joint, it's necessary for you to place one loop halfway along the joint, and another towards the knife, near the incision; also if the incision is at the side of the knife, it's proper to place a lighter loop without effort until the incision is level with the joint and the blade; then make an even cut, as fits, and hold it in place, so that if pus doesn't come out.
And if pus does come out, do not restrain for more than seven days, and place on it greased wool in a quiet place and in oil rose until the pus coming out is soothed; then release it, and do it in this way of restraint by placing plaster on the incision, then attach the arm to the shoulder support, and put your hand on the shoulder or breast; place the towel and restrain on the support, and on the arm, such that the arm remains straight without anything preventing it, or if the bone is not broken.
And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use splints, and place on the incision an extra wide and strong splint compared to others, leaving .5 do of space between each splint, and make sure that each splint is large enough to pass across the incision at least 3 do from each side; then apply traction to the splints as I said at the beginning in this chapter on the incision, applying more strength than in bringing closer together.
And when you see the position of the stakes and the tightening, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken member, if you doubt about removing an abscess, if you let it bind until the seventh day, as we have said; then watch each three days the binding, so that itching does not swell up or come to the site where there should not be any pus coming out because it is too tight. If it heals, as we have said.
And if no such events occur, or if the dislocation takes two days or more after the start of the healing process, and if the patient remains comfortable on his back with his hands on his stomach; place one inch thick wool under the shoulder for each hour during which he is to rest. Then watch every day that the figure of the broken limb does not move or soften, nor do you find any pus in the wound. The medicine heals it by its virtue and provides the meat we have placed before as treatment, ensuring that the meat is thoroughly absorbed; when he starts to recover, if it's large. It's customary for both the shoulder and leg to be healed within forty days after all procedures; then you must dislocate again and administer baths and medicines for local treatments until complete recovery.
of the breaking of the arm
The arm is made up of two bones, which are called the 'fosciles'. One bone is smaller, and it is this one that protects the elbow; while the other bone is larger, and it is this one that lies beneath the small head. Sometimes only the large foscile breaks or both might break together.
When the smaller fosciles break, the restoration is light, and the healing; and when the larger ones break, the healing is poorly done, and more painful than when they broke together. If it's only the small foscile that breaks, then gently extending it slightly, and putting it on equal footing would be sufficient.
And if it's the larger foscile that breaks, then you should pull more tightly; and extend it on a cushion, and elevate the elbow of your hand higher than the others, and the smaller fingers lower than the other fingers, and have the patient cross their fingers over themselves, and another cushion in front of them raised, so high that the hand does not suffer any strain; then extend your servant's arm to the part above his hand, or at the elbow, and one other assistant on the other side. Then place the mirror evenly according to their best form.
And if during the breaking into pieces, you place each back in its original position, and if none of them is broken to be grasped by the hand, and you cannot restore it to its original position, then you do work on and the bone, as we said before.
And if during the wound caused by the breakage, which I have discussed in the single chapter; take the treatment.
And if during the beginning of the restoration there are abscesses present, then apply .i. a strip of cerate made from rosin and white beeswax, ensuring it is neither too hard nor too soft; and bind this strip finely above so that when the abscesses are alleviated, they are soothed. Then remove the cerate, and replace with plaster made by mixing the powder from the mill with plenty of egg whites; place the splints hereafter, making sure that the splint corresponding to the breakage is more prominent, slightly wider than the others. And you should know that there must be seven or eight splints in various positions: whether the breakage affects one bone, two bones, and it binds more above the breakage than elsewhere, as I have explained at the beginning of this chapter; and ensure the strips covering the breakage are soft and moist, neither hard nor rough; and use threads made from linen that are not too thick or too thin, as we said. And keep up to bind the limb and its joints for several days. And if any bad occurrences come to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, it should be that you warm the limb with hot water, until that itch is calmed; and let the limb not be left to rest. And then restart constriction, and when this ligament has been split and these bones have been exposed, and similar things, if they are treated properly.
And if precaution is taken so that no distresses cannot come to the limb because it is too constricted, it should be that you soften it with pox (a kind of compress or poultice), and leave it in this manner for a few days, until the distresses have passed, and then you should tighten.
And if none of these things that we have spoken about come to the patient, or if it is allowed to remain unrelieved for up to 20 days. Or until then, then place their hands on the neck and make sure the necks are even, and take care not to move them or to dislocate anything, and let them rest on their back; and know that this swelling has been restored in about 30 days or about 45 days, and perhaps around 20 days depending on the compositions and the nature of the virtues.
Of the breaking of the hand
Know that on the back of the hand and around our thumbs there are few breaks, and only bending happens many times.
And when the sole of the hand is broken or bent, it should be treated so that the parts heal in a straight line and directly in front of him equally; then place his hand on an extended surface, and extend the fingers with the broken bones, placing them evenly under each eye, until they are properly aligned; then apply the bandage and splints if no abscess forms, and then place an elevation according to the size of his bed; and wrap it in one layer of linen.
And if the break is in the heel near the belly of the sole, make a cone of linen and instruct the patient to place it on his broken foot; then draw it tightly onto the heel, and ensure that the elevation is as wide as the hand's sole, and adjust so it fits properly.
And if the breakage is at the front, it is necessary to place an electrode above and another under in the sole of the foot, so that the hand be open and straight, then tie it completely around the hand, and seal the connection between the fingers.
And if the breakage affects neither of my fingers, it's the thumb case, and you should place them equally, as is appropriate; and apply pressure with the sole, and if you see fit to use a small right electrode to lift the breakage, and keep it still; and if the breakage occurs on one of the other fingers like in the index or any other, then you should place them equally, and tie them with a healthy finger that follows; or you can tie all together, considering each's position, or you put an electrode here like you would for the thumb; take care in maintaining and arranging the treatment at each stage, and help those who are coming up against problems, as I have explained.
Of the broken kneecap
The bone of the elbow is often broken, and one can see it when it turns in front and behind; and the restoration happens as follows: first, one ties a bandage above the break, and secondly underneath it. And the wounds lie on their face, then stretch each of their joints to their equal parts; and this is when the break has reached into the bone.
And when the break is close to the elbow joint's base, then tie one ligament towards the wrist, and the other ligament below the break. Similarly, if it is close to the knee, in which case place one ligament behind the knee, and the extension downwards; then place the bones equal to their two hands until they follow its natural figure, and then apply plaster and bandage, and should no abscess occur.
And if there is an abscess to deal with, let it heal first before returning to your work and treatment; the incision is made in such a manner. It is necessary that you wrap around the wound. i.e., bandage it tightly in two or three layers, and retain the excess, then bend the leg until the heels reach the root of the thigh, and insert one long thread between the calf and the leg, under the knee, and guide the thread up through the loops; then continue to wrap around the leg and calf with the bandage, then place a wick on top of the wound, and place another wick on the bone of the leg; then fill the space between the leg and calf with strips of cloth so as to make the pressure equal, then begin to bind tightly in three or four turns around the wound; and when you go beyond the wound, bind more loosely; then take two threads that you have inserted between the leg and calf, and bind them with three wicks placed above, then return under the thread where it was coming from until you reach the ankle; and tighten, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it like this, then if there is no abscess, swelling or other symptom.
And if it happens that it dislocates again, reposition as what we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that catch, it is necessary to extract them if possible; and if you cannot, then it is necessary to cut through the wound, and drain the fluid; and treat in the way we have said, until it heals.
And never is the skin broken in such a way when these needles are inserted, as in the shoulder and arm; however, during this kind of treatment, there should be no harm to the patient.
Know that the skin is restored in about one day, or somewhat more or less depending on individual differences.
from the garden alley
Know that in the garden alley there is little breakage, but it bends many times. And if it breaks, it's usually just a crack, or two pieces missing, and appears on any wound, and even without a wound, and one feels this well.
And for its restoration, we are to make it so that what is round on its ends matches up until they can move together. Then apply the plaster, and place a round wedge if needed, then tighten as necessary. Afterward, confirm all the arrangements we have spoken of in other fractures, like pus formation or similar phenomena; for each condition, use what suits it until it's healed.
of the fracture of the leg
Know that in the leg are two bones, of which one is called by its right name "tibia" and the other is called "fibula"; and any injury or breakage occurs similarly as with the arm, and for this reason, the restoration method is exactly like that for the arm, and the procedures are all the same.
And if two bones are broken together, then turn the leg from all sides.
And if the delicate bones are broken, then turn in front.
And if the larger bones are broken, then one feels great pain and sees it clearly; turn away from there. Then apply extension, make it equal, and fasten the ligaments equally; but still, when the break is ugly and consists of many pieces, the extension should be smaller and lighter; and adjust according to your skill.
And when you have accomplished your task, take two ropes of hawser that bind the leg on both sides and are as long as the leg from the knee down to there; then wrap them twice around each of the two large ligaments above and below, tying them in the middle so that the leg cannot move either right or left. And thus it is well done; and no one should treat with a single rope of this length made of hawser, and they put the leg to rest from movement, doing this properly at the break where there is an injury; and move the leg every day to see if any abscess forms or any other incident occurs; heal it as long as it is sound.
From the breaking of bones at the knee
At the ankle it does not come from breaking, but with bones at the knee breaking occurs and in the legs, there is only force that acts in various positions.
And if breaking occurs at the bones of the knee, and you see these bones press one against another, place those bones in the ground like they wanted to go, just as it would with them trying to move. Then place your foot on their spot where the bones are lifted, press it there until they regain movement in their joints; then apply plaster and bandages over it, and place a small table under his knee for about two inches, then force the knee to its normal position, then wrap cloths around it and other things you need.
And once three or four days have passed, you'll find that the ligaments are equal; whether they were broken or dislocated.
And if any of the ribs are broken, restore them as we have said about the ribs of the hand. Then place a piece under each broken rib according to its length, slightly longer than the rib itself, then place that base on the table I mentioned, and hold it in position; and if there are two or three or more broken ribs, break them, and then for each rib put a piece according to its quantity, wrapped in one piece of linen, and hold the table under this; and while standing over the front edge of the table facing the belly of the wound, make sure to secure it well.
And you must not forget the other things I have said about other injuries, once we've discussed them; and attend to each incident according to how it should be.
of the breaking of the hand bone
When the bone of the natural womb is broken, if she lets it swell, then incline her to the lower part of the back, and hold her from behind; then fill the opening of nature with cotton, and put in such an amount as half a stick; then make the woman stand up again slowly and gently lift her back bit by bit, and then let the cotton spring out until it reaches the entrance of nature, bringing the bone along with the stick; and when she wishes to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has done so, put it back in place, repeating this process for seven days or more: if you see that healing is occurring, take a goat bladder, tie a piece of cane to its opening, and fill the whole bladder with nature; then blow into the cane forcefully until the bladder inflates internally. The natural process will correct the breakage; afterward, fill it with cotton and let her rest for some more days until it heals.
And when the bone of the hand is broken or that of someone else, if it can be restored as we have said concerning the thigh bone; and do not ignore these injuries for those who devote their efforts to them, and hear my book. For the breakage signifies in various positions the right way of restoration: hence, understand this.
In the case of a broken penis, take an oyster shell and fill it with the penis; then wrap it securely in cloth, and leave it for three days or as long as needed, and it will heal quickly.
of fracture with wound
It is necessary for the one who has a fracture with wound, even if it's large, like in the case of a rib or shoulder blade or similar, that it be treated surgically now, so that the surgeries we have mentioned can attest to this.
And if the wound is healing well, one may use vinegar to do so, should you have nothing else; then proceed to heal the fracture in that same hour or day. If abscesses form and remain there, however, then start again on the treatment of the fracture at that point.
And should abscesses continue to form and remain there, let the healing process continue for a new day, until the abscesses are subdued. Don't touch them on the third or fourth day, as you would cause unwanted complications.
And if the bone is broken and visible under the uncovered part of your body, you should place it lightly with your hands, in a small extension.
And if the extension does not appear for you to place it evenly with your hands, then take this tool made of iron which is .vij. or .viij. inches long, and its width corresponds to the size of the wound; and in each case of a broken bone, the surgeon must insert three or four (depending on his needs), according to what he requires for each treatment of fracture; it should be round and slightly thick so that it does not bend under compression against your limb when working, and it should be sharp at both ends, and thick at the middle towards the front.
And it is called 'palainche', so that the curved ends of the bone should be placed on the tip of the visible bone; and strike once, as long as it holds, and make them even against each other. And if the breakage is subtle, and the tools are unable to properly grasp the bone, then you must hold onto the tip of the bone until the tools have the ability to do so.
And if you cannot bring back the bone, as we have said, if you have a suitable tool for this purpose, such as an incisor or awl, use your strength; then remove what is left in the bone of roughness and small flakes.
And when the bone has been returned and the patient feels intense pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place. Do what you can to have it back there, then apply one part of vinegar tincture mixed with black wine; and if this happens in a dry state; and do not put anything like plaster or other thing on the wound where there was an open sore, so that no gangrene or corruption comes about; then give these remedies after you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and apply the dressing all over according to the size of the wound, and take care well that the wound not be strained with friction; and many times have people done this wrongly, causing harm or decay to the patient; and let your treatments be softer and less aggressive than other injuries.
And if the wound is deep or large and you doubt that harmful occurrences might happen there, as we have said earlier, and you find pain in the area, then it does not suit to apply remedies; but cover everything neatly instead of applying remedies, with tough bandages and secure them. And when after one or two days you see improvement on the wound bed, so remove what you had put against all wine, and apply a healing ointment for wounds, such as tetrarmocon's ointment and similar ones.
And it must be that you dislocate the limb twice a day, in the morning and at vespers, until it is joined and healed.
And it should be that the limb is placed so that the bone goes back up slightly gently.
And if this continues for several days, and it can't join at all back to its place, know that there are small pieces of bone, so you should treat the wound with a plaster bandage, and remove all these pieces that cause pain.
And if it leads to a fistula in the place or any other form of corruption, then you should treat it according to what he explained in his chapter above. And when the bone is broken and exposed at the limb, such as the bones of the elbow or shoulder joint, or others like large limbs, do not treat it; many times this leads to death, but let it heal naturally; by chance, it might close after about 20 days or 30 days. Then if you can, cure the wound; if not, leave it as is.
The burns that come from sweat
We often see burns after rubbing the skin by the breeze, especially near joints. An ugly thing to see is how the member's figure becomes; and by chance cannot perform its natural actions on the body.
Take caution then when it is fresh: if you administer any stictch medicines such as aloes, frankincense, and myrrh, sarsagall, aniseed, and similar others, do so according to your preference for any of these things or all together, and mix them with a stichtic wine or with plenty of egg or with vinegar; then apply it on the skin in poultices, squeeze well, and do not remove by hand; afterwards remove it, and start another application until all the lumps are removed. Or you apply on a well-made piece of plaster; for the properties of the plaster so are that it removes all swellings above the limbs; and if the lump has turned into hardness like stone and needs to be removed, then cover it from below, and let the excess show clearly; or take it away with any knife until it is completely removed, and continue treating until it heals.
When the breaking of the bone has been restored and afterwards, the limbs are weak and subtle, this happens due to various reasons: because it was tied too tightly and not as it should be; or because there were too many bindings, and no relief could come to the limb; or due to an excessive amount of swelling; or due to large movements that did not occur in their time; or because he has little blood in his body, being weak.
And the treatment is that you must eat the disease for him, and make his body soft, until the abscess multiplies within him; then give him baths, and make him happy and relaxed. Then put ointment on the limb, so that the ointment attracts to the large swelling, and washes it with cold water frequently, until the swelling aligns with the limb; and restore its natural shape.
If the member is bent after illness
When the limbs are twisted after restoration, and if the bones were broken apart during this process, even though the shape of the limb becomes ugly afterward; yet it does not lose its natural function. Do not believe in those who say one must break the limb anew entirely; many people have followed this advice in our land; these procedures are criticized and lead to great harms and even death. Nonetheless, if the swellings and pains from the injury are still fresh, they should be treated with hot water applications or with boiled soothing herbs like leaves of fennel, roots, and melilot, among other such remedies. And apply one part of a moisturizing plaster; take figs in oil, grind them with cumin seeds, and similar medicinal substances that soften the wound. Prepare this with oil from sesame or grease, then apply as a plaster on top; alternatively, you can gather fatty figs, crush them together with flour from cumin, and other such medicines that reduce inflammation, mix it with fat from lard or oil from safflower, and apply it as a plaster.
And whenever there is an injury to the joint, continuously rub it with wet hands for a long time. And each hour apply movement to the affected limb.
And if the twists are aged and hardened, like bone, and it requires being treated with fire, then cover up to the bone, incising subtly lightly; and apply consideration and study in the treatment.
This begins the book on dislocations
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing great pain and injury to the patient.
When dislocation affects any part, if the situation requires it now, you should attempt to reduce or reset it without delay.
For if one delays and the joints swell, and by chance resets it to its original position; because it is not good to move it when it's swollen at that location: many times this brings pus and other pains;
If this happens, when you encounter such a situation, have the surgeon attend to the patient, and let them rest until all the pus has subsided; then immerse the limb in hot water and oil, gently move it afterwards, and treat each part according to its natural position.
And I have arranged the chapters on shoulder dislocations up until this point.
of the jaw
It happens that the jaws are dislocated downwards, and the dislocations of both jaws occur in two ways: either they are somewhat bone-like at their roots and somewhat softened; or they are completely dislocated and hang down towards the bottom, and expel saliva from the mouth so that they cannot hold it, nor can they close their mouths, and wrap their tongue with their speech.
When the dislocation is small, it can return through various positions.
And if it's complete and accomplished, you should reset it quickly without hesitation;
And in such a way that the doctors cut into the head of the patient, and insert their fingers from one of their hands into the root of the jaw dislocation inside the mouth, if the dislocation is 2 inches; and the other hand should be out of the mouth to keep it level. And instruct the patient to soften, their jaws, and move them in all directions.
And keep the fingers steady until they return to their place.
And if bringing it back causes pain, similarly when the two jaws are together, if they come from hot water and oil, as long as you gently bring them back; do not burn during the attempt to return them, as we have said.
And when they are brought back evenly, and the mouth of the patient feels well when softened, if you place wet cloths in the form of a poultice made from rose oil and beeswax, then bind it gently with soft strings.
And let the patient rest on their back, and if their shoulders are placed between two cushions, so they do not move to either side or strain themselves, but feed them light food until the pains have subsided, and secure the jaws.
And then test this to see if it can be slightly lifted, and does not struggle with opening the mouth for eating or drinking, until the lower jaw is well healed and sound.
And if the two lower jaws cannot be properly aligned within an hour and are not turned back to their original position, fever and chronic fatigue will result, and in some cases, abdominal pain or vomiting will occur.
And when you see this, then know that it is a loss; and many times, death befalls the one who undergoes this within eight days.
from the lever (referring to mechanics or possibly medical tools)
The forces cannot displace from within along the middle of the chest and the back; it is displaced only outward, and one feels this clearly.
And the restoration is such that when you lie back on your back and stretch your arms out; then press with your hands to form them like a palm, she will return; then place on the plaster and the bandage, and compress her.
And the head that is towards the knife cannot be set back; if it's not able to return like this, and when it does get displaced once, you should reset it to its place as we have said; then place on the plaster and the bandage, compress her, and instruct the patient to rest until she becomes well.
And similarly, the head of the shoulder is brought back when it's set free from its place.
On the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder is dislocated in only three ways: one way is when it dislocates at the part below the clavicle and above the elbow; and the second way is at the part near the heel; and sometimes dislocates at the part above, which happens rarely;
And the shoulder does not dislocate behind or inside the nerves; and many times it dislocates downward towards the elbow, even in those with little flesh, because in these cases it moves quickly; for those with enough flesh, it jumps to points, and returns to its place.
By chance, it happens to some men from a blow or dislocation, and the shoulder swells with an abscess filled with heat, and they think that she is dislocated because of this.
So you must verify this thoroughly until you are certain; then you can start the treatment.
And recognize dislocations when it is tilted towards the shoulder blade, and you will see a clear difference between the diseased and healthy shoulder, and you will find their distinct variability among each other. You will find a hollow at the head of the shoulder. From the shoulder blade to the armpit, the head of the shoulder behaves as if it were a socket; and the patient cannot bring their hand back to their nose, nor move it with any movements;
Also, if it is dislocated upwards and not completely hidden, for you will clearly find it at the armpit;
And this way of dislocation must merely be to reposition it, when it is new or if the child is sick.
And the method is that the ministers lift their hand from the disease up, then place their thumbs under the joint, and lift the joint to its full height at the top of its position; and the ministers lift their hand and extend it upwards, putting it underneath; if it comes quickly.
And if it doesn't come as we have said within days, then the sick person should be bathed in warm water; and the practitioner should apply soothing warmth and relief, such as a decoction of garlic and fenugreek and milk thistle in water, and it should be applied.
Then dress the sick person on their back, and place a piece of even wool underneath the joint, not too soft nor too hard, then put the heel of the foot on the piece, and lift the shoulder blade upward, and pull the hand towards the diseased area.
And another minister pricks the back of his adversary's neck, so that he cannot move downwards; that shoulder returns now completely, and if you see that you reset it in this manner:
And it is that you make the space present .i., at home which should be larger than the adversary's; and is upright towards the costeit side, and pushes the shoulder onto the slope of the neck, and lifts the slope upwards, so that the adversary hangs in the ar. And another minister pulls the hand from the adversary's neck downwards towards the belly. And if the adversary is too light, then by no means bear any weight with him, and the dislocation returns now.
And you also reset it in another way: and that is to stick a long piece of charcoal in the ground, so that the head is balanced like one pistol, and should neither be too big nor too greasy; Then have the patient place their hand near the wound but with a shield under it, and let the limb stay as long as the length of the staff. Then extend your other hand down from above, forming, and the joint will return to its place quickly.
and if she doesn't return with all these things that we have said, then do this treatment: take one staff of two strong arms and four large rods which allow the head to easily enter from all sides, according to this form:
then tie the staff with a shield underneath so it doesn't hurt the patient, then place the staff under the wound on the patient; and extend your arms along the staff as long as needed, and tie the brace onto the staff, and the arm at the hand's head, then put the arm on one of the pegs of the same size from below, and keep the hands down, and leave the body hanging on the other side: the joint will return to its place now.
And when she is in this condition, no matter how it may be, if you need to place a piece of equal thread over the joint, then apply plaster mixed with flour from the mill, along with incense and egg yolk oil over the entire shoulder and around it, then remove the thread when done applying, and tie the bandage over the plaster, and wrap your hand around her neck, and keep your hands in this position.
And it is necessary that he nibble a little bit, until the limbs are strengthened, for they will heal faster; and then nibble more after about five days or seven, and move them; and if it is firm and not softened, it has healed.
And if the joint is loose because of moisture or for another reason, it is necessary to administer three applications of a cautery tool, as was explained in the chapter about cauterization.
And if you do all this, and it dislocates after seven days, and the joint doesn't hold, and can't lift your arm upwards, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is either cut, stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never properly set in its place.
Dislocation around the buttocks and breasts, or behind, happens due to pushing and stretching of hands, and it can occur elsewhere; and treat as long as they are in order.
And if after healing there are still pains in the member and late movements, then one should bathe their body many times, until those pains ease away, and it returns to its original condition.
From the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder joint is dislocated at its points and returns there; if it has been dislocated from all sides, even in front and behind, and this dislocation does not respond, because one sees and feels it clearly; it can be dislocated according to each figure. And when you join the shoulder bone with your healthy side, if you can see it clearly. For the joint is bony and cannot bend the arm or touch their shoulder in any way.
And it must be reset in such a way that abscesses can be extracted and heal, because if abscesses were left untreated, they would cause trouble upon reattachment; and sometimes cannot be fully restored even when behind; this is worse than other dislocations, and causes more intense pain, and occasionally leads to death.
And the restoration is such that if you can bring it back to this manner: you extend its hand with both of your hands; and its arms are spread out, and the hands point towards the center according to the line of the elbow, inside and outside, and you push the joint onto its bones together, or at the base of its palm, until it reattaches in its place.
And when the dislocation is forward, it returns whenever it doubles its hand with its own and pushes from the base of the palm using the lever that is dislocated.
And if it does not wish to return to its place, then apply strong extension; and when both administer extend the arm, and hold it in check with both hands, so that it does not move during extension. Then turn the arm from each side, then once you have wrapped a long and wide cloth around it;
And when the eyes grasp the joint with their hand, if they apply any oil to soften the joint, then press the joint firmly, until it heals;
And when it is at the shoulder, if she places dry plaster with egg white upon it, and presses it firmly, then allow the arm to be bent against the side of the body, and leave it for some days, then release it.
And if the joint is firmly in its place, release the tie and leave it alone; and if you see that the joint has not set well, reapply the plaster and the tie again, and leave them like this for a few days until it is firmly in place; then release it.
And if it feels sore after the resetting of the joint and it moves again, bathe and rub it beautifully, pressing until it is relieved; or you can place a fat sheep's wool on the joint, then leave it for one day and night, then give it to an osteopath to bathe him. And when it sweats, you rub the joint gently, then set the bone back in place, and then submerge it into water; and thus do this one or two times or three times until it is healed; and if possible, place on cow's wet and heated fat with butter, and apply that; if it returns to its correct position.
The dislocation of the hand
The hand joint has dislocated, and the return is light, more so than other joints. It's necessary to bring it back to its place immediately after it has been dislocated, in the same state when it was dislocated, thus making sure that the limbs swell or an abscess occurs.
And the realignment is that you place your hand on a table and extend the minister's hand, and you make them equal, in such a way that they place their palm against the appearance of the joint, and hold it until it regains its position.
Otherwise, it must be that you check if it is correctly aligned; then have the patient place the back of their hand on a table during extension and realignment. And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then have the patient place the back of their hand on the table, and you put your hand against that appearance of the joint. If it returns to this position now, it is correctly realigned.
If not so, if they hold back with plaster that soothes abscesses, and leaves him thus without needing to start again.
And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back into place after some days, then the joint remains twisted;
And it does not harm the patient for as long as the arms are immobilized and cannot exert any force: thus you know that the nerve is cut, or the artery; if there is no other option but to apply a cautery in this case, and by chance there is nothing else.
And when the arms are in place, put on the plaster that we have described, then apply pressure and leave it for five days, then release and leave him like this.
And if he cannot move it well, and there is no swelling, with hot water, and rub it until it becomes clean.
of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Neither are the fingers of the hand ever released to one side, nor on the back of the palm or the belly;
Therefore keep the fingers, and prevent the dislocation in your pockets until it heals, then support the head of the finger, and bend it towards the part where it was separated.
And let it two days, and then put the patient level on that day; and during those days do not tie him up, as we have said, and undo his bindings at night, and make him move him each day; and rebind him in the morning; and repeat this process until it is snug.
And do it similarly if it is dislocated in the front of the shoulder, and do this as you did before until it heals; and do it similarly when it is dislocated on the other side.
Careful repositioning of the ankle, care of the back
When it's dislocated in the back or neck, or there are multiple dislocated (shoulders), if there is no treatment, for death comes to the patient quickly.
And the signs are such that the expulsions go against one's will, not being able to hold them back, and many times parts of a member, or both feet, or both arms, or one
And it often happens that the elbow bends at four parts; the one that bends behind is called 'gibbosity':
The treatment is such that you should address if the gibbosity has come from childhood: if there is no cure or healing at all.
And the one that comes from childbirth or impacts or similar things, according to old methods of treatment through grand words, there was no benefit in all.
But I have shortened it according to my intention, and formed instruments in various ways.
I say that in the inflammation that occurs before the anus, none has any health;
And likewise those that come straight to the two ribs, and one cannot cure outside of that which comes directly to the back, as I say;
And it is that the sickness be spread over his belly for one league evenly, and have strain underneath him, so it does not blister;
Then stick a piece of charcoal in the earth and another at the heels, and tie a band around the knees of the patient,
And two surgeons know how to tie them, one on the head and others at points, among the two prongs;
And be well closed, the prong as we have said, and the surgeon place her palms on the spine form until she regains consciousness.
And if she does not return from this cure, take a board of three spans long, and place it over the body, and if the patient is on their side, have them lay their head on the edge of the table. Then place the center of the table on the spine. And have the surgeon place their feet on the other end of the table, pressing firmly until they regain consciousness at their head; and if you see that it turns to the arm turning towards the hand, do it in that position.
And you should place two needles at the shoulder of the patient's arm from top to bottom, and between each needle, directly above and below, one palm's length of space;
And in each needle there should be two threads, or if it's the elbow area, and the needles are firmly planted into the ground so they don't move; and between each of these two needles, place one twisting needle, because with them the elbows twist, and there should be two small needles of one palm's length between the twisty ones, to twist the elbow.
And then tie the thread that's between the elbows at the elbow towards the shoulder, and the other thread towards the feet for the other elbow, and each of the servants twists their elbow with respect to all the thread, and the masters make sure they twist equally as we have said.
And when they are equal, place them on a drying plaster with plenty of egg whites, and then beat them, and then apply lard from a tablet the size of three inches. The area around the boil and the healthy part of the spine should be rubbed by this preparation. Then tie it with a string, as we have said, and let the patient feel slight discomfort until it is healed.
And if nothing comes to the end of health, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines with the preparation that we have said before; and each time it is administered, give one piece of lard.
And if there is any appearance behind the lower spine in the back, be careful that it might be a dislocation; and it's the bone that opens up, so we should not have presumption about it: accidentally it could bring death.
Dislocations of the hip
Know that the joints of the hip and the shoulder joints only produce dislocations, they do not behave like other joints; and the hip joint is dislocated according to four parts: inside and outside, front and back; and more inside than out, slightly dislocated in front and behind.
And the knowledge of its dislocation from inside is that when you join the diseased leg with the healthy one, it becomes longer, and the diseased knee opens further than the healthy one, and the diseased knee cannot bend to touch the fire. And it is when the leg is swollen below due to an abscess, because the head of the hip bone comes there.
And the sign of him who comes to the death, is that this event is contrary to what precedes.
And the signs for him who approaches beforehand, are that his leg is well according to its completion; yet, neither double nor walk without pain, and if you try to make them walk, they cannot do it before, and retain their urine, and swell the ankle, and when he walks, he walks on the heel.
And the signs for him who approaches from behind, are that he cannot spread his foot out, nor double it, and one leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and there's swelling in the calf up to the knee over the ribs.
The correction of this sign suggesting dislocation is that you should recognize if the dislocation is old and remains in its position, without any treatment needed; and there's no need for assumption about it.
And for those whose dislocation is recent, and there are four ways of dislocation, if you hurry to restore the joint, and stretch it inside and outside, and move it to the right and left; if by chance it returns into place, no other treatment is needed.
And if it does not return in this way, then you should apply one strong remedy, and hold the leg strongly with two hands, or at one place where the limbs are tied above the knee; and another remedy extends his hand above in such a way that he kicks out his hands from under his buttocks, then forces it with one puff of strength against the thigh; and another holds the head on the rope;
And extend upstream and downstream all at once, until the patient is lifted off the ground in one go, and remains hanging.
This way of extension is common for four similar cases, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is indeed well.
But if not, you should treat it according to its similarity. When the dislocation is in the chest cavity, it's necessary to support the patient on his healthy side, then place the bandage on the root of the arm, and above the armpit, then secure the bandage towards the armpit and the back;
Then secure another assistant with his arms and hug the largest part of the diseased arm, and extend it upwards in this form: if it returns to its place now; and this kind of dislocation is lighter than others.
And if you cannot tighten it in this way as we have said, then you should tie the two legs of the affected area together with a firm rope under the heels and knees, and make sure that the injured leg is stretched out more than one foot compared to the others.
Then have it hung from the head of a post, and add two spans above the ground; then instruct one minister to hold onto the head of the chicken, and have other ministers with the affected area hanging as well, who should hold onto the chicken's neck firmly because the joint returns quickly now.
And when the dislocation is in front, if you lie down with the affected area, as we said for those who are flexible, and pull one rope on the injured leg correctly, and also on the foot.
Then put two needles, one on the head and the other in a convenient place; then stick one needle between the thighs at the patient's armpit in the shape. and place damp cloths around him, so as not to irritate the patient, then extend each physician towards him, and make the patient lie with his hand in line with the dislocated shoulder.
If it returns, that's good. If not, place him on a table, and press him like we have said in the case of dislocation of the knee, and let the patient lie on the healthy side.
And when the dislocation is in front, it should be stretched out as quickly as possible, and according to what I have said; and place the patient's pain on the diseased side, then press with the other hand, and stretch down towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is at the back, it doesn't make sense to stretch the patient's back, or lift them from the ground, rather it should be positioned as when their hip was dislocated behind them, just like we said about lying on both hips. And upon their face, and the neck stretched as we said previously, and must apply pressure to the joint at the table;
And it will be right when the limbs are extended and equal; then adjust the thighs, and place the plaster, and apply a bandage, so that the hip does not move.
And let them rest for three or four days, then release and place the plaster; and if you see that they are equal, tighten as before, and leave them for another three days; then release and allow them to walk properly until the limb is reinforced.
Of the shoulder joint dislocation
The shoulder joint can be dislocated in three ways: to understand this is as follows, either internally or externally, and behind; and it does not dislocate forward.
And the signs for this are that you instruct the patient to bend their leg at the knee, and if they cannot reach their knee, know that it is dislocated.
And for the restoration of all this is that you make the patient sit up straight, and if they can extend their leg, do so, and place your back on their thigh, and put their foot on your feet.
Then take his knee in your palms, and draw it between your fingers, then bend the two sides of the knee joint; and some other attendants spread his feet as far as the knees return to their place. And the signs are that he has comfortably moved his leg slightly with respect to his thigh.
And place the plaster on, and allow the leg to be in line with the thigh, and join them together tightly for three or four days. Then release it; and do not move any part of the wound until the limbs are strengthened.
And if the limbs are not yet properly aligned, apply strong extension therapy, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
Of the dislocation of the heel
The heels are never completely dislocated and neither fully out of place, both inwards and outwards.
And the signs are that the ankle swells, and it tries to move forward towards the part where it is dislocated:
The readjustment is quick; you should gently stretch it with your hands when it's only dislocated.
And when it is dislocated right away, you should have the patient sit upright, and hold them one and a half lengths of your body length by their leg, above the ankle;
then pull their foot towards you with your right hand and then with the left twice, then extend them upwards, and firmly hold their foot high;
and do this twice, as we have said, by gripping and pulling the foot; if it returns, that's well; if not, start the process again because it will return.
and if it cannot return in this way, you should let the patient lie on their back on the ground, and place one stick firmly in the ground between their buttocks, and tie cloths around them so that they don't hurt the patient.
Then the ministers burn the leg, and other ministers extend his feet to his hands or two inches below the knee, as he ties them above the neck of the foot; Then extend each minister equally, and have the helper placed between the legs of the patient to hold the patient when they are extended.
Then put the dislocated joint in equal position at your hands, and other ministers burn the healthy leg at its base; the dislocation will return quickly.
And when it is in the right position, put on the plaster and fasten it up, then tighten properly, bind the foot to the leg, and guard the nerves that are above the ankle bone, so the bandages should not be too tight.
Then leave it for two days or three, and if the patient sweats, remove them; then release it on the third day or the fourth, and continue to guide the person for four days; And even if he goes beyond this, it doesn't mean that he won't dislocate again.
And if pus comes out at the incision site, it is necessary that you soothe it, just as we have said in other places, while it remains clean.
Of the cautery made with fire, command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When the shoulders are dislocated, if they can be properly stretched like in manual work, it's a simple task.
And if the dislocations are in no bone of back or feet, it's necessary that you make the patient lie down on their full back or on the table completely straight, and place your foot on what opens from these joints, then press with your foot firmly until they regain consciousness.
And when they are even and do not open anything, place under the foot of the patient a board with two shoulder heads, then hold them in form, and leave him for three days, then release him; and make him rest until he is well.
regarding injuries and dislocations together
When an injury comes with a dislocation, and one needs to restore it, many times it happens that the patient dies:
if you are not presumptuous in the treatment, and if you are knowledgeable in the art and have practiced it for a long time, and if you are compassionate and merciful but patient, do not be reckless;
And at the beginning of things that soothe, remove a hot abscess, and leave the patient in God's hand, if you do not see hope for recovery; And when you see hope, then reset the limb in its place immediately, so that the abscesses are removed and heal.
And when the limb is in place, administer remedies that soothe abscesses and heal wounds, according to what is necessary, with drying ointments.
And if there's a break due to the dislocation, and small bones are exposed, set them back in place, and do as we have said for simple illnesses.
And protect yourself from entering the path of fear, according to what I have said, because this is worth doing in accordance with your Creator, and for the knowledge that you arm yourself and guard your body. Amen
