You, dear children, I have completed this book which is the summary of medicine's knowledge at its end, and finished it through its explanations and by its declarations. And I saw in my vision that I would complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of manual skills, namely "surgery".
And because the work of hands is practiced in our region and is everywhere unknown, so it has been lost and its knowledge has been taken away, and nothing remains from it beyond the small descriptions in books by the ancients that were handled by the hands. And from this has come error and vanity, and closed minds, and science has been moved away.
It seems I should revitalize this treatise altogether according to the path of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and will follow together the forms of the cautery instruments and other tools for use with their adjustment and preparation, just as it is necessary.
And because no good masters are found in our time for this reason, the art of medicine has been extended. And it is necessary for the one who interferes to master in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, until they know the location of the limbs and their shapes and connections and separations, and have knowledge about bones, nerves and arteries, and the number of bones, and their movement and rest positions, and where their exit lies.
And thus says Hippocrates that rest with rest is much, and work with work is little; and similarly in the art of the hand.
We tell you at the beginning of this book that if someone is not aware of what has been said before, they might commit errors and waste others' time; just as I have seen many times more than once with those who interfere in this science and abandon their knowledge and lack of experimentation.
For I saw a foolish surgeon who amputated one of the neck ulcers or a woman's goiter, and cut into her arteries around the neck; because so much blood came out that the woman died in her surgeon's hands.
And I saw another surgeon who treated a stone in an elderly man, and the stone was large; he took with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
And I have already been called to remove it, and saw the position of the wound and the size of the stone, and indeed if they operated on him he died.
And I saw one other case which was treated by draining Duke of our land who had his leg broken, and with the breakage there was an injury; and the patients were full of ignorance causing the break to occur in the wound from being treated roughly, and did not allow any healing at all for the injury, and did this until one month; and he was commanded not to move it again; so he stayed like that until his leg was completely swollen and his feet, and resulted in ruin.
I was called to come to him, and I hurried to relieve the leg; and when I heard it being dislocated so smoothly that he did not feel any pain.
But all the corruption was already established or throughout a member, and could not be cured; and the corruption did not cease to spread within the member until the member was completely lost.
And see a second wound that collapsed an abscess in a crooked way, and then inflamed due to the mischief of its lordship.
For a gangrene, when it is of dark bile humor, one should not touch it with iron if it is in its place so that all the corrupted parts can be removed.
And for this reason, dear children, you need to know that the work of hands is divided into two parts: that is to say, one where there is danger in multiple dispositions; and I will show you in each section of this book where it has power and danger.
Because it is necessary for you to keep this advice, so that the foolish might not wrongly speak of you.
If you take your weapons in consideration, and treat your illnesses lightly but firmly, and use the best way so that through God's grace you come to salvation and be blessed; and leave the terrifying diseases without complaint of healing; and remove your weapons from those who make you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can come from this world to another one with glory.
Galien states in some of his admonishments: "Do not take ill disease into treatment, lest you be called a foolish observer."
I have composed this treatise according to three chapters.
The first chapters deal with fire cauteries and medicinal cauteries, and the chapters are organized from the head down to stones; and about the shapes of instruments, and the metals for cauterization, and all that is necessary in the operation.
The second chapters concern cutting and piercing, and suction cups and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar matters; and these chapters are organized with descriptions of instruments.
The third chapters deal with restoring dislocations and twists, and similar matters; and they are arranged from the head down to stones, and include descriptions of instruments.
As we remember from the work, it is necessary for me to discuss the quality of each remedy and its harm associated with each temperament.
I state that the qualities of assistance, and the harm, are the longest word and subtlest science and the secrets respond. And many wise people spoke about this, agreeing with it; and they satisfy me with their words, for I fear lengthiness.
I state that the cautery helps universally for any complexion where there is matter, because there are two kinds of complexions: this means hot complexion with substance and dry complexion with substance.
In the hot and dry complexion combined with matter, they divided their thoughts and said that the cautery is a great aid. And the other group said the opposite: that the cautery only helps in diseases caused by heat and dryness.
For the nature of fire is so hot and should not be treated with hot illnesses by heat or drying. And it contradicts those who say otherwise, that the cautery provides great assistance to hot and dry diseases that come into the bodies of people. For when you compare the body of the person and their moisture to the nature of fire, you find that the body is cold.
And I agree with this word. For I have found it true on every occasion by experimentation.
And for all procedures, do not interfere except that which has been proven and by long use is known the chapter of cautery, and the variety of human complexion, and the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the occurrences and time period; we have no fear from other complexions, especially in cold and moist diseases. And all the parts should assemble and align with the cautery.
Know this, my children, that assembling a fire-based cautery contains secrets of healing and yields even greater goodness than a burning medicine cautery.
For fire is simple, and does not come forth from any member that is cooked, and does not harm another member if it's not named.
The fiery medicines spread from one part of the body to another, causing diseases in various parts; and sometimes they displease the patient.
Fire, due to its high quality and the goodness of its substance, does not cause this if there is no excess.
And this I have found through experimentation and the length of my service and study in the art, it aligns with the truth of things; and because of this, I apologize for the length of speech, as I do not wish to withhold from you the secret of fire and its quality, how it removes diseases from bodies, as the philosopher explains when demonstrating. Receive it into your thoughts.
And know, boy, that they decided when the cauterizations should be done, and read prayers.
And I say that cauterization is suitable in all times, because the harms arising are most removed by the help of the cautery; and likewise if the cauterizations are for necessary pains that cannot wait until greater evil befalls the limb.
And never think like those foolish people, child; for there is no recurrence to a disease cured by cauterization. They say it this way: but they are mistaken, because cauterizations are only medicine that changes the complexion and dries out the fluids causing pain, which is more effective than medicine for hastening recovery, and due to the power and authority of its work.
And the possibility is that the disease does not return at all according to the complexion of the patient and the location of the illness and its effects; they are gathered together in him through the acquisition of foods and similar things. If no cauterizations are administered or if there's little excess and moisture, as with cauterizations for pain, and similar conditions, then this kind of pain does not return again; but this happens rarely.
And not many people understand why cauterizations are named the last of medicine, and this can be seen; but they do not believe that cauterization is worth after medicine. But their understanding is false, and they say cauterization is the last of medicine because when our methods for cures in any disease do not work, then we administer our cauterization, and it works. Thus clearly cauterizations are the last of medicine, not according to the understanding of those who say otherwise.
The old ones said that gold cauterizations are more effective than iron ones and they stated this because of the quality of gold and its high substance. They also mentioned that the skin under iron cauterizations does not rot; however, it's not true as I've proven it myself and found that in some individuals, it can indeed happen. Gold cauterizations are better than iron ones, just as they said.
And yet, when you heat the gold tool, you do not realize that it is heated by the color of the gold, and it quickly cools down; and if you heat it too much; then put it in fire; thus, there is enough prevention.
And for this reason we use our metal cautery which we have prepared for our work.
So I have organized this chapter about the shoulder joint up to the elbow, so that one may find it more easily.
oil cautery
The fire cautery works with moisture and cold on the brain. There are two ways to do it due to an illness called 'soda', and due to many fluids that descend from the head as sweat, from ears, and because of multiple dreams and toothache, throat pain, and especially for all diseases that come from cold such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
The form of this cautery is such that the patient is cleansed by a dissolving medicine altering the head. Three or four times, or five times according to how well the powers and the strength and the habit of the patient can bear it; and then wash off the head of the patient.
And then place his hands between yours and put your hands under his nose. After that, place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two nostrils; and let it come where your middle fingers are, if blood is drawn out, then heat up the cautery which is called 'olivare', from which here is its form:
And place the joint in its natural position with ink, and guide your hand downwards and sideways gradually and steadily while turning it; then lift your hand alone, and check if you see bone. If you don't see any bone, continue with the cautery until you do see bone as I have instructed; after that take one pinch of sand, put a moistened cotton inside and place it in the joint, allowing it to be there for three days; afterwards apply a butter on top of a cloth; leave it on until the scorching disappears; then treat the wound with the ointment known as 'tetrafarmaçon', continuing until it heals.
And if they said that the older ones believed, when a wound stays open longer, more pus discharges out; and because of this advice moves.
And it was said by none of them that we should let the cautery burn for so long that part of the bone becomes ashes, and then one must set back what has been burnt from the bone, and treat it.
And they say the other that we must let the cautery burn there and press so hard that it raises as wide like a small egg that women place in their bellies because fluids can be expelled out of it; and should we leave the wound open for a long time afterwards; after this, we should clean it and dress it.
And these two ways of using a cautery do not seem to me to be good in every respect, except when it comes to certain patients with fear; and I believe that I should leave them alone; because the joints become weakened by continuous exposure to nature's fluids, as we demonstrate with other limbs; and even when the joints are weak from nature itself, and my first experience of using a cautery is more healing and soothing for me, and in doing so I gather together salvation.
from the old head pain
When throughout the entire head comes chronic pain that lasts for a long time, one should use the patient's fingers and pills which are called "cochies," and also do cleansing of the head and ears with bandages; and if one performs the cautery as we have previously mentioned to them, then it proves effective.
Take care that the shoulder of the patient is of strong nature and not too cold; therefore, apply the cautery slightly over the part where we previously mentioned to do so.
After apply the cautery to each horn of the head up to the bone, just as we have said previously, and perform one application of it over where it is called "vessel"; and make one application of it in the place where suction cups are placed; and lighten your hand so that you do not go beyond the bone: patients feel more intense pain with this cautery than others, and I will discuss this further elsewhere; and it should be noted that the applications to the horns should be subtler than that used for the middle part of the head, and it's the form:
A fire cautery, for the purpose of a patient, instructs them to let their hair grow long and even; and if it starts pricking at its base when they are young, one should hold steady so as not to move until they fully grow. When pain suddenly comes to a part of the head and extends till to the eye, and if the shoulder is purged by mild medicines, and other treatments I mentioned about diseases have been done in the division of diseases, but none of them help: then one should do cautery according to two ways, meaning with medicine water and fire.
The medicine water cauteries involve you taking a spoonful of oil, and then applying the bark and dressing to two pieces each for both shoulders, in such a way that you can place the spoonful of oil on the skin; and when it is placed, ensure it adheres well and leaves it like this for 12 hours. Then remove and treat with garlic butter until pus comes out.
After the oil cure until it is healed; and if you see that doing some of those burning medicines that I have written or the first treatment of burning medicines works for you.
The iron cautery is done in this manner. Heat up the shape of the cautery as described:
And call it "closed" because its head is made in the shape of a bell or has .i. inch of curvature, and at the middle there's a small appearance; put it over the painful area, hold your hand and slightly rotate the iron, until half of the thickness of the flesh burns; lift your hand to avoid burning the artery, which will start bleeding abundantly.
After this, place cotton in the form of a bandage and keep it on the affected area for .iij. days; then apply moistened cotton with butter, and continue oil treatment until it heals completely; if you wish to cauterize this migraine using the iron cautery ('cultellare'), do so at its tip but be careful not to cover the artery in this part of the migraine that is not old.
From headache
When you cure headache as we have previously described in divisions of diseases, and it is not effective, and you notice that the cauteries mentioned earlier from medicine do not work on the iron, then it becomes necessary to heat the cautery known as "cultellare" until it turns white; and do this at a length of half a foot along the arm, and take your hand once, and strain until you no longer touch the artery and only reach up to the bone; and guard against the jaw that closes when eating, and let the tongue only care about closing and not allow spasms to affect the patient, and guard against bleeding from the artery when it is cut, or if cutting it causes great fear and similarly for those who are untrained and inexperienced; and leave your work half done; but I will tell you how to stop bleeding when the artery has been cut, and I will show you where it happens in this book.
And if you notice that these cauteries do not work on the illness, and the patients are suffering, apply them to the middle of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it heals; and if you see this, use the cautery that we said or from chapter on extraction of the artery, with a two-bladed cautery; and these cauteries are better than that one and more effective.
of the pain of the ears due to cold
When pain comes from cold in the ear, and we have tried remedies that dissolve and others of the treatments we discussed in this division, and if the pains do not subside, then apply this type of cautery called 'points', which is described thus:
After applying the 'points' all around the sick ear, or all around the two where the pain is located in both ears, and move away slightly from the root of the ear after you have indicated its location. Place ten points around each ear; cure the area until it becomes healthy.
of mouth agony
Tortures that should be cured by cautery are only those that move due to the flow of blood, as we have stated in the divisions of diseases; and no cautery is to be done for those that come from scorching and inflammation of nerves.
When you treat this kind of torture that moves due to the flow of water and from clearing the head, as well as gargling, if it responds well, then it is necessary for you to apply the cautery with three applications: one in the root of the ear, and another slightly beyond the temple area, and the third at the adjustment between the two lips; and place the cautery on the healthy part that opens up, and apply it right where the head of the ear is just under a bit above the ear wax, and another on the temple as long as about an inch; and leave the cautery there until half the skull is burned; and this is how you should do the application of the cautery:
And there is the appearance of the cutler's burn that we have described previously, but it is somewhat more subtle and requires that the knives be a bit thicker; after the treatment of the area as I have said before, until it becomes healthy.
When dealing with an old stroke, you treat it as we have said, and if it does not benefit, and the patients do not have a fever, then let him undergo four cauterizations: two on each of the four head corners, one under the head, and one on the neck in what is called 'watches' as we have mentioned before, and the last one at the mouth of the stomach; and treat it accordingly as we said previously.
from Liturgy
For this illness, you should give the patient large pills and brain-purifying pills to cleanse their brain; afterwards, let them rest with their head high. And place the camphor plaster on the back of the head; and here is how you do it like a cautery: do it as I have said.
If it remains in this state, well and good; and if not, let him undergo three cauterizations down the neck to just below the collarbone, and leave an interval of one finger's width between each cautery. And treat as with others, and if you see it fitting together, and the patient endures, let him undergo a third cauterization in the middle; and if required, two more on top of the two horns, and treat until it is in this state; and let the cauterizations be called 'olivare', as I have said before.
Of the coldness of the head It is necessary that the head be cleansed of years and what we have said before; after treating the head with the patient, then let him undergo cauterization down the head and on each horn, and one behind and three on the spine below the neck; and if you need more, and if the body is moist and the patient endures, and the disease has spread, then let him receive four cauterizations on the spine of the back; and leave until the most pleasant cure becomes dry, and lift your hand; afterwards treat until it is in this state, and let the cauterizations be called 'olivare' as we have said before.
From epilepsy
The epileptics should only use the cautery for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to first modify the brain with years and other remedies that we have discussed in the section when the organs are large and suffer from physical illness.
And if this is a child who cannot bear it, make gargling and chewing often with good meats; after that you place the head in the middle, and I perform one cautery according to what we have said before, and another on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the organs are far out and suffer, make cauterizations like I said for those who have paralysis and softening of muscles, on the spine both at the back and neck, and apply olive wood cauterization as I said previously.
And if the organs are female, make one subtle cautery according to this manner:
When due to the reason of melancholy are excesses or substances corrupted and large bile flows, therefore the part cautery of fire cauteries as we have said to him who has paralysis.
And if due to the cause of melancholy are the excesses declining into melancholy, and is the body of the malady moistened, then it should drink something so that the brain may be purified, according to what was before in the division.
After removing the head of the malady; afterwards make two pieces of linen well made, as one circle, put them under the head; and if the malady is seated, place it so that it is held in all directions; after that present the liniment, and apply butter from old beeswax; and heat it on a moderate fire, until what you pour can be tolerated; afterwards empty the circle through the center with the head under it, and let it cool; and do this to each part of the malady once per week with another good method, until it is healed.
If you see that the cauterization has been done by making several burns throughout the entire area of the cautery. This method of cautery moistens the brain more significantly; and then place damp cotton, butter, and gelatine fat on it.
of the pain in the eyes When the pain first comes to the eyes through the symptoms I have mentioned in the division, then start and continue to instruct the patient on things that purify the head, and keep him/her away from all moistures, and make him/her sweat or take baths several times fasting.
After having him/her direct his head, and make him/her cauterize in the head area, and make two cauterizations on each temple when the pain subsides from both eyes together, or when the pain is subsiding only from one eye; and apply this cauterization to all veins and arteries that are around the brain, and make sure they are cauterized long according to the width of the temples; and watch for bleeding out, and if you see too much blood coming out, then stop it properly like you did before.
And I will teach you about the extraction of arteries and incisions in the cautery technique how to perform it; and never should one apply a cautery or heat over both sides of the two bones behind.
of the two paths of tears
When the tears of the eyes have been long and accustomed, and are located on the veins, or beneath the arteries that appear from the head outward; and it is seen that they are superfluous cold humoral discharges, then do as I said at the beginning in treating such things: first apply a cautery to the head, and then two more cauterizations on each temple, and two cauterizations or heatings beneath the two bones. And if further treatment is needed, carefully perform one small cautery up to the eyelid for each location.
of the two paths of tears within the eyes
When you apply the medicine as we have instructed in the division, and if it doesn't help, then give the patient three raw onions to drink; after this, you should lift the head, and perform cautery or mid-cauterization with olive oil; and make two cauterizations using the 'claw' type of cautery on the two ears, a little above the hairline; and be careful not to touch the artery as you don't want to cover it. And this is the shape of the cautery which is called 'claw':
When the paper of the oil has been softened due to illness and moisture, then cauterize it with this type of cautery which is called 'olive'. The shape of this cautery is as follows:
And if you see that it's done twice, two cauterizations on the two nipples as long as they are; and don't let go of the hand until a third part of the paper is burned, according to the method I have said.
of hair that pricks the eye No instance has occurred where the hair of the eyelashes turns into the underlip and pricks the eye; in that case, one performs cauterization according to two methods: namely, with fire or with burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they grow and are even, then put the patient in good health; after that draw a figure on the paper of the eyes such as it is like to the leaf of mirtle, and let its beginning be at the sign of between the hairs; then place wet cotton saturated with egg white and garlic paste on the eye, then heat up the fire cautery which has this form:
After that cauterize on the figure you have drawn bit by bit several times, until the skin is blackened in that spot; and the signs of health are that you see the paper shrink, and the hairs lifted to the eye's point. Then raise your hand and leave thus for three days, then place wet cotton saturated with butter until the scorching disappears; after that apply a balm until it heals properly.
And if after this the hairs and paper are softened, then restart with the cautery on that same area as you did before. If the hairs have fallen out, apply heat until the paper rises to its natural position and is even, without touching the eye.
The fire cautery of medicine commands the patient to let their hairs grow long and even; then make a shape from parchment as if it were the leaf of myrtle. Then take French soap and live charcoal, each one ounce, and grind them together thoroughly; mix it quickly so that it doesn't cool down, then spread it over the shape like a myrtle leaf, put it on the paper eyes. If the disease is only in one oil, you must open it with one finger, if in both equally; place cotton moistened with egg white under each eye. The patient's shoulder be in your good health and put your forefinger showing on the medicine; press once every two times when the patient feels the bite of the medicine because they feel a bite also like fire. When you have done this for some time, then apply the medicine to your finger. And when the biting sensation has passed, then raise your arm from the wound, and if you see that the paper is raised in the same way as it was lifted due to the constriction of fire or incision; and if this is so, then it is well. If not, then apply more medicine on your finger or where the medicine hasn't worked, until all your actions are equal and your eyes are in order; then place moistened cotton with butter under them until the burned flesh has healed, after that cleanse the arm from the ointment called 'dyafenis' and others, until it is healthy.
And if it is necessary that you guard well in your work by great caution so that no medicine sticks to the eye. And if the paper becomes moist after, and the hairs pinch in the eye, then repeat the medicine on the part of the eye which has softened from clean paper; do this as you did previously; after that treat until it is healed completely; and this is the form of the leaf of rue:
And know that the eyes of men are various in size and smallness, and according to this be your constraints; and do not allow the right way to that person who studies this art.
on the treatment of fistulas by cautery
When you treat fistulas as we have instructed in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not benefit, then it is necessary that you apply cautery to them according to this manner.
Instruct the patient to place his head in a healthy position; and cut the hair on his head between your hands in such a way that it does not move or shift his head; after this, apply moistened cotton inside an egg or garlic juice to the eye; then heat the cautery which is prepared: and place it close to the head as if it were a feather of a rooster, so that the tip of the cautery rests there; if you see it, let the tip point from one part of the head to another, and if you can see it, let it be like a tent; but in any case, it is better for your work that it not move.
After pressing the fistula if it is open, and treat any pus, then dry it off; and if it is closed, operate on it, remove from the bowe; afterwards place the heated cautery in this manner, hold your hand near the cautery to the part below the eye, so that your hand does not cause trouble; and put the cautery into the oil grease, and let it fume.
If you start with the cautery until the bone, it would be good. If not, continue with the cautery one more time, and if needed, do so again, then leave it for three days; afterwards, place moist cotton on balm, and apply the dry ointment cure as long as it's healing. And if forty days pass without healing, put on a corrosive water medicine until the bone is exposed; and follow this method according to what you find in your chapter.
And there is a method for cauterizing fistulas that none of the old ones mentioned. Understand what a fistula is and perform it; afterwards, place one thin camel bone in the slit. And they do it in the size of three parts of a spoon; and hold your hand or camel firmly, making sure not to move the patient's skin so that the melted wax does not drip onto their eye; and one should put moistened cotton on the eye before applying an egg yolk or oil: the wax then removes the pus from the boil, and through marvelous healing, it saves health.
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery we have mentioned, that is good. If not, then it should be treated with garlic, and return the fistula to the body near the nose according to what suits its proper place in its own domain.
of cuts in lips Many times, cuts appear on the lips that are referred to as 'whiskers', and similarly on the lips of children.
When treating these cuts using what we've discussed in sections, and if the treatment doesn't help, then use this method: apply a small surgical instrument for cauterization like this:
And place him quickly in those openings until they grow; afterwards, clean the wound where it is healthy.
of the boil on the neck
When an abscess comes to the root of the throat or on the gland, or at the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after it turns rotten and swells up and becomes discolored, turning into a fistula; then you treat it as we have said in divisions, but it does not heal: so you need one cautery according to the size of the fistula; after removing the pus from the fistula, keep your hand until the iron tip reaches the bottom and beyond the lesion; do this process once or twice, after treating as we have said in treatments, until it is healthy; if it heals like this, it's good; and if not, you need to uncover the area and remove the rotten bone, according to what you find in your medical text.
movement of the teeth
When the gums are softened due to moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it through medicines and that doesn't help, then place the head of the patient on your healthy side; afterwards heat up the cautery according to which will come after in this manner: that you put a twig onto the tooth; and place inside the cautery quickly burning hot, hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat reaching to the root of the tooth; afterwards lift your hand and restart the cautery according to your desire; afterwards fill the patient's mouth with salt water, and leave it there for an hour and then remove it.
And in this way, the moving teeth are stabilized, and the softened gums are restrained, and the moisture is corrupted and dried.
from toothache
When toothache comes from coldness, or there's coldness or ice present, and medical remedies don't help, then one must use cauterization according to two methods: and the wax cautery and the fire cautery.
Wax cautery if it's like this: you take butter from a cow, and at the tip of a metal or iron spoon; after that take cotton and wrap it on the point of a needle, and moisten the cotton with melted butter, then put it quickly over the painful tooth and hold until it cools down; and do this often until its effectiveness reaches to the root of the tooth. And if you see cold hair and cotton moistened in cooled butter, apply it again onto the painful tooth, and place a hot iron on it until heat from the fire reaches to the nerve of the tooth.
The fire cautery if it's like this: you take a piece of iron or steel, and make it large enough so that the flame doesn't reach to the mouth of the patient; after heating the cautery, from which its heat will come afterwards, place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the heat from the cautery cools down; do this repeatedly, for the pain will be alleviated that day or the next. And ensure that the patient fills their mouth with good butter in anticipation of this cautery, then remove the fire; and this is how the cautery works:
When the tumors are due to cold blood and moisture, and do not respond to digestion by medicines, then heat up the cautery as described below in this form, and make two openings for the fumes to escape from the other part of the cautery; and place the heated cautery against the abscess once, or twice if necessary, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, adjust the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it like that for three days; and apply moistened cotton with butter until the pus is drained; afterwards cure the wound with oils and poultices until it heals.
When the moisture invades the channels of the heart, especially when this comes from a cold constitution, then it is necessary to empty the body first with diuretic medicines; afterwards make a cautery at the root of the throat and be careful not to go all the way up to the throat, but just slightly. After that, do another cautery at the juncture of the neck to the base of the spine, and use the cauterizers known as 'clavile' which we have depicted before; and cure the wound as previously mentioned until it heals.
To the cautery of fire, command the sick to let their hair grow long and even; and if they stick at their root, hold the eyes firmly so they do not move until they grow. For all and every disease of the lungs are due to cold moisture, and the patients do not have fever nor chills, and they are diseases that come from old age, then you should apply two cauteries on their force (or strength) in their veins; and one other cautery right under the buttocks between the breasts. And let the cautery called 'clavile' be the one according to the form which was mentioned previously.
And if you see fit, apply the fire to the whole 'point' cautery which is called by that name from the description given in this text for diseases of the ears; and let there be three points up to thirty or beyond it. Afterward treat the affected area according to what was said previously, and place the cauterizations at three places according to this form:
And for this reason are the cauteries lighter, because you make them three times over.
of the dislocation of the shoulder When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture and it is set back in place, then it cannot stay put; instead, it immediately dislocates again with small movements as we have experienced. Thus, it befits you to first reset the dislocation. After that, bind the wounds on his back and sides; then remove the kidney inside the scrotum with your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated within, heat the cautery to just two fingers' width as described here for this process:
And cauterize the palm up to its knuckle, and let the mark of the cauterization come together in one point. Four cauterizations; and for this reason, perform the cauterization using the tool with three prongs, because it is due to the intricacy of a tent that there are four marks resulting from cauterization; and the nerves follow along like threads and the form of the cauterization tool with three prongs:
And each time, fix it on this one nerve because there are seven cauterizations for it.
After placing the fire cauterizer over the nails, grind with a thong; after that, rest the patient, and do not let any of the limbs be in long tension until it is well stabilized.
And if it is reset above, a small thing happens then, so apply the cautery to the thick part of the bone cautery, or use only one cautery point. Because the joint is closed off, and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
of the water cautery
The old ones said that one should make water cauteries of the roots of aristologe, and do it like this: take a long root of aristologe, the longest you can find, let it be dry, and also as big and as long as your hands; then soak it in oil, heat it up on fire, and apply the cautery between your shoulders and neck for one application, and two small applications lower down where is below the chin; and four applications between the fifth and sixth rib, going slightly behind; and one application near the belly button, and another on the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and four more at the ribs towards the end of the application that's between the two shoulders; don't squeeze your hand, instead do it openly as when you smell.
And it was said by an old one that no man uses a fire cautery like this for .i raser, and they heat it up and place it between the ribs, until it reaches that abscess; and when pain left, as we have mentioned about the abscess in the liver. But in this chapter there is fear or perhaps the patient died now, or a fistula comes which cannot be cured.
of the mouse
When you treat the illness of the mice in those ways we have discussed for wound treatments, and it doesn't benefit, then they try three methods of cautery that are all good.
There is a method as follows: you make .iij. or .iiij. cauterizations, depending on the length of the needle according to its linearity relative to the body's form; and don't immediately place your hand all over the cautery, and ensure that the patient remains warm from their back;
And another method of cauterization is that you heat the cautery with two noses, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the heel which is at the tip of the needle, where the cut comes from the left side of the body, and lift the elevation according to the heel, according to the length of the body, and let the cauterizations be according to the width of the body.
After holding the two flaming needles until the heels are pierced from the other side, then remove the cautery, and in this way there will be four. And if you see fit, cauterize all of the cautery with three needles. After treatment when it has expelled pus over a long time, and this is worth mentioning compared to another method of treatment previously described.
From gout
The fire cautery is not suitable for gout,
After leaving the cautery in place for a long time to treat gangrene, do not stop treating the patient after the cautery treatment; and then recovery would speed up, and all four intentions would be fulfilled with God's help.
The shape of the cautery for the belly is like a curved metal piece as we have demonstrated before; and for the back, it should be round like an olive, as it was shown earlier.
Of the swelling of joints When the joints swell in someone who is hypoplastic and filled with yellow bile, it's necessary to cauterize on the back of the joint between the base of the thumb and the base of the index finger; then lift your hand with the cautery without turning. And don't go too far inward, thus would leave outside the yellow bile, and move the cautery according to this shape:
After performing two cuts on each of the legs at the tip of the knife; and make the cuts along their length, one in front of the knee and the other behind, halfway down the leg; then leave the cuts open for a long time without curing them, until the bile comes out; afterwards take care of the other treatments that we have mentioned.
Regarding memory loss
When the treatment of abdominal pain arises from cold or moisture, as long as the digestive and retentive powers which are in the stomach and intestines are overwhelmed, it cannot be treated with regular treatments; and you see the patient suffering very much and full of strength, so do this. First, apply a large cautery on the stomach according to what he has discussed previously or abdominal cautery, for the circulating cautery; and four more cauteries inside the mouth on subtle places, using one small cauterizing iron in each place, and two more on the hips.
And if you see the moister being abundant and the patient suffering, do this: apply a cautery on the thumb, and one cautery on each elbow, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the large one. Because the treatment benefits when there is good assistance.
regarding the treatment of hemorrheic disorders
When the tumors are or have a foundation, or one or more, and they are old, being large cold and moist corrupted humors, and if treatment does not succeed as we have described in divisions, then you should apply cauteries: three on the spine of the back, that is right outside but slightly inside the middle of the vertebral column, a little at a time triangulating, and one cautery underneath the buttocks. Four times;
And if you think that the stomach is cold and the food isn't cooking properly, and you see swelling in the abdominal area, then apply a large cautery to the stomach as previously mentioned, and another one to the liver, and another on the kidney with the whole body covered by the cautery; and leave the cautery for an extended period. Afterward treat the affected area until it's healed.
regarding the condition known as 'thelul'
When you handle the metal tip, if it resembles a small rasp, and then heat the rasp completely until it's red hot; leave your hand touching until the cautery touches the place where the metal tip is cut; do this once or twice, and if there are many metal tips, cauterize each one just like we have said; after applying healing herbs wait until they start to heal; and if you heat a large cautery on iron, it will provide greater help.
from poorly treated wound
When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening the wound, as we will explain in its proper place, if there arises a disease that can only be cured through the use of a cautery.
When there is no opening present, and the condition worsens with gangrene and infected moisture, it's necessary to thoroughly examine and test every detail of this case. Always be aware of how much damage each area has incurred.
Of kidney disease When abdominal pain originates from the kidneys and is accompanied by excessive wind, it does not affect all women equally. Hence, you should perform a cautery on both sides of the kidneys with the clavile cautery as we have previously mentioned; and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three lines of cauterization, which will provide more assistance.
From the bladder When the bladder is thick and weak from heat and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then you should apply a cautery to the lower part of the bladder, where hair begins on the hand, and one each right side and left side; and let each cautery be as long as our finger. And make an application defuers (backwards) across the back, or two if needed; and let the cauteries form in a clavile shape according to what was said beforehand.
From the maris When the uterus is cold and moist, and fails to allow conception, and its flowers are corrupted and their ends are delayed; and when they come in, there's great pain: thus it should be that you apply three cauterizations inside the womb, as we have said or like the bladder cauterization, and two cauterizations defuers (backwards) across the back; and let the cauterizations form in a clavile shape, as we have said.
From the thigh
When the viscous fluids descend into the thigh socket, and because of this reason it moves out of its place, and the signs are that the leg is longer than the other when measured together; and it's found that the limbs start from their origin view, so you should cauterize the wound on the thigh socket as if with one cautery resembling a circle, and mark in front of the limb within the socket where it turns, so that the socket be inside the circle; and let the cauteries be such as those which have been cauterized on the stomach.
And if the above cauterizations are not available to you, make three olive-sized large cauterizations, and let each of the cauterizations be as perfect as all the knees; and treat until it is sound.
Of thigh pain When pain comes in the buttocks region, and this is due to coldness and moisture, and the patient has been treated as we have described for division and treatment of such cases without success, and the disease is old: therefore, it is necessary that you cleanse the body of thick fluids using stinking pills or other good-looking pills.
After the application of cautering; and regarding the method of cautering there are two ways: it is to know as follows together with burning medicines, and fire cautery. Fire cautery has several methods, among which one is like this: you should apply triangular cauterizations on the buttocks area three times according to this form, and ensure a good depth and large space for each cauterization, leaving an interval of the size of two coins between every cauterization; and these are olive cauterizations. Never make a cauterization in the middle of the main part of the buttock, since there should be four according to this form:
And if you see fit, apply the circle cautery that we have described previously in relation to the dislocation of the hip; but do it in such a way that the circles encompass the entire buttocks area and all parts of the flesh are heated.
And this is the way it's done in sciatica, when the pain stays in the hip and doesn't reach up to the thigh or down to the leg. And if it does come up to the thigh and the leg, then two cauterizations are performed at the place where the pain resides, and one above the ankle three inches, on the left side a little bit; and make these cuts with the surgical blade, and burn away any thickened areas of the skin. And if the person feels that the pain extends up to the knee or close to it, cauterize there where they feel the pain at three points or four points, where points are referred to in this process.
And if more work is needed, then do it accordingly; and if the pain spreads from the knee towards the thigh, perform a cauterization with the surgical or circular blade. Make sure to take great care in all your cauterizations so that you don't let up on burning until you've destroyed nerves and major arteries, and don't cause the patient any greater harm or constriction.
And I myself have seen several who performed cauterizations on the ankle up to the knee, and left them until the leg was swollen all over, and also the feet were so affected that they became inflamed and rotten. After this procedure of abdominal washings, death ensued for him.
And if the pains are in two parts together, make cauteries on each one following this manner. // And the surgeon says concerning the fire cautery of the thigh, as follows, take one such iron rod that is as large as a small duck or slightly smaller, and have it intricately designed with lines running through it from the start to the other end, across both parts; let there be two crossing points, making them resemble knots, and prepare two sturdy iron rods. And this is its form:
And heat it until it turns completely red and emits steam, then place the heated rod on the afflicted part of the thigh, turning it towards the healthy side; apply one cautery operation at once to each side and leave the area for three days; then cover it with butter and keep the wound open as long as needed; continue treating with ointments until the wound heals.
Albucasim says that we use very little of this type of cautery for the fear of his consideration, and we see few who use it; yet still, this is a good cautery, which one can tolerate, and leaves where it has been applied.
of the pain of the back
When pain comes to the back, whether by fall or from percussion or due to excessive evacuation, or due to any semblance of cold spread material, none of these appearances warrant cauterization, because it's akin to what comes from an infusion of cold matter.
It is necessary to do this after the fact that the body has rid itself of foul pills or other such things, when one performs it on the back, at the spot where the pain persists, three lines marked by a cross, and in each line more than five cauterizations according to the power and quantity that the body can endure; and do the cauterization as per the 'point' cautery; and if you observe, perform three or four cauterizations at the mid-clavicular line following this form:
This disease often befalls small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they appear pale when they stand up and faint; and you find in the last spinal segment of the back and also on us the appearance that comes over the other spinal segments.
When you see this [condition] and observe its treatment, if you apply it with a blood cautery in the form that follows.
If you see this and observe the treatment, apply it using a proper blood cautery to each part of the spine equally. And when you see it, apply the blood cautery along the spine on two lines or three, with the points close together. After that, let the area heal until it is sound according to what we have said, and be careful not to administer the cautery in places where there might be nerve congestion.
of the pain in joints
When joint pain is caused by moisture spreading to every limb, and when the pain comes from the feet, which people call "gout" properly, and when it's due to cold reasons and cannot be cured with medicines, such can be treated with cauterizations in this manner: make the animal of cauterizations near the joint on the foot, and let the cauterizations be olive oil according to this form:
And if there is need for you to touch on the face of the foot, if you apply a cautery across the entire area claimed as "point". And should pains come up to the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, if you apply a cautery on each knee. Three or four applications per knee, through the olive oil; and if you need more, then do so more but hold your hand within only until the cure is well done.
And should the pains descend to the knees and back, you administer the cautery as we have described in our chapter. And if the pains are at the hands, you apply points internally along the foscile for two lines; and if there remains any pain at the hips, you apply points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and should the pains come up to elbows or shoulders, you cauterize every part, and take good care over your patient and administer medicines. For should you give him good care and purge phlegm, he will be restored by God's help.
Of the rupture of the uterus
When rupture occurs in the stomach and the intestines fall into the cervices (birth canal), this is new. It is necessary that when you see it being cured, do not remove it during day; and use things that relieve the belly, so that the insides descend from his belly; after make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to rub his anus until the intestines are repaired, then take them with your fingers, and pinch just under the rupture onto the bone of the knee, and have it look as if there is a sign halfway up the front, like half a circle above the chest; then heat the cautery to its form:
Until it is white and emitting faeces. Then remove the intestines to their original position; and have his ministers cut her hands so they do not return backwards; and work well on his thighs with the patient, and place one cushion and another servant on his thighs, and another under his buttocks who cuts his hands; then place the cautery on the sign in front of your whole hand, and hold it steady until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, keep trying again until you touch the bone; and be careful so that the intestines do not escape as you use the cautery; that you don't burn them; and by this means the patient's hands do not hurt or any other harm.
And know that if you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worthless. It must be that the size of the cauteries for children is subtle according to their measure, and also large people's should match their measures; after three days cleanse the area around the burr cautery until the scab comes off; afterwards cleanse other remedies until it heals properly, and let the patient rest on his back for forty days so that the wound is well sealed; and ensure his baths are long enough so that the intestines do not escape when he wants to go to chambers.
And after forty days, when he wishes to stand up, he should be assisted by a well-made bandage and wear it for forty more days; with good rest, he should move lightly and avoid overeating or drinking excessively and shouting too loudly; and once he follows this advice, he is entirely restored. And I will speak about the treatment of tailoring in my chapter later. of the rupture of the abdomen
When abdominal ruptures are due to known causes, and you see that they are no longer growing, then apply fire according to their quantity with the cautery; take one-third of the hearth; after treating it in accordance with what we have said; and none of the old men said that one should cauterize at three angles with this shape on the cautery:
But the first sign is that the area has swollen and draw a line across the width of the wound, and another below it, and make contact with your hand throughout the iron. But the initial cauterizations are lighter and wetter.
from old pain in no member When pain comes to any limb, whether from falling or being struck, and that pain lasts long, and the cure of medicine does not help, then it should be cauterized with a cautery called "points", and the cauterizations according to the length of the member, its smallness and weakness, its utility, and its location for twisting and its pain. If the healing is good from the first cauterization, that's fine; if not, perform another second cauterization on it, because such a routine is that it should change in relation to the body part that is closest to it, so you must make the cauterizations until the patient feels better.
In amalgamation
The meseil are treated with a cautery once in a while and, likewise, the disease that originates from the putrefaction of blood and melancholy. If you see it being cauterized, take care if the disease is at its beginning, and treat it according to what we have said in division, without letting it spread or persist, and doubt that corruption might permeate all the meseil, then perform .v. cauterizations on the chief: .i. on the head up to the ninth degree, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the hair; and .ij. on the .ij. horns, and .i. behind on the hinge; and leave your hand so that the cautery reaches down to the bone, and until the scabs come out so that the vapors from the large humors can escape; and cauterize it on the mice according to what was described previously.
And if the meseil is scattered everywhere; and it clearly manifests itself, so it's necessary that you cauterize using these cauteries that we have mentioned on the head, and one cauterization under each nose, and two cauteries along the spine from the neck, and seven along the spine of the back, and a large one over the kidneys and another in front, and two along the shoulders; and two across the ribs, and two along the tendons of the feet, and one on each joint of hands and feet, and in the cavities of the hands; and be careful not to burn any nerves that are behind the heel bone, so do not scorch them. And never make a cauterization over the bone at the elbow, and another over the bone of the stomach, and one more on the liver.
And know that when I use the fire cautery more often, I provide more aid, and it benefits; and know that patients do not feel pain during cautery as healthy people would, because their bodies are already thoroughly corrupted. And ensure that your cautery tools are both large and small according to limbs and joints, as you will find in manuals for instrument use. After the cure, dust the area with flour mixed with honey and other treatments until it is completely healed.
of inflation
When swelling appears in any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and it doesn't heal, then I make cauterizations on the limb according to the size of the limb; and so let the cauterization go just a little into the skin near the bone. Then treat it with dressings until it heals. And every time one makes a cauterization at the wrist, at the foot, and at the back, along the exit point of the nerve that paralyzes the limb, in this way the swelling is extracted; and still, no one should interfere unless they are knowledgeable about limbs and the exits of moving nerves in the body.
From balms
When the disease known as "albaras" progresses and medicine in the form of remedies proves ineffective, then apply heat from a cautery slightly over its surface, according to the thickness of the blood found there, until the pus is removed and the color changes; then clean with flour mixed with lentils and rose oil, plantain leaves, and blood from a sheepdog and an almond, each in their respective parts; mix all together, wrap it with a cloth, and leave on that part until it heals.
The treatment for the chancre by cautery
When the chancre begins to appear, and you want to halt its progress, then apply a cautery around the circumference of .1 circle, all around the chancre. And still, some say that one should also apply the cautery in the middle of the chancre; and I personally do not think this is wise, as I fear it might lead to ulceration and putrefaction, which has happened on several occasions for me; and a more prudent action would be to cauterize around it, with a cautery known as "circular", just like we have described earlier in terms of cauteries.
of swelling that cannot die
When some have a disease called "adubelati", and it is delayed from dying or because of its excess or due to the old age of the body when it is decrepit (that means too old) and it has little blood, or due to tension; and you see that it hastens towards death: then apply small cauteries inside by making a few minor ones; leave him like this. For it will hasten its death.
And if you see that it penetrates the entire cauterization, then heat the cautery as described here:
And place your hand in the middle of the disease called "adubelati" as long as the cauterizations have penetrated through the kidneys, and make such cauterizations that the patient feels relief to such an extent that the process of decay is alleviated. After treating him until he is completely healed.
The treatment with fire using a metal tool
Another way of disease is called 'corrodens', and it's nothing else but a member disease, because it affects the limbs like the fire affects dry wood. If you see this disease in someone who can withstand cauterization together with heat, then smooth out the cauterizing iron rods both small and large as needed depending on where the disease is; after that, cauterize from all sides until you remove all corruption, and leave nothing behind, making sure every rotten part is removed. And then let it rest for three days, and apply ointment with oil to those areas cauterized until the burnt parts are healed and all the corruption is gone. After that, perform the treatment of ointments that produce flesh. And if after three days you see no signs of healing, it's good; but if this doesn't happen, reapply the cauterization on the remaining corrupted area. This disease can sometimes be treated with medicine instead of fire cautery in someone who can tolerate heat cautery; however, fire cautery is more effective, and I've already mentioned the treatment of fever in a separate section: use it when needed.
The text discusses conditions that come with stones.
Sometimes when nails grow out, a disease is born which we call "clos" according to our understanding, and it's a large clotting thing that hurts the foot. And for this illness of clos, there are two ways to handle it: fire cautery and hot water cautery. Fire cautery involves heating up one tool like a feather from a goose, made of good iron in proportion so as to be able to pierce any nail all around, with fine margins; after that you heat the whole thing on top of the nail, and quickly twist your hand around the nail until it reaches the very tip of the nail; then leave it like this for three days until pus starts to form. Then make a plaster of dried soap powder mixed with vinegar, and let the plaster stay overnight on the entire area, and the nail will come out and be completely removed from its root. Then apply ointment healing balm until the wound is clean.
And if they're turning outwards in the flesh, and it happens many times whether in the hands or in the feet, then you must bring back hot water cautery; and do this way: take a thread of spider or iron, or a goose feather, and place them over the nail and its root. This is for things like warts; put the thread so that it touches everything around. Then add a bit of hot water, and hold your hand well while twisting it back until the edge of the thread reaches to the base of the nail, and then can find the way of the hot water deep down to the root; let the patient suffer for a little time with the hot water for an hour; then leave them like this, and they will completely come out from all their roots. Do this again as many times as you have nails in your flesh, until these are all removed from you, then heal any pus-producing wounds that may form.
He heals by shaking
When some shudder from cold or nerves, or from a quartan fever or another sickness, it is necessary that you apply four or five cauterizations on the spine of their back. One cauterization between each spinal bone; and one cauterization at the chest, under the olive-shaped cauterization; if they continue to shudder, hasten their recovery from the cold illness.
pus-filled boils
Whenever you see the spot that has emerged or pus-filled boils coming from large putrid matter, if they originate from gross materials. It is necessary at first when they appear that you cauterize on each tip of every boil: a delicate firewood cautery stick, whereby its point grasps the flame, or a long root of aristolochia, or with an olive-shaped cautery iron. And it must not be cauterized immediately when they are just emerging, according to this manner, for they can't grow further into infection but instead, the excess that causes them is removed and they become healthy; yet it should be done after the evacuation of blood.
When the artery is cut Many times great flows of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound come outwards or during incisions on an abscess, and similar things; it is much distressing to smell it.
And nevertheless, whenever this happens to no one, if you hasten to place your index finger on the wound of the vein and hold it as tightly as possible until his pulse is calmed under your finger, and that no more drops come out; then light several small and large olive oil cauteries until they are all red. Then take one or many according to the size of the wound and apply them where the artery was running, and place the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and keep the cautery there until his pulse is fully restored.
And if it jumps out when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cauteries are extinguished, then quickly take another one of the cauterizing instruments that are at the fire.
And do not cease to perform this one after the other until the tooth becomes black; and be careful that you do not burn the nerve which is beneath, and that no harm comes upon the patient; and know that when the tooth comes out of the artery, it cannot remain well even if the artery is large, unless this is done through one of these four methods that we have mentioned: by cautery, by extraction if it has not been treated already, by strong string tying, or by medicines placed upon it which have the power to harden blood; and let it be tied and restrained in due course.
Who will administer hardening through tightly binding with cloths or placing things that burn upon it, or similar actions, if they do not benefit in this way.
And if this happens to anyone and they have no means or medicine at hand, so they should place their index on the wound of the artery in the manner that we have said, and stretch it well until the area above the wound and above the artery is hardened; and do not move the finger but dampen it with cold water often as much as can be cold until the tooth becomes frozen and swollen and hardened. And prepare for cautery and medicines for what needs them.
We have told you in the first chapter all about every disease for which it is necessary to apply a fire cautery, or medicine that heats up, and we discussed their uses, causes, instruments, and forms of application; and I put that chapter dealing with the head until the feet, and now I will proceed in this chapter along the same route as those things are found more easily for what you want.
And as I begin this one, it is necessary for you to know that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first book about cautery, so here greater caution is needed.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in treating wounds, and extracting arrows, and cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I advise you not to embark in folly. For many ways of people come into cures. Some come from those who were so afflicted by their illness that they died lightly due to the panic they find in their disease, and out of the terror of their malice; and against these one should have fear. And there are some among these who give their understanding and say: "Wait, I am healed"; and the disease is deceitful. It would not be appropriate for you to consent to those who come to your aid in this manner, but place more restraint in your honor than in your greed, do not act foolishly but wisely of those whom you are certain about and can have knowledge from; and use prediction and guidance in treatments of diseases where health has been converted; and this will help you gain good reputation, glory, and lasting memory for a long time.
Dear child, Our Lords grant you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to aspire from the holy inspiration of their hand, Amen.
Or I have instructed you this chapter by discussing chapter by chapter, according to what is before or the chapter on cauteries, which I discussed from head to heel, because you will find it easier for that which you will need.
full of water at its head
Know that this sickness comes very often to children at birth, and when the mother presses too hard on the head of the child; and it happens none other time because of some reason that cannot be identified.
And I never saw this sickness happen outside of children, and among all those that I have seen, their death came quickly; and because of this, it seems to me that I should abandon the practice of this disease with such remedies.
And I saw one child of these, his shoulder was full of water, and the head swelled each day so much that it could not bear anymore; and he thought it to be too much moisture until he died, and this moisture is assembled right over the bone under the siphon, between the heart and the bone; and the veins are like this when the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and abscesses are small that you cut through the head a wide crack; and it's as long as two fingers, as long as the moisture flows; and see here the shape of the spathile:
If the moisture is more extensive, and the abscesses are larger, make two cuts in the manner of a cross, according to this shape:
And if the moisture is under the bone, and the symptoms you see are that the corners of the head open on each side, and the water jumps when you press it from your hand inside, and this does not respond to treatment: then it is necessary that you make three cuts in the middle of the head according to this manner:
And after the incision, remove all moisture outside. After that, hold the cuts of linen and powders; then apply wine and oil, and leave it like this for five days; afterwards, reset the limb, treat the wound with poultices and applications, and let the head rest equally, then allow the patient to eat dry meat from a source without moisture as long as the member is strengthened and healed.
And another method of incision is that you look at where the large opening of the abscess is, and the assembly of the water; for it is not always in front; nor always behind; neither always on the right; nor always on the left.
Cut accordingly where the abscess opens and the water filling it, making the incision according to what you can do, and watch that you do not cut the artery; let a flow of blood, so that the patient dies due to the loss of blood and evacuation of moisture.
Of cautery by fire, command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When it comes to any illness that is called "catarrh" affecting the eyes or at the bottom of them, and this sickness is ancient, and the medicine cure doesn't help, then the last resort treatment if is the cautery with which one cuts off the two main arteries.
Therefore, when you cover the eyes, make sure they are under their head; after this, rub a rough cloth on the area until the arteries become visible. Then stretch the patient's neck over two cloths so that the neck can be seen clearly. Next, look where the vein lies and examine both eyes after them being positioned just behind the ears, and once they've settled down, then mark the eyes with an X, and cover each one with a sharp spatula blade for about half an inch until you reach the bone, and this should be done while the head is elevated.
And if you see it, clamp the spatula over the artery and above it, cut also like two thumbs through.
And when the vein is cut, make the patient jump from above continuously outwardly.
And if the artery does not open at being touched, it is necessary that you measure the length of the space equivalent to three thumbs; then pierce and cut until reaching the bone. And what should be left out in terms of blood depends on .14 c/cs, and possibly slightly more or less depending on how the patient can endure it and the filling of the artery. Then examine the wound: if it is still pointing towards the bone just like syphilis, or if there is no opening to the abscess when we cut away, then clamp down the wound and secure it, and apply ointment treatment until it heals.
From sanding
When old age comes and severe congestion occurs, due to moisture from tears and heat in the temples and ears that have been known for a long time and similar things. Medicine treatments are done using methods of medical cure and nothing of this benefits it. We extract the arteries in the temples and apply cauterization, as we have detailed.
And the method of extracting them is that the patient sweats after their head hair, and listens to the artery that opens in the temple, for it opens well due to its pulsation, and responds only in some who are too cold; if she responds, then pull the neck with some cloths, then rub the area with a rough cloth, and warm water until the artery becomes visibly apparent; then take the sponge tool as described:
And then gently scarify the skin until you see the artery, then raise it upwards with forceps, and remove all the threads that come off from each part; and if the artery is thin, pierce it at the tip of the hook, then cut along the length of both shoulders according to the size of two fingers. For if she isn't cut, she won't break anywhere in particular.
And treat bleeding for two days and nights. And if the artery is large, you must bind it with two thicknesses of a strong silk thread for two days before, so that infection does not occur during wound healing and to prevent blood loss; then remove excess between the two threads at that same moment. If possible, apply the cut cautery up to the bone as long as the shoulder is cut; this is the surgical procedure if the patient doesn't have fever and has a warm complexion.
For the cauterization helps to finish off moisture issues: because this is more effective against moisture compared to other methods. When it is necessary for the extraction of arteries, one must fill the wound with old cotton and place well-made wicks on top; and when they are removed, they should be treated with dried medicines that produce pus, and wicks, until cleanliness occurs; and if there is no artery to cut from them, you proceed as you would normally, then hurry to apply cauterization, or use the space of vitriol and tighten it in your hand so that the artery becomes hard. And if you don't have this available, you can place water on top until the artery freezes, and lift the cold water over it until it stops bleeding and is tightened as necessary; and the one that is softer and easier to extract from an artery should be cauterized with this cutting cautery across two parts, but make sure the cuts are well spaced to retain heat for a longer time. For when the instruments are too tight, they hold less of their heat. And should have between the two knives an inch of space, and then when you are ready to apply the two edges, place the hot iron until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein in two places. And keep them separated by the two heads because there is no welding from this cautery across; and this is the shape of the cautery:
of tears
When the tears of the eyes are draining from the veins that are located on the back of the head's neck, and medicine doesn't provide any benefit for this ailment, you notice the skin turning red due to it, and feel or see sweating on the forehead as if in a fever; and when they are damp and wet such that the paper hair falls off, and the papers become heated, burned by the heat of the tears, this is where one needs this treatment.
And they called the old one 'the wounded healer', and what you should do for this patient suffering from this ailment is to let him have hairs on his forehead, then make three cuts evenly across the forehead according to its length; and perhaps one of these cuts can extend as two or four down the front until it reaches just under the nose, and the other two are made about the ribs above the nipples, and you must avoid incising the arteries that are above the ribs; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the two jaws, and each wound should be three fingers wide across.
From the incision that is below the temple up to the second incision; and peel off all the tissue in between the two cuts until you reach the membrane covering the bone, then continue cutting from the middle incision up to the other second cut, and then remove this pus.
If you use the first opening tool which is called 'cultellaire', and it is very sharp on one side, while being blunt, not sharp, on the other side, and this tool has a shape: And position the blade so that it cuts towards the fatty tissue near the bone, and make the tool blunt towards the bone, and press the blade until you feel at least halfway through. And remove all tubes descending from the head within these tubes as long as the incision is continuous up to this one opening in the bone, then proceed with further openings halfway into the first incision until it reaches the other opening; and extract blood evenly, and express the limb for the blood sucked out; then place a layer of old cotton in each incision, and cover it with moist cloths soaked in wine and oil and garlic, and ensure no pus remains; and on the third day loosen the bandage, and apply generous amounts of water-tea bath, then apply ointment basilicon with oil rose and other treatments for wounds until they heal.
from the pus
When to any sudden cough occurs habitually, and you see the eyes weak and small, and weakening of sight, and burned paper; and the hair falls out, and one sweats profusely from the forehead in a fever, and the patient experiences intermittent pain; then know through these incidents that those materials and that mucus come only from many veins, and the curative process underway is this.
And you instruct the patient to look behind their forehead, then make a large incision around the forehead, and another broad one. Start from the temple on the left side to the temple on the right side, and ensure the cut goes until the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move during eating. And when the bone is revealed, let all the blood drain out using a sponge, and then remove the pus between the two lips of the incision, and place old cotton and linen dressings on it; then cover with wrung cloths soaked in wine and oil, and avoid opening an abscess; once the bone is exposed, you should rub it until cartilage begins to grow, then treat it with desiccating substances that promote cartilage growth.
In this manner: take two parts of the flower of wheat and four parts of colofon, and make a plaster from them; and administer it to these wounds to promote cartilage growth everywhere.
Of the cauterization of the ears
All that is found in the ears is one of the four things: grains, or beast, or mine stone or similar thing like iron; or seed, like beans, peas; or something discharging like water and oils and similar things.
When he excretes in the ear a stone or other substance that does not fit with the ear and does not grow in the ear, put the ear under the sun. If you see the stone, if there is any drop of violet oil or saffron oil, then proceed to extraction; and have them sneeze with consigns, and plug the nose when the sneezing comes, and insert pieces of cloth or wool into the ear; and keep the ear above. Many times this cure helps; and if it does not help, have him extract using fine forceps, as described below:
If it leaps out with the forceps, that's good; if not, proceed to extraction using a fine double curved needle; and if it doesn't leap out through this, make an arnica stick and pinch the tip of the stick or the ear's wick very hard, then plug the area around the wick with solid wax so that nothing can enter with the wick; then pull forcefully because many times it helps as we have said; and if it doesn't help in this manner either, take some glue from this and put a little tool to its point for doing this thing, and place a bit of cotton inside; then press the glue onto the stone or anything else, and pull forcefully. And if she does not allow these things that we have spoken about to take place, you must quickly pierce the ear in this manner so that pus and blood drain out, and muscle contractions follow. And the method for piercing is as follows: first prepare the patient with a cold application on the area of the head, then remove the blood according to the size of its strength, afterwards put the patient's head between your hands and turn the ear upwards, make a small cut in the root of the ear towards the fat that hangs down; and let the wound be like a crescent moon until you reach the bone. Then break the bone according to your ability, and suck it quickly into your mouth; continue treatment as long as it is healthy. And if it's grains (probably referring to small infections or swellings) and they are present and cause swelling, you should administer an extraction; and if he cannot come out, then perform a fine incision according to this form:
And perform the incision of that grain. But do not do this when you think that the grains are moist due to the moisture in the ear, until you have made many pieces; then remove them with fine forceps and suck out the pus, just as we said, so that the extractions are clean.
In water therefore, when someone coughs in the ear, the patient should use spitting of cold liquids first, and widen the ear with old cotton. And remain sitting right next to that ear where it's wet. If they suddenly start spitting out water, this is good. But if not, take several stones according to their size and gently place them; and heat each stone a bit on fire; then put one or two of these stones into the patient's ear, and stick out halfway from her feet on another side, and make an incision with another stone over the stone in the ear; and keep doing this with stone after stone until all water is spat out, and thus it spits out completely; and if you see that, take one rush, insert the first shoulder into the ear, and hold the other shoulder with fire until the most sensitive part of the rush burns. Then redo with more rushes until all water exits, as we have explained in stones.
In the extraction of worms, if they are small like fleas and similar creatures, treat them as we have explained in the division; but if they can be felt due to their large size, then perform worm extraction using forceps; this is the easier thing to remove from the ear.
In the extraction of tangled worms in the ears, if you're applying treatments as we have described in division and using distillation methods, but no cure is effective, then it's necessary to observe the ear with sunlight: if there are no worms visible, use fine forceps for removal; if nothing is visible, take this form of cane here that corresponds.
And make the opening narrow below and wide above. And take the finest tip of the wick according to the degree of pain in the patient's ear, then fill it all up; do this often until all the liquid comes out. And if they do not want to come out, stuff cotton into the hole as I have said about the skin; and if they do not protrude forcefully as we have said, give them distilled water that ancient people have proven effective in removing worms, and you will find instructions for distillations in treatises on this subject; and distill your oils and medicines into the ear with all this instrument, which is shown here as you see it:
And it should be made of silver or lead, being narrow at the bottom for .i. small openings and wide above to distill from; and for pressing inside the distillation use a well-made tool of lead suitable for this purpose, and if you see take a blade and wrap it around the end with cotton; then pour your oil or juice onto the wick, and what you see of your medicines in the wick, and let the wick be in the ear; then press within the blade all the cotton, and press your hand properly until the oil is distilled or when the ear feels relieved; and feel inside the patient, and do one portion of heated distillation as if it's being distilled into the ear; and make sure it’s not too cold, because the medicine wouldn't be so good.
regarding ear piercing
No child is born without any part missing in their ears; and this same thing happens to people due to wound impact or a fetus being born inside the ear. And these impacts often happen within the ear if it cannot be seen; and it does not occur twice, so one can see well.
Therefore, what comes inwardly, if one cannot see it, is due to grief in the process of healing from multiple conditions. And concerning this where we can see, you should put the ear close to the sunlight; and look inside: if you see the obvious pus, that which forms like this from the material within:
And do so and cut evenly in front and behind it all the way through, without hurting the ear; if the pus is from a fetus or a part of the ear, if you have subtle pincers, gently pinch it until that flesh is completely removed.
And if the operations are inserted right in the ear, take a fine, light rasp and rub it gently over the fire, then place it behind the ear. If you feel the operation causing the ears to hurt from the skin, make a slight incision and ensure not to damage the ear nerves; then insert an eardrum according to the width of its outer part into the ear canal, and stuff in Egyptian ointment inside the wound.
Do this every day until the wound is healed, or take an eardrum and stuff it with rose water ointment, and apply powdered vitriol. If you see swelling in the ear, you should remove the eardrum and replace it with another one that's moistened with a wick made of rose oil and beeswax, until all the swelling has disappeared; then treat it until it is clean.
And if bleeding occurs, soak a cloth and wring out cold water, then place it on the ear, and apply other treatments that stop bleeding, which include therapies involving distillation processes.
From the ashes of the papers
When dealing with hairs that come from the eyes when they are wet and then dry, it's necessary to spread them out with tweezers and forceps, and take off their roots with a pincers. Then, place sulfur in the area where the vinegar is applied.
And if they are not peeled off, apply a fine lens cautery to them and do the cauterization after incision; and repeatedly check, because nothing remains of their roots. And when they are cauterized with fire, those roots burn and don't return.
From the ice block
Many times in the papers come things that seem hard and tough by their form and hardness, and because of this illness is called "granule", and it's a gathering of large moisture on top and beneath in the paper. The procedures are like this: be wary if the granules move from one side to another; it's a simple thing to understand. Then make them wide across, then lightly cauterize each part, then take them with forceps, and extract them. If you cannot extract without piercing a bit of the paper, or causing harm to the patient; and if the cut is large, and there's an opening, treat until it heals; and if it's small, do not exert any force, because the ointments heal it quickly and promotes wound healing soon.
And if the granule goes down inside the ear towards the upper part, invert the paper and there are granules on one forceps, extract and press from both sides; and if the paper is moved away by the incision, it doesn't harm anything; and when the granules have been extracted, wash out with salty water, and cure the wound until the patient's healing progresses.
of the grease of granules
Extraction is a type of fat that gets trapped in the sheets of papers above, and this happens more often among children than adults, it causes much pain to their eyes, and they experience a rush of tears during the day; because tears quickly come out of their eyes. And due to this, they lie on their backs all day long, sleeping flat down, and have moist paper sheets beneath their eyes that become swollen and covered by the extraction, which opens in the eye. And when you press your hand onto it with your fingers and feel the extraction between them.
And the method of this treatment is such that the patient places their head in your healthy area. Then take one linen sheet and set up a tent in manner of a circle according to the quantity that contains extraction from each part, then place it; and press with your fingers on both sides so that the extraction be assembled within the circle. Then make a cut through the wetness in the middle of the moist area, creating an opening of the length, not more than the wound as we do for cutting a vein; and make the leather fit perfectly until you see the extraction through it; and in various arrangements comes out the extraction from the opening according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Extract it then as one piece of coarse cloth between your fingers at the front, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is scattered; make sure you do not stick in the opening, that you do not come up to all the inside skin till the eye, that you do not hurt it.
And if the incision doesn't open at the beginning of the cut, increase the cut gently until it opens; then pull it as we have said, then moisten with cloths and water, and place on the wound, and strain with wrappings.
And for those who grind the grain and put it to ferment the moisture that remains there. Then treat until it is well. And if an abscess forms at the wound, then treat with soothing plaster until it is well.
"Des poils de papier" translates to "paper hairs". This phrase might be used metaphorically or in a technical context depending on the broader context of the text. Without additional context, this could refer to fine threads or fibers that resemble hairs from paper.
When hair grows on the face in a manner not natural and as it ages, these hairs can cause trouble for the eyes and lead to various illnesses such as watering eyes, papillary swelling of the eye area, and albuminuria; all this is due to damage caused by the hair. And here is how one should treat: through a method involving fire (cautery), or with medicinal waters according to what was discussed in the chapter about cauterization methods, or it can be done through incision and suturing, or with threads, following what I will explain next.
It is necessary for you to place the head of the eye in its healthy position, then turn over the paper of the eye with your left hand; if it turns correctly, that's good; otherwise, if not, you should pierce one thread at each of the two ends. And do this either inside the margin where hair grows or right above these hairs on the paper. Then draw the second thread across all the paper, and turn them over with a rasp tool. Afterward cut through the part under the paper, under the adjusted hairs, until you reach the corner; then extract one thread, insert a small cotton tent and lace inside the paper, then mark an engraving on the paper like a bay leaf pattern. It is also necessary that the figure matches the size of the raised area of the paper as it's marked for all.
And if you need to handle a larger quantity of paper according to how the paper has softened; then cut all the pus above the two lines that you've marked, and start from the large tear down to the small. And make sure there's one of those tears near the natural hairs in their growth, then pierce the needle in one of the corners of the eye socket, then remove it entirely; then bring both lips together with a stitch using a single thread for all .i threads of fine wool, and clean out the blood, and burn off any excess fibres on both eyebrows up to certain points that stickiness appears when you perform this action. And if this doesn't happen, don't worry about it, just leave the stitches open for .iij days or .iiij; then treat the wound without a stitch with drying and constraining substances as the paper will heal due to the direct contact of the wound, and bringing the parts together, but the stitches remain moist (as the old ones said), and this is done without fear.
And if through another method: and you mark the paper with a figure that is as such as the leaf of bay, as we have recounted, at three inches cut according to the form which is here:
And cut that which crowns the lesser powers evenly according to the form which is here:
And if you don't have the ability to hold the forceps, and the thing isn't equal, take one needle or attach two threads to it and place them according to the figure; and attach another thread under the large cut, and the second thread underneath the small one. Then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin over where you have marked out, as we have recounted, then stitch together both sides of the wound by sewing, and treat until it heals properly. And if pus comes to your incision, soothe it with ointments and similar healing substances;
And at no time do the paper hairs get converted: so it is necessary that you use what we have told about incising; but the stitches in one and the other are more artificial.
The treatment of canes follows this form: and it is that you should convert the paper and make a cut according to what I have said, then create two canes by art, and two small stitches as well; they should be long enough compared to the paper width, taking into account the thickness of the membrane covering the eye. Cut off two parts from each end of the thread; afterwards, skillfully assemble these two small stitches under the part that protrudes out of the paper of the eye, then pull apart the two canes in both directions and shape them accordingly; leave it like this for a few days, the skin that has been tautened will soften and heal completely until it comes out naturally.
If it takes longer, and if you can exert force, then continue treating until everything is healed; and when the wound has been stitched, and if the paper has lifted off, and no hair will grow back anymore; this is the shape of the two canes that you should make according to this diagram, and according to this length and width:
The surgical procedures are as follows: you should take a delicate needle and bind two threads of silk that are fine and smooth, then attach the shoulder's head parts by carefully knotting them together. Make sure the thread lengths measure roughly one hand span in length; next, prepare another short piece of silky thread to tie around the head firmly. Put the patient back into their healthy position and ensure sunlight reaches all areas for clarity; this is because it involves intricate details and small actions. Insert the needle to its end near the root of the hair, piercing through paper rapidly while you pull it up from natural hair above it; then extract hair until reaching the tip of the thread in the paper, and firmly tie that hair within the hole if there are one or two hairs present or more. Remove your hand as soon as the hairs appear fully out of the paper along with their natural hair length.
And if the groove is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, you should pull the groove from its opposite side until all the thread you have ordered is used, as long as the groove goes beyond halfway up and you can see it through your eye's vision; then remove the groove and the thread, and leave the eye closed for two days or three, until the hair grows back to its original place and new flesh forms above; and if the hairs are small, accompany one long hair from a sheep naturally, and lift it along with that or let it hang until it has grown longer, then tie it.
Regarding the corruption of the eye
When this illness which is called "aleacrati" or the corruption comes to the eye, if there are two ways: one natural, and the other unnatural. And happens suddenly from a wound, or from cutting or with a cautery, and by similar actions.
And the way of this work is that you cut that seam, and unseams the edges of it, and puts linen sheets inside, and seals until she's healed; and it should not be that you use in the treatment of it with things that dry and restrict. For if you do so, then the disease returns worse than the first one; but works with softening substances like fenugreek; and lets water or distilled and linen seed be cooked, and ointments of garlic melted into none of the oils, and wraps a tent, and treats it by this.
And the treasures of your cure are that you must beware not to seal it according to its former shape; and these works which we have spoken of are not out of remedies for this illness, so as to not return according to its former shape.
Of the fluid which comes in the eye
This disease that is found in the eye truly is called "axacrati", and it's natural and accidental. The accidents come from wounds, tears, cauterization, and similar things; and how this happens within the eye is as follows: you take a needle with two threads attached to it, insert it into the flesh of the eye, causing it to pierce through on the left tear duct, so that one thread enters inside the eye. Then the material goes up to just above all parts of the needle, and the paste at the end widens by .i spatumile wide.
And if the shape of the paper returns as it should, according to what is supposed to happen, then it's good; but if not, take a bone scraper and place it in the tear, turn the paper over, make two tears inside where they would be on the paper; and let the corners of the .ij. tears at the two angles of your incision be such that when they are assembled together, the shape will resemble that of a letter which has an 'n' and 'j' in Greek writing; then remove this tissue according to its thickness up to that point where you started with the paper, then adjust the .ij. torn parts using threads made of wool; then treat this wound as we have said previously about softening medicines and rubbing until it is healed.
And if the illness is due to a cut or suture or cautery, it should be that you make an incision full of the hairs on the paper, and according to what was said before; then cut between the two sheets with one knife, as I have said; and must perform the operation according to the shape of the illness, for she is much varied in shape, and the wise surgeons equip themselves everywhere so that they know how to make the figure return to its natural form; and the patients themselves, according to what needs to be done and instruments can be in various positions.
right away from the paper
When this stitch happens with hands in such a way that the paper above is sealed with the white of the egg, and cannot move or do its natural actions, then you should put the tip of a razor under the paper and lift it up; and stretch it using pincers until you can touch the subtle pulp underneath which should neither be too thick nor too thin, so that the patient doesn't suffer from an overly thick pulp causing irritation to the eye; make your incision carefully on the assembled area, ensuring the paper heals according to its natural form; heal all the assembled part and do not ever put in any sharp salt water in the eye, but instead lift it with fresh water and a colander; then place between the paper and the eye a linen tent, and put wet wool on the eye; afterwards for several days apply oil and other soothing treatments until it is healed.
From the eyelid of the eye
Know that the eyelash can be done in two ways: it is nervous and resembles a hard wax, and another which isn't nerveless but seems like frozen moisture. When one touches it with iron and cares for it using forceps, it cannot; both of these appearances start near the large tear duct, grow slowly and slowly until they cover all the eye, all the light, and the movement of the eye.
And the method of incision is such that you place your patient's eyelid in its healthy position, then open up the eyes. Lift the paper with your hand, and then pull out the nail with small forceps; proceed to cut above it. Then take a needle and insert two horse hairs or one hair from a cow or ox, along with strong thread. Double the needle point slightly and insert it into the nail, piercing all of the way through, and secure the nail with thread and place it above. Then burn all the way across the side of the nail which is under the eyelid and the silk hairs until you reach the root at the tear duct, leaving only the most delicate parts of the mucous membrane and using fine force. Let nature take care of the eye-liner region so that the usual tears do not leak out through the incision; and then merely extend the nail to the corner alone and thread, as we have said; then burn away all the mucus from this point forward, which is where this form begins:
And make sure that the pincers do not touch the fleshy cloth and break it, and that the pliers are not pierced. And after incision, pour a little powder into the eye, then make a bracelet of bismuth, and leave it until another day; then cure as it requires when he is well.
And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot push the needle in, and the cuticles do not enter, many times this semblance of a nail made from medicines is cured; and grows as I have told you in the division, and if it appears thickened, the eye sees by the disease, take the pincers slightly sharp according to this form.
And cut the nail gently from above, and if you see that it does not thin at all and the reason presses it, then distill from your mouth into the eye a bracelet made of bismuth and a red bracelet and some powder, and cover the eye until another day; then start the next work according to this same process, until everything is extracted.
If there is nothing contrary to your sight, for instance abscesses, then proceed, and first treat the abscess by cutting it open until it's clean. Then resume your work as before, until it is clean.
And if the appearance of the flesh at the eyelid affects the eye by great harm, then suspend it with vinegar, and cut out a part but not entirely, so that no tears come forth; then apply red oil to the eye which is made from litharge.
from the flesh that grows at the pupil
Some people are born with a single layer of red flesh, covering the pupil and constraining it to the eyelids, giving an appearance like a lampwick; and in this process, the operations involve having the patient's head in a healthy position before removing these eyes, and thus all that flesh is held by suitable forceps, then remove the first layer carefully up to the edge with the razor blade until the end of it. Be sure not to injure the eye during surgery; and make the incision as we have described previously for the incision of a nail and other small procedures, where you scrape away any excess, following this process shown afterwards in the chapter.
And when the incision is completed and all the pus has been removed, oil of burnt corn or you distil a red colander from it, as well as similar corrosive medicines, then place cotton soaked in this oil on top with an egg, so that it remains covered by heat. And if there's nothing left to drain and when the pus continues without heating, and you doubt about heat-induced pus drainage, then leave the oil and treat the pus drainage from things calming heat; then return to your work until it is healthy again, and thus make many incisions healed in the oil through this appearance.
But still it is necessary that you treat the cure of each weak oil in its natural way; and also for accidents in the way, in iron work; and do not insert your hand into any of these works until you see that this member endures that work.
of veins and eyes
When the veins that cover the eye become red and are situated over it, they tolerate vision of their work and weaken the sight for several days. It is therefore necessary at first to determine where this occurs in relation to your body, and apart from the sebel there is no other disease; then treat it as follows: instruct the patient to position their head so that it is aligned with the healthy part, then suspend those veins down to all the inches according to your wisdom, and have the inches be subtly doubled according to this shape.
And let there be two inches by degrees in one corner following this shape:
Then perform this operation by carefully suspending those veins, and let the blood flow after another hour, until you see those veins being removed from the eye; make sure not to cut into the eye with the tips of the spatulas. Perform this procedure at noon in front of the sun, and be very meticulous in your work so as not to remove more than just these veins. Once you have done this, apply a colloid of green and red color to the eye to decompose what remains from the sebel.
And if you do not have the ability to perform all of this in that time, then make a poultice from things that soothe the pain in the eyes and leave it on for some days until the pain is soothed and assured free of pus, then resume according to this method as was mentioned before until it is healed; and this is the form of strength:
of the tear duct of the eye
The treatment for what is called "arissati" fistula: when you cure it with a cautery and by means of hot water medicine as I have said before, and if it's not fully healed, then there's a method in cutting above the abscess, at its place where it should die, and draw out all the moisture until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed, and you will see corruption and darkness, if you remove it with all the tool which this text describes; and name it "hard head", and make it of iron to about one inch in thickness, and point it like a file as it is presented here.
And place the corrupted part of the bone under your hand, then press your fingers on it until you know that this corruption has been removed; and do this once, then return the area with medicines for drying.
When the flesh is joined and a scar forms, and the body of the bone is also joined, and remains in this state for forty days, and does not heal and doesn't become an abscess again, and no bad accidents occur, then you know it has healed properly; if this isn't the case, otherwise there's nothing else but to return the fistula to its original location according to this form: and when you uncover the bone a second time with iron and medicaments, and once it is uncovered take one rod according to this form, and fit the metal tube at three angles, and the shaft should be thinned just like shown here:
Then place it on the bone close to the sizer, and keep your hand away from the eye .i. pox, then turn around completely until you pierce the bone and feel the pain through that area if his wind is in it as long as he holds his hand on his nose; and then restore the limb with dry medicines as I have taught you, and when the child is born and hardens the limbs, allow the matter to go into his mouth; if a lighter thing is at the patient's mercy.
from the passage of the eye
When the eyelashes open completely and there is no disturbance in the heart or diminishment, it is necessary that you bind the patient; then heal him, then apply suction cups or a suction device without piercing to draw out blood, then place on the eye .i. an incision made from myrrh and aloes and frankincense and sarsaparilla, and then strain the eye, and plaster it with bands and cloths; and the way of the cloths is that you take cloths quite soft enough and fold each one in half four times, and then place them on top of each other according to how many inches the eyelashes require. Then strain over it from above with a hard band formed, and repeat suction without piercing; then remove the suction cups and let the eye be strained day and night until the bandages loosen, if necessary, you should strain the area quite firmly; then remove the bandage after day and night, and if you see that the eye is healed, it is good; if not; then continue with plastering and cloths and the bandage and suction cups until he is fully recovered.
From the bursting of a vitreous membrane
When disruptions occur in the vitreous membrane, then it opens and contains pieces like a grain of resin, which is hard to see; so if you look closely at this, the operations are as follows: you would poke an opening into the part below the eye up to that point, then poke another hole with one thread from the part behind the eyelid. And make the punctures, and let the first needle follow the arrangement; then cut out a part of the vitreous body with the double thread and tie it around inside, tightly, then remove the needle and place greased wool on the eye; and leave it until the thread breaks along with the vitreous substance, then cure the eye with soothing things until the wound is healed; and not once should a wound be left restrained by the vitreous body each part of a circle of cloth, until she is healed.
And if the eyes have a significant appearance, then pierce through the delicate watery part that comes from under the eye, and remove the moist albumen and let it go down on the vitreous substance, and enter into this place immediately; then extract until it is healed.
By the way of the eye
This disease known as 'alcunnati' only originates from an oil that is gathered in the eye, resembling descending sharpnesses, yet it is not actual sharpness; and the way it appears in the process involves making the patient sit upright on a stool or seat, then taking their head between your hands of four parts, and move them as you see the oil coming up above to your eyes; then place it inside, do not let it descend and remove any obstruction to the light, observe the matter inside the eye like it should be done; and if it does not descend outwards, know that it is sharpness, and if the discharge of the oil is not in accordance as we have said. When you sit the patient between your hands, then take the thin spatula and apply on the corneal surface with the continuity of the conjunctiva with the cornea and crown until the oil exits; and when it has exited, distill into the eye hot sharpness mixed with honey or hot sharpness boiled with fenugreek and honey, then continue treatment with other remedies until it is healed.
Of the tears of the eye
Here is the translation:
After a little rest, and when the infection ascends the second channel, apply force with the tool, and when it is firmly in place and does not ascend, gently remove 'almagda' while turning your hand slightly; then insert just a bit of pearl powder into this area and remove the eye. Then place it at the back of the eye using wool dipped in oil or roset oil, and cover with healthy fat. Now, for those who are our patients, we apply a poultice made with plenty of eggs.
And if it cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, for there are people who have too hard eyes, then it is necessary that you take the tool called 'alberit', whose form here is specified:
Then pierce only the conjunctiva and do not go too far inward, but do slightly, then insert the amygda (as we have said); and at the completion of the work provide to the patient another sleeping aid, in which he sleeps on his back in one lew. And be free from all movements, eat light meats, and do not move his head neither to the right nor to the left, and bind him according to his position until the third day; then release him within this dark house himself, and test his vision, let him see some things, and then return the bandage up to the seventh day; and it is not proper that you do this during the cure time or after the incision now, but it is proper that you administer this because the cut has healed rapidly.
When draining pus comes, you should release the eye before the seventh day and apply the remedy for pus drainage. And when he is relieved, then release his vision and place one eyebrow on his face to cover for a day, and be always in this dark house. And then exit from the house gradually and return to his usual condition; and know that no pupils should interfere in such cases.
And one came to us from the Marches, who told us that among them they practiced bloodletting by means of a needle, through which water was sucked, but I never saw any like this in our land, nor did I ever read about it in ancient books; and perhaps it is a new thing.
And these are the appearances of the forms of almagda, for those who do not know them see them; and they belong to arsenic properly:
And it is the head of this very subtlety, and the last one in three corners sickle-shaped.
from the nose to the chin
None of them are born or grow hairs in various places. Some seem like scorpions from the foot of a bird; and if there are such cases where there is a hair patch with red coloration, and if it's a hair patch with a good color. In those specific cases of these hairs that are colored well, not excessively so, you should have the person sit between your hands facing the sun; work their nostrils, and pour out the onion juice over these hairs, then remove them; afterwards take what you can bear to touch the subtle sharp tip on one side, until you know that this hair has fully grown out.
And if there is nothing left that we can't take, then open it all up with two fine, light instruments, ensuring there's nothing remaining; and if you don't exceed your strength or encounter an abscess, treat it as required; and if they are malignant ulcers, hasten and cauterize them until the pus stops flowing and all the hairs are removed. Then remove or excise easily either with water or vinegar.
When it comes to working on the nose and moisture reaches up to the palate, you should know that there is blood present. And if the moisture doesn't penetrate as it should, you should know that there's new tissue above the bone, so no tools come forth for cutting: thus, one must first push out .i. threads of linen, a bit thick, and tie them with your hands; have an inch or less space between each knot; place the patient's head by threading these strands through their nose to their mouth, pull gently until it comes out through the nose into the mouth; children often do this in school, and it is a simple task for anyone who wishes to perform it. Hold one coming out of the nose with your hand, and another coming from the mouth with the other hand, understand each after the other as we are holding them here. Do this until you can tell that the knots have rotten the flesh inside; then pull out the threads, drain any blood, moisten the thread in Egyptian ointment, and place it back into their nose as before; do this for three or more days if necessary, until the ointments dissolve all remaining flesh. Then put a paste of opium into your nose for several days once it is healed; and if there's need for dried medicine use them, this is how to use the instrument to clean out the head: one distills oils and medicines with the nose.
And use silver or lead, resembling an open lamp, like a cane, and guide it in the same way; and if you see fit, make a closed cane, and fill these tools to clean out the head; and have one hand for holding the head when heating the oil or any liquid.
from the flesh of the nose
Many times in the head there arises a disease called "telul", it grows and becomes large to look at; because of this you should cut it off at the beginning, and remove all bone, then put on the head the cautery or hot medicine; and if you delay cutting until it is large, when it is hard, notice if it has turned color, lost sensation: do not touch it with iron as there's an abscess inside; because once cut, great harm can come to the patient. And if the abscess is due to heat touch, not from changed color, and you see that it can be completely cut off, let the patient bleed freely under fear, and cure him of dry things and restraining substances.
When the nose is cut and sewn
Know that when solutions for continuation come into one of these open veins, it doesn't benefit much, as this happens in few people. Therefore, such situations should not occur to anyone else; if the wound is still fresh and all its blood is evident; then adjust the two lips according to a stitch pattern, and cure them until they heal properly; and if both lips have turned white on one side and the other, it is necessary that you burn every part of their keratin so long as they heal, then join the two lips with a stitch and keep them in place, and sprinkle dragon's blood powder and powdered incense on them. Then apply a piece of plaster of Paris or another adhesive plaster, and leave it until it heals by itself, and cure with ointment until healed properly.
The method of stitching is that you assemble the solution: or with needles, as we have said in the stomach stitch; or with thread, which I have shown you.
Of abscesses on the lips
In the mouth, within the lips there are abscesses that are hard like grains, smaller and larger in size. Therefore, you should open the lips and cut into each lump individually, then remove them with forceps from every part; afterwards, apply the mouth to a vitriol incision until the pus is drained out completely; then empty it gently, and clean the mouth of dry things until it heals fully.
Of the flesh of the gums
Many times, a whitish substance is born on the gums, which the old called "albulus"; it must be held in tweezers and cut at its root. Allow blood or blood to flow out of the wound; then place on the site with vitriol powder, or other drying and constricting powders. If that flesh returns after cutting, and does so many times, if it is cut a second time, and cauterize: if it doesn't return after the cautering; these are the forms of substances used to cut.
of the stinks
Many times they are assembled at the head of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, where the skins are ugly and rough; and many times the tooth becomes black and yellow with wormholes until corruption reaches the gum, making the tooth stink; it is necessary to hold the patient in your hands and his head so that you can see the teeth or the skin appear, until nothing remains. And thus make it smelly and green, yellowish and other colors, until they are removed; if what is extracted at the first attempt is suitable, it's good; otherwise, start again from the second day to the third, until you have everything out. Know that each tooth requires different cutting instruments for extraction according to its work shown by the dentist, as the remover of teeth outside the teeth has other forms than those used between the teeth; and these forms and others should be with you ready.
When you treat someone for toothache pain, delay the extraction as long as possible because doing so is not bad; indeed, it's a very high substance up to this point where there should be no excuse for removing it. When the patient is compelled to extract, ensure that you are certain about which tooth hurts. Often with tooth pain, be careful if it's a healthy tooth, and remove the good tooth; however, do not completely relieve the pain until the bad tooth is fully removed, as we have already determined this for these patients; and when you are certain about which tooth hurts, ensure to cauterize around the tooth thoroughly throughout i. spatumile firmly so that the gum stays in place from all sides; then move it between your thumbs or with your delicate forceps at a gentle tap-tap, until it is properly extracted, then secure well the forceps; and have the head of the patient below their knee, and hold firmly so that it does not move.
After extracting the tooth correctly without breaking it, and if there is no sudden release of pain, take none of these instruments and gently push into each part inside the mouth, and then move them as you did initially. And if the teeth are pierced or damaged, ensure to fill them with cloths at the place where they lost. And when extracting subtly with forceps, make sure it does not break during extraction; and one must very carefully work around the gum for ease of removal of the tooth.
And make sure to guard that you do not break it, and leave a part undone, causing the patient more intense pain from the root of the mischief than before. And be wary not to act like ignorant surgeons who in their haste and boldness break everything once, not bringing any improvement as we have described; but instead they bring this great disease back through the opening of these roots that remain, or through breaking the cartilage, which happens often, just as we frequently say. And when the bone has been pulled, wash the area with wine or oil and vinegar; and if bleeding occurs, which often does, wash the area with vitriol solution; and if this doesn't work, apply a cautery treatment.
The tools you use to pull out the teeth, which come into contact with the tooth first, should have long points and thick handles, so they do not bend when you are pulling a tooth; these are the types of tools:
And may have thick limbs that do not bend when pulling, and they should be made of well-crafted iron, and should have teeth for gripping during use.
From the root of the teeth When the root stays in the extraction, it is necessary to place cotton moistened with butter inside. For one or two days, until the gums are softened, then use the forceps called "algefri", which makes the tooth appear as if cared for; and do this also like a file, this is its form:
And if the roots do not want to come out with all these forceps, it is necessary that you expose the entire flesh around the root, and put in the tool called "althali", which is known as pincers, this is its form:
And make it strong and large enough so that it doesn't break at all, and if the root jumps out through this, it is good; if not, use all tools, as their forms come after:
And if one uses this tool which has two prongs, of which here is the form:
And other tools that are positioned before in the row of teeth, and with this tool that looks like a large pair of forceps, here is its form:
And may these tools be such that they cannot be broken, and know that many instruments for teeth exist; and similarly with other tools which are not numbered; and let the wise master find his own instrument by himself, according to what his tasks and illnesses demonstrate to him. For there are parts of diseases where the old ones did not teach any tool because of the diversity among these, and if they break nothing from the caries or of other bones, or if it rots, then he seeks for the tools that suit him, which I have told you about, and aids in gestures, here is its form: And let them be large and well holding for keeping the bone, so it does not escape, but can keep and remove it; and then restore the site with medicines suitable to this, and if there is rot in the bone, and if it is small, then take all of this instrument to retrieve it.
When the tooth appears not according to its natural form, and its shape is ugly, especially in maiden women, you should know if this tooth has been born after the real tooth, and it's not straight; then you can't file or grind it. Therefore remove it; and if it is mixed with the real tooth, take this instrument that is described here which has a form like half of a small beak, and made of sharp iron.
And the file grinds slowly in your hands due to the hardness of the tooth, and because you don't move the others; and if it is visible that one can grind it, then use a single piece file as described here:
And similarly to how one makes needles with the steel from nails; and by grinding down a tooth gently in short bursts, so that it does not move until it is thin; then in the end grind away completely without leaving any burr. And if the edge is too sharp and hurts the tongue, then you must smooth down the roughness of the edge until it is even, so as not to hurt the tongue nor corrupt speech.
When the tooth becomes dull
When the tooth in front becomes loose, either by shaking or by hitting, and the patient is unable to push it out with what they chew because it doesn't fall out; if you have treated the area with medicines that restrict movement, and this didn't work. Then you should restrain it with a thread of gold; for silver threads turn green and rot, but gold never changes.
And when the tooth is dislocated, if it's returned to its place, again and again, as we've said; and do not interfere with someone who isn't a professional or suffers from pain, and each time shape it like an osine (a type of bone) tooth, and put it in the position where the defect is, and hold it like we've said, and remains and serves thus for as long as needed.
of covering the wound on the tongue
None of the veins that come from under the tongue or naturally present at birth; or by accident due to injury that is healed; and these operations are such that you work on the mouth with the aid of medicine, having your head in a healthy position, lift the tongue; then cover the nervous vein so large, as long as the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if there is hardness or stiffness, especially from sudden injury, if I cut the uncinate and cover it with something large; and be careful that the cut isn't too deep, for fear of an artery being underneath; and when you have done this, raise the head to pinkish water and cool water, then put under the tongue a linen cloth; and treat your illness every night so that the mouth cannot heal. And if bleeding continues, place vinegar in the mouth; and if it doesn't stop, cauterize with slow fire, which is good for such cases; then cure with other treatments until it heals completely.
And if you see it being of any color or black or hard, such that the patient doesn't feel it, and doesn't touch it either, because it's a chancre; and if it has started to turn to blenchor, and there is moisture, if pus secretes, and one cuts with a fine needle, and discharges from both sides; and if it refuses you in your operation, then apply vitriol oil until it is completely cleaned out. Then return to your operation as long as you're removing all the force. Then raise the limb from the side and the heel, and treat it with other remedies until it heals.
of the abscesses in the throat
None of the times does anything come within the throat that are called 'godath', and properly they are known as two almonds. And when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and if they're not healed, be cautious: if it's a small, hard abscess with any color inside, don't touch it even with iron. And if it is red and its root is large, don't touch it even with iron, also because of the bleeding; but let it until it bleeds on its own, and then you will remove it, or it would break by itself. And if it's a white colored abscess and its root is thin, prepare your instrument to cope, but first look to see if the abscess has healed and calmed down. Then have the patient sit in front of the sun, and their head be in your line of sight when they are well, and let them open their mouth with servants holding their hands, and squeeze their tongue completely over the instrument, as shown here; and may it be silver or finely arain like knives:
Can you press the tongue to all this instrument and see the abscess, if one takes an ounce and puts it into the almond, and moves it above as much as you can; and removes nothing from the threads with it. Then control the tool, from which this is shaped, like some strength; and always make the head bent, and each to its place, and are very sharp, and made of iron or steel:
And if you don't have this instrument now, take the tool from which this is shaped:
And be it sharp on both sides and named; and when you have done one almond cut, do the other in the same manner, and after incision gargle the patient with hot water, or water that is hot and easy to drink, and if bleeding occurs, gargle with hot water, or with cooked currant almonds, or bay leaf, or similar things, until the wound has healed; then treat them until they are well; and let no new abscesses form in the throat other than the two almonds, so cut them accordingly.
And I treated a woman with an abscess that was inside her throat, to be precise, a small-sized abscess. She almost completely had the entire throat closed off due to it, so she couldn't breathe through the obstructed passage and consequently couldn't eat or drink, thus dying if she remained like this for one day or two. The abscess had risen to such a point that four inches of rope were needed for each of the two openings at her neck. I immediately proceeded with urgency, placing an inch of rope in one opening, then pulling it out and extracting a large portion of the pus; afterward, I placed another piece of cloth around this other opening, and forced her mouth open while pressing on her tongue; after that, I placed the inch of rope inside these abscesses, taking out some pus with it. Only a little blood came out from here; thus, the throat passage was unobstructed for the woman, she started now drinking water and then wine, and didn't stop cutting away at this abscess over a long period of time; and the abscess grew again immediately, filling up the space I had emptied out till it became very large; then I operated on her inside her throat: she did not grow any larger after that. And I left those areas, only letting God do what came after me with this.
of the eye
When the inflammation reaches to the eye and it swells significantly and grows long, then it is called "perpendicular". And when it's swollen and spherical, it's referred to as "eye" or "uvea". When it has been cured in the way that we have described earlier, yet if the cure doesn't work and you notice that the swelling of the abscess subsides, the eye becomes tender, then it is time for you to perform a removal; and if it's round when gathered together and not long; and it's red or yellowish or black in color, it would be appropriate for you to avoid incision on this. Because there is great danger to the patient from this. So whenever you see it, based on what I have described concerning its brightness and length, you should make the patient face towards the sun, press his tongue with the instrument that we mentioned previously; then place an inch of rope into the eye and pull it out again while doing so; and once you've removed it to about half of a double thickness. And ensure that you remove only as much as necessary beyond its natural limit; because if you remove more than needed, this could cause injury to sight and speech. After incision, use what we have described concerning the incision on two almonds, and treat until she is healed. And should there be fear from the surgeon during removal, it would be appropriate for you to apply an instrument of cautery here. The manner of the cautery is liquid in nature. And let it so that his head reaches your health, then press his tongue with the tool we mentioned under the chapter on cautery, and mix it with live burning coal until not too thick or too clear; and use the movement of this instrument according to its form:
And if there is a hair or part where we apply the medicine, like how a spoon moves, and place the instrument with all the medicine on the wound; and the patient remains still on his side so that saliva and moisture flow from their mouth into the medicine within, not descending to the throat and the neck; then hold your hand on all the medicine and press it onto the wound for half an hour's quantity, until you see the skin dry out and the actions of the medicine cease; and when you notice this, take cotton and wrap it around any tool, soak the cotton in the medicine, and place the instrument entirely covered with cotton above the cloth; continue to keep the cotton moistened over the wound as long as necessary; and do this repeatedly until the cautery is perfect, then let it dry, and heal after four days or five. And if you need to repeat the application of medicine cautery, do so, and after that, rub inside the wound with cotton dipped in butter, and clean out whatever remains within the medicine; and wash yourself with cold water, and continue gargling until fully recovered.
This cure is safer than incision or the cautery method; if it's treated with fumigation following this manner, take calamus and rosemary, and oregano, and rue, and chamomile, and yarrow, and other similar herbs. Gather all of them into one pot or any of them alone in a single pot, place it in the pot, and bring to boil; ensure the pot is well sealed with strong earth, and inside the pot place one tool according to this manner: And use silver or sulfur, and let one of these be placed in the mouth for the patient until the vapor rises through their nostrils, allowing the wound to be burned; repeat this often, until the wound dries up, making sure you do not perform this at the beginning of pus formation as many things occur then; instead, only do this when pus is about to disappear. And if such a tool is unavailable, take one stick and place an eggshell in the mouth of the patient, so that their mouth does not become too hot; for the eggshell does not let the vapor weigh down on the mouth, and it's a good treatment combined with salvation.
Many times it emerges in the throat bone or spinal column of fish, without anything else; therefore, if you must treat what you can see, press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument so that you can perceive any movement; and for what does not reveal itself to you, which is stuck in the throat, you should induce vomiting in the patient as if their food was cooked in the stomach; by chance if expel the obstruction through vomiting; or if the patient ingests a piece of sponge, a piece of navel, a lettuce root, or one small chunk of dry bread; and bind the sponge with one thread, then swallow it. And when it reaches its place, if it gets caught, and then pull forcefully; and if this does not work as what we have said, take one diving tool according to this form:
And have the instruments bent towards the head so that it may more lightly enter the throat, and raise the head high; and be cautious not to touch the epiglottis, that nothing might slip down or push the bone inside; and move when the patient pushes the instrument in, because if they are moving or obstruction is forced through; if it is pushed back down, or if it is pulled out forcefully with all the instrument evenly, until it is pulled out.
from the saliva of the throat
No treatment is provided for bleeding from the nose, as I have explained in division through medicine cure. Should this not prove beneficial, then look into the patient's throat from where the ailment emanates when you press their tongue with the tool mentioned to you. And if you see blood within, guide it out completely or half an inch using a fine pair of tweezers suitable for this purpose. If that fails, take a weaved hair and place it in the throat from where the ailment arises; then immerse one end of the hair into cold water heated to a warm temperature, perform this several times, and let the water drip into their mouth until they can swallow it, moving it around frequently. And as soon as the patient senses the water, they will vomit blood.
And if it doesn't vomit as we have said, subfumigate the ailment with asafetida like we did in the fumigation of the eye using the tool mentioned for that purpose; do this several times because the ailment will expel without any fuss. The manner of the fumigation is such: you take one pot containing burning charcoal and place it covered in a lid halfway through, and there insert the tool's handle into the hole at the bottom; then blow your fumigation, and place the tip of the hair in the patient's mouth while closing their mouth, so that the smoke doesn't escape but goes all the way to the stomach; and now the stomach will expel. If it doesn't vomit, restart the fumigation several times; and let the patient drink, eat salty things or similar, don't drink water; and then it is necessary for her to expel forcefully through this method.
And the shape of the tool used to treat blood is like this: when one can see it, it resembles curved scissors meant for entering the throat; and it has a likeness to a doctor's beak, and it is sharpened with grinding, so that whatever she takes, she cannot leave it. And here is the form:
The chapter concerning abscesses
The descriptions of abscesses are, according to what memory brings forward from one and the other in this book, and they vary in perforation and sizing; and there are two ways to do it, where one follows its own appearance and is moisture-related. And the second way is through the bones or where they are inside the body. because abscesses on the head are different from those on the foundation, and abscesses on the meaty part of a bone are different from those that come in joints, each has their judgment in action.
And for abscesses one should not pierce them until the body is dead according to their maturation; and if there are such that it's necessary to pierce when they have grown, and do not die based on their maturation, like abscesses located in joints. For when abscesses come from joints, if you let them rot internally by chance, perhaps the ligament and nerve of the joint will become corrupted, which is the cause of contraction in that limb. Or if an abscess is inside the main member, and if you delay perforation until it is dead, it will harm the main member; or if it's inside the foundation, piercing it should be done when it is dead; and it should not be allowed to pierce a growing abscess without complete digestion, except for that which is inside the foundation, so that it does not rot completely and remain buried within, leading to a fistula; and cannot heal in great extent.
And you must know the time of draining an abscess which is done according to completion, and this occurs when the pain subsides, and the departure of fever, and the diminution of pain and redness, and during the movement and sharpening of the head of the abscess, and other signs; and it is necessary that you keep the drainage hole as close as possible beneath the abscess, and where it opens outwards. And make the drainage hole long along the center line, and if the abscess is near the hands or feet, or at joints and in necks and arteries, and everywhere uniformly where there's no furrow.
In those that bend, according to the length of that limb. And when abscesses are in the soft flesh, if they swell you should leave the drainage hole until digestion is completed as part of the process, just as we have said. For if you pierce it before this point, pus would spill along with the body's venom and be filled with a heap of filth; and by chance harden the skin and the depths beneath him. And for every abscess that needs to be pierced according to the length of the body, as each limb requires. It is necessary to perform minor, shallow piercings, minor cuts; in larger abscesses, larger cuts, and many slits according to the size of the abscess; if it comes to such abscesses or one where you should shave him clean and cover; when he has healed as much as a small sheet, and is softened, then it must be done as it's done with sores: for those that are cut into three angles, and for those like the leaves of bay, like abscesses from angles; and for those where you make a round shape, and other cuts and similar shapes.
Those that do not have a head, such as superficial abscesses, it is necessary that you pierce them thoroughly. And when the abscess is large, and has formed a big lump, if you pierce it, but don't drain all the pus in that moment, instead drain some part of it; then cover the abscess until another day, then leave no treatment for that period; do this step by step several times, until all the pus drains out. Similarly, when someone's strength is weak, or a pregnant woman, or small children, or old, decrepit individuals. For the body shudders each time with the release of pus, and by chance dies from the disease, and you wouldn't know it. Therefore, use this chapter cautiously. When you have pierced your abscesses, if there is a wound, check that the wound at the abscess site is small; and if it's a full cut, then apply linen or old cotton patches; and for large abscesses, and there are many cuts, then each should be covered by one patch so they stick together; and if you made a cut in the abscess into some skin, and sewed it internally, then fill it with old cotton or rags of linen without moisture, and bind until another day. Then apply, and treat with ointment until it heals.
And if bleeding occurs in your operation, cool water and ease are to be applied, and moisture for half a day. And if the bleeding persists, then take control of it and treat it, using the powders that I mentioned in this book, whether it is due to cold or when the place where you have inserted or opened has become very nervous, then it is necessary to put damp cloths and moist linens on it in wine and oil; and if it is in this condition, and the place is fleshed out, then it is necessary to apply damp cloths with water and oil, or in cold wine and oil for three days, as we have said; and then remove the dressing and clean the wound, according to how you should do so, until it heals.
And this must be known universally in treatments of abscesses: I have told you how one should proceed before the treatment of abscesses, and here is the chapter.
Of these
From small pus discharges that occur in the head and are like in bandages, as with a worm's body, many seem similar. There are some fat and such which have moisture just like worms; there are also some that are hard like stones to a cutter, and there is no doubt they contain an artery without contradiction. And when cutting open for this purpose, use whatever tool called "entromissoire", as follows in its formation. It contains something because if it contains moisture, you do so from above over the long. And once the moisture is drained, then burn through without leaving any trace of the moist skin underneath, as it returns immediately when nothing is left behind; then plunge cotton into Egyptian ointment if available; if not, in water and vinegar, and apply this to the wound, leaving it until the next day; and that which remains overnight. And then resume with the cotton again as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know clearly it does not remain overnight; then heal the wound with ointment suitable for healing, until it is healthy. And if pus persists with one fat lump, cut along this shape, long; and let your cuts drain all around, and place your entire treatment cure over the bandage where it lies; and if the artery causes contradiction, do as I have told you after that. And also treat any hard pus bulge in a similar way, and when cutting and healing, as I have said to you.
And when you cut into the hard pus and the wet area, it is lighter because there's little blood. If there are any of these pus bulges or shoulder joints where no moisture was found, as well as .i. (one) pus bulge that I copied from an old woman; and found the pus like a hard stone, rough and white, and could not break it. And if you had pierced none of them, you would have made cuts just as well as for one stone. In other pus bulges coming out or those coming from children's heads and ear roots, the opening should be left for as long as possible depending on each individual case, so that the bowels can come out; and treat them accordingly.
regarding the instructions for dealing with scrophula (also known as King's Evil or leprosy).
Many times there emerges this abscess at the neck and in its vicinity, and also near angles, and nowhere else on the body or on any other organ; they are round, connected to each other. And each pock is properly within its bone, just as with the lymph nodes under the chin, as we have mentioned; and there are many appearances like these pocks. Some contain moisture, while others are malignant and do not obey healthiness. In that which you see has a good disposition towards treatment, and appears in the color of skin, silent from each side and not pressing against the collarbone or artery nor deeply; it is recommended to handle it from above, and scrape off each part, and place two fingers under each rib, if necessary as we have mentioned for abscesses under the chin; and treat gently and gently, be sure you do not cut the nerve or vein, and avoid excessive incisions that might cause bleeding, make sure your hands do not escape, and do not see too far ahead to avoid cutting what you should not.
And if you cut the vein or artery and it doesn't allow you to open further, place vitriol or some powders that stop bleeding in the wound, and restrain the wound; leave it until the abscess calms down and the wound softens, then begin to heal. And when the skin is healed, return to your work until you finish; then according to your skill's indication if there are still small pock marks, cut them out and clean them. And if there is a large vein at the root of the pock, it would not be right for you to cut that pock mark at its root, but bind it with a strong double thread instead, let it fall off by itself without harm; then apply old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment to the wound, then begin treatment.
And if you cut out the entire pock mark, it's necessary to assemble the two sides of the wound and stitch them together now, so that there is no excess left due to the size of the pock. It's necessary for you to be aware when cutting at its root, extracting fluids, and stitching as we have mentioned. Those pock marks held by excess, pierce where it opens naturally; and pierce in the same way as previously described, hanging down, then apply treatments with ointment and similar things, so that what remains from corruption is corrupted; and when the wound is well cleaned, treat with ointment until it heals properly, until it has recovered its health.
Of squinching
The old ones spoke and discussed about the surgery of the throat; but I have never seen anyone do it in our land, and this is their written word.
For those with squinching,[1] it is necessary that the incision of the throat known as "epiglottis" be made; and one should not attempt this, for all the veins and the lungs are vulnerable to illness in these who have abscesses either within their mouth or in the throat or .ij. amandines.[2] When the disease is in the channel of the lungs, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid the loss that comes from suffocation.
Therefore, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, it is necessary that we make a cut of three circles or four with one small incision through, between the two circles or according to the size of the incision therefrom, not in the cartilage;
And those loops are suitable for the division of the epiglottis so there is no flesh, and the vessels are long enough to reach it.
And if the surgeons are fearful, it is necessary that they extend the skin of the throat to all inches, then cut through the knee until you reach the chain; and avoid any blood vessels, if you see anything, and then carve at this spot as we have said.
And this is demonstrated by the division of the canal of the bile duct that jumps out through the broken part of the body and due to the failure of the voice;
and keep the wound open for a piece.
And when the time has passed since one begins to doubt strangulation, gather together the two lips of the wound as neatly as possible, and sew them all smoothly without the cartilage; then apply medicines that cause tissue growth until it is healed.
All right, if you do not perform this until the throat is completely swollen, and the patient is judged as dead, and the defect remains. So protect the epiglottis because the patient can't breathe normally, and they are breathing through the wound, and thus is kept from dying.
And because they commanded the old man to leave the wound open until the illness's evil passes, and it has passed in three or four days or so. And then they commanded to stitch the wound and clean it until it was healed;
And I will tell you what I saw. I see that a maiden took one knife, and stabbed it into her throat, severing some of the channels from the womb.
and I was summoned to treat her, and found her as dead.
I discovered the wound, and found that blood was flowing from it, and indeed she did not have a cut vein or pathway leading out except for her throat, and the air entered through the wound.
I hurried, dressed the wound, and treated it until she was healed;
And when the young maiden lost her voice due to this, she returned after recovering;
For heaven knows that in tailoring the epiglottis, there is no need.
of the swollen throat
Thick abscesses are called "throat hernia", and they are large abscesses in the color of a grape, and occur very often in women;
And according to two ways: naturally, and accidents; or natural has no means.
And the accidents are according to two ways, of which one is like fat in us, and the other way is like pus that comes from us through the artery; and there is fear, and it should not have fire done outside that in the one who is small, and prove and search throughout all the introducer: if you find it as one small piece of fat, and cannot reach any vein, then do it, just like we do with us, and treat everything in its covering, if there is any doubt; And search carefully always, and treat them accordingly, until it is completely healed.
after us
Many ways there are to do this, of which I will describe all the similarities;
and it is fitting that I should describe all the differences between us and them.
I state that the cause is heat and fever continuing until the boiling has passed, and the corruption is completed; therefore, the fever and heat must cease.
With the new one, there is no heat or fever or pain, and contains one gallbladder, which is its own sac and is within the flesh's color, beginning also like a cyst, and becomes large;
And according to two appearances, either fatty or moist, and most of the color are as I said in the division.
It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of the new one, that you first test and inquire about all the instrument which is called 'entromissoire', according to its form or chapter that comes after.
And the method of incising abscesses from us is that you take the wettest part you find inside the abscess and twist your thumbs gently, gently, until you know that the instruments have pierced the center,
Then extract the pus, and take care that it doesn't jump out.
If moisture is found, whatever its color may be, cut as I have said for other abscesses;
And if after the introduction there is no moisture, know that it's greasy, so cut it in a cross shape, and grab it with pincers, and lightly scrape off each side of it and remove the coat where it lies until you pull out the thing clean with the nut;
And if you can't pull it out clean, then pull it piece by piece so nothing is left behind.
For if nothing is left behind, the issue will recur multiple times;
And if it leaves a little behind and does not bother you, fill the wound with some corrosive powders and treat the wound, and place antiseptic things on hot bandages, and apply other treatments until it heals fully.
And if it is large for us, we measure two inches from the wound's edge, and prepare the treatment for the one who sutured the flesh.
And if the vein is more than two inches against it or otherwise urgent, prepare and use the iron tool for a short time, leaving it in place for two or three days until the wound heals, then continue with the copper treatment that has been left over from the new one.
Here are the forms of the instruments used for incision, and there are three ways: large, medium-sized, and small. If you have four squares which are called "albaret", and one that is called "breb". And there are also three ways: large, medium-sized, and small, to encircle the abscesses of fistulas;
And they are also like needles from which one cuts the roots, and they are made of citrine crystal, or iron, or silver, and those that are yellow in color are more effective than those with black polish to encircle the bends of fistulas;
And there are three ways: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the width of the cuts.
The shapes of the hooks resemble sheep, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and if there are two bends on the hooks in the same manner.
And if there are hooks with two bends, they are also in these three ways; and if there are hooks with two bends and single hook that only has one bend, and they are also in these three ways; and all of this is necessary in their place.
The tip of these is made sharp, and there are some that do not cut strength from one side only, which we scrape our hands with, because one does not sever the vein or nerve.
And these introductions have their replies placed on gloves, so that the patient does not feel them during the opening of abscesses.
And there are three ways: large, small, and medium, as you see;
and only use the larger ones for places like the limbs, such as legs and arms, and breasts, and in similar body parts;
and no other instrument of one size smaller is ever made, resembling the bark of a walnut, with this shape, to which bleeding can be applied:
And we place it at once within its healthy location where all veins are properly connected, and with arteries, and in no way follow such grand form:
None of the males develop breast swelling as they start to become corrupt, until they seem like breasts of women.
And remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wants to treat them, if it should happen to follow this form according to line b., up to .g.: Then scrape off the fat, and treat the wound with medicine that promotes healing tissue, then bring together the two edges of the wound for stitches, and continue treatment until it has healed completely;
And if the belly sags down, and is squashed by its size especially as it happens in women, so that she divides into two parts, with two similar cracks; From which one supports the other at the end of each and both, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line b until this line g; Then scald the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and follow what we have said about stitches and powders, and what is necessary for treatment until it heals.
And if it hasn't healed, or if the incision isn't fully made, because the patient doesn't want to rest or due to bleeding, you should fill the wound with wet cotton soaked in a corrosive ointment; And let it grow as long as it feels it, removing flesh and fat along with it, then treat until it becomes clean.
of abscesses and scabs
Abscesses that come from under the skin are manners of hard scrofula or when there are nodes, and if they contain moisture.
So for those containing moisture, it should be cut according to this form, from line b. up until the line .g.: And when all the pus from within the abscess is drained, one should fill the wound with old cotton and leave it until another day. Then remove all the cotton and apply balm to keep it clean until it heals.
And if the abscess resembles lymph nodes, one should open it as we have described for fissures of lymph nodes, and if the wound has pus, then apply a cautery in accordance with what we said previously.
from the rupture of an artery
When an artery is ruptured and the skin above it is sewn together, there are many times when abscesses form, and just as this happens with veins, there will be an incision made.
And if one knows this, then indeed when it is due to an artery, the abscesses are long and extend fully. And when you feel it with your fingers, if you sense a constriction; and when it is due to a vein, there are bulges appearing.
And it is foolish to remove this abscess, and even more so when it is found near the joints and elbows and in the neck, and in many other places, and it is very large. So it is necessary to avoid iron treatment, and one who has a fever should also avoid it, and in the case of arterial swelling, do so above the skin for its entire length.
So it is necessary to avoid iron treatment, and one who has a fever should also avoid it, and in the case of arterial swelling, do so above the skin for its entire length. Then undertake the operation on the body parts,
Then use a needle,
Then pierce the tissue between the two strands with an introducer until blood flows freely,
Then continue the treatment that reduces inflammation, until the thread comes out; Then treat with this ointment as long as it remains intact;
and if the abscess is due to the size of the vein, it is necessary that you dip your hand into this substance as much as possible of the abscess up to the entire skin, then insert the needle near the area you are holding in your hand, and make it pierce, and let it out at another point; use two threads together, so that you pull from the other side. then tie the abscess, just as I have told you, or with a thread of each side to two shoulder joints;
And if you doubt whether the child will survive, should the needle fail to puncture, then replace another needle with two threads of wool throughout the abscess incision from the first needle, and hold the threads tightly in four places.
Then remove the abscess as long as the excess comes out, then remove the excess gently and leave what is bound.
Then place one moistened linen cloth with wine and oil on it, then apply treatments and dressings until they are healed.
Of nerve abscesses
As with pus coming to the artery and the vein, pus enters the heart when it is cut, or due to too much work, and similar occurrences.
And this happens more often with the shoulder girdle and bones and throughout all places where there are joints, and it is one thing for pus to enter, and its appearance seems like the color of blood, and appears in various positions without pain;
And when it is squeezed or formed, the patient feels pain, and it does not come from within the body, but under the skin;
It moves in all directions and does not go forward or backward, neither under nor above; and one who is dislocated at the joints should not be covered with iron by chance, it might lead to constriction.
And he who has a head or forehead, lets the skin grow smooth. If his abscesses are small, and you have forceps, clip them at their base;
And if they are large, hold them at the armpit and cut, then burn, then remove the bone and stitch the wound shut, and treat until it heals properly.
large hanging masses No occurrence happens in the womb or anywhere else like this, and it's an ailment which is called 'fungus' based on its appearance. It has delicate roots and big lumps; and there are both small and large ones.
And I saw one person who had two bellies that seemed more like fungi than anything else, and there was no distinction between them, they were white, and had a slight root, and were slightly split, and were corroding due to moisture.
I copied them and found that in one of them it weighed 16.8 ounces, and in the other 5. The organs in the incision are such that when you look at them, you see that the patient is moist, and the color of the inner surface is white and moist with a delicate root;
If you operate in the wider area, and have a fire cautery present for you. For the surgeon often experiences too large amounts of blood, and if it escapes without your knowledge, then quickly apply the cautery;
And if you see the patient frightened and fearful of the incision by the iron, take a piece of well-made lead string, and tie it into an armband as we have said, and let it be for two days;
And then hold it tight, and never cease to tighten the lead string until you have tied the armband, and everything proceeds smoothly; and if the roots are large, so that you feel fear even for the belly, but you can well tie half of it.
Then apply the cautery so that it doesn't blister; then treat the wound, and make sure you don't tie up the thread which is of a red color and lacks sensation and milk-like pus.
For this is an abscess, and I will come to the treatment of gangrene afterwards.
When the bladder is full,
When the appearance of the bladder comes about through a wound or fissure in urine retention, and it is located on the abdomen and there are some bladders, just as it might occur in other ruptures, or blood that escapes from veins or arteries following what was mentioned before, or due to windiness;
And if it's due to the rupture of urine retention and through the outlet of the bladder, its color resembles that of the flesh, and it is a light matter without pain, and opens through various outlets. And if it's due to the issue of the intestine, then it's more diverse, and when you press it with your fingers if it responds and then returns, and by chance if it's squeezed and grows much at the entrance during bath and for strong work.
And if it's due to moisture, it's a simple matter, and opens well when you press it with your hand, it doesn't get stuck; and if it's due to blood, then by these signs the abscesses are large and hard, and are situated according to a quantity.
And if it's due to wind, you'll find suffocation at the throat, and the organs are such that when you look at their appearance they resemble blood from an artery, or a vein, or wind. If it is necessary that you let the treatment proceed. Because there is doubt and fear with this, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, concerning the artery and vein.
And if the appearance is from the intestine or the belly, then it is necessary that you instruct the patient to bleed their ailment and have their skin stretched completely straight, then cut around the entire circumference of the belly; Then command them to vigorously move back and forth between your hands, Then enter deep within the area you marked on all surfaces, Then expose half of the abscess above on every large curved part;
Then expose half of the abscess laid out on the tie, and put your index finger in it to feel the intestines; If you find it caught by its link, release it, and push the intestines forward from the belly.
And if you find it in the stomach, take hold of the knob, and remove any excess.
And if it goes against the artery or a vein, go straight into them, then return to your task and take two needles, and insert two thread tails, and place the two needles inside where you have pierced across.
Then tighten the abscess in four lengths above the needles, and if you see it, remove the needles, and let the wound heal on its own, and bury the dead body. When you encounter it when it is subtle and full of pus, then treat according to what is necessary, and clean the abscess as we have said.
When you encounter it when it is subtle and full of pus, then treat according to what is necessary, and clean the abscess as we have said. And remove the pus or moisture that you find, then treat the wound according to what is necessary, and sew up the wound.
And the ulcer.
We have discussed the appearances of ulcers and how to open them with medicines, as well as how to avoid iron treatment. Let's say that an ulcer can spread in the mouth and there is great caution needed when treating it; the old ones said that if you find a sore that can be scraped off, such as one found in the armpits or on other similar locations, then you should remove all of it when it starts. But if it's large and old, don't touch it because I have never known anyone to heal from ulcers; no one heals from them in front of me.
And in the procedures, when it is in place or can be removed as we have said before, you must cleanse the patient of black bile once. Then make them clean if there's evident overfilling, then perform the cleansing procedure properly for the operation; then remove any scabs or ulcers from everywhere, and the flesh from everywhere without leaving anything behind; and let the blood flow freely, pressing the area well with your hand or nothing, and if the bleeding counters the incision of an artery or vein, cauterize until it stops. Then treat otherwise when they are healed.
Of dropsy. We have discussed the appearances of dropsy in division, and how water assembly is made, and the signs of each appearance, and the treatment done with medicines, and that which is treated by iron: these are clearly explained; and should we not use iron in these two conditions: it means peritonitis and edema, for they are deadly matters; so when you apply medicine to this dropsy condition known as 'dropsy' through medicine, and the treatment isn't helping, if you notice that the patient is weak or has another disease besides dropsy, including stomach distension and other conditions; do not use iron because there's uncertainty; and should you see the body very green and it only has dropsy, without any other illness and is neither too young nor too old, you must act as follows: Let the patient lie straight on your hands, and have the attendant press their belly with the tip of an upturned spoon at the lowest part of the back. Then take a thorny spurge in this form: And make it sharp at one point, but not so sharp that it can reach until the intestine when you insert it, and cannot be squeezed;
Then observe if the ascites is extending towards the intestines: should you need to cut above the belly button three inches across from the sides; and if there's ascites due to liver disease, then make your incision on the left side of the belly button three inches. If it's due to the spleen, then do so on the right side, and don't have the patient lie on top of the cut as excess fluid wouldn't flow towards the weak area;
Pierce the entire skin with an instrument and pull it out, then lift your hand so that you're holding the thorny spurge between the skin and stomach as if searing in proportion to the size of a fingernail or slightly more; then pierce the stomach until the spurge reaches about halfway up, this is the height of the knife blade, then cut forcefully, here's how it should look for the instrument described: It resembles a slender silver rod and is made of iron or copper, weighing light. There are two small bumps on one part, three on another; and one bump on each other side; and the shoulder is cut as if into a feather, this is the shape of the incision that the writers draw in their description.
At the top is the heart, so when the instruments come into water, they now fall off on the instrument; empty it then either half or one-third of it, for if you remove more than it should in that hour, by chance it could kill the patient through his spirit's resolution from the weapon, or he might lose his pulse, or he approaches death;
but empty according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the indications of virtue on the patient signify, and his pulse; then guide the instrument and retain the water, and it is held now for the anesthesia that stuns the area we have spoken about, where you pierce in this manner. Then start over with the instrument another day, if you see the patient suffering from this, and extract a small quantity of water.
Do this every day, and refrain from drinking until there is barely any water left but just a little. And if you are uncertain about the patient, and leave too much water, if the burial cure or sand heats up, and due to sweat or bath and sun exposure, and turns red; then drink as prescribed. And apply the medicines for drying until it is clean, and cauterize on the stomach and liver and spleen after extracting the water, just as I have said before.
on commands the faulty one to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they pierce at their base, hold them steady so they don't move until they grow. No child is born without imperfections in the penis, or if the imperfections are small, or not in their proper place. If they can pierce through completely .i. soft and very thin material according to this form: then place one .i. small sharp clove on it, tie it up like so for three or four days, and when it desires to urinate, if you remove the clove, let urine out, and then put it back; and by chance there is no objection because the urine that comes forth does not leave it closed. If the imperfections are small, then medicine using a clove of plonc works well, as we have mentioned earlier. Those who do not have the imperfections in their correct place suffer from blindness, since no child is born with the imperfection at the tip of the penis; because they cannot urinate before lifting up their penis, and cannot get pregnant either for this reason that the matter cannot reach to the prepuce, which is a serious disease.
And the method for the operation is such that the patient lies on their back, then they lift the head of the penis and the belly in a manner akin to half the width of a feather, so all parts are exposed, as it should be; and beware of blood leakage which happens repeatedly during this procedure. If it occurs, stop it with someone who can staunch bleeding, and treat the wound until it is clean.
The pimples of the penis Many times, abscesses come in the penis, and there is a disturbing appearance of an ugly lump; and among them, some are bad and some are not. It's necessary that you remove those which weigh one twelfth ounce each carefully, then cut and clean all of them thoroughly afterwards. Then place moistened cotton on top with Egyptian ointment. Finally, cure it with clarifying ointment until it becomes clean. And if the scab is malignant, turning red and spreading, it is necessary to introduce a cautery. When you have prepared it, and if the scab is covering the penis and has part inside the skin and part outside, it is necessary to remove the scab that is inside first; and when it is healed, then remove the one outside. For when you treat them together, it's not enough to secure the head of the penis so that it doesn't pierce him, and brings blackness and corruption in his penis and the anus; if there must be cut away all that is black and corrupted, then cover with a plaster made of honey and flour which is made from almond skin and several times, then treat other treatments until he heals.
And if bleeding occurs, it is necessary to use the lunar cautery according to this form: The cauterizing tools should be arranged in two positions together: that is, at the time of bleeding and during corruption; and if the head of the penis has become corrupted and removed, then it is necessary to use a darning needle on the penis and let the patient urinate between them; and when the hair is dry around the head of the penis which is at these who have never been circumcised, or there was injury or an abscess, then you should burn with one tool with four teeth, until all the ligaments are free and the head of the penis is released from everywhere.
And if it is hard to decide on this matter, then you should burn with two small needles near the head of the penis and the skin; then open nicely between them, and I place one thin piece of linen in cold water so that it does not dry right at the head.
From circumcision
Circumcision is not merely about continuation like other wounds; nevertheless, when we perform this work by our own will and specifically for children, it is necessary that we do the best job, and cause the least harm to health.
I say that the old ones did not mention circumcision for their children, as they do not practice it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
For I have wanted the majority of masters and officers who practiced circumcision within the first two days, as well as the forces, and on every newborn; some were left because there are two layers, and by chance if one is performed above the other it remains below the former.
The recipient receives treatment and experiences double pain. In the operation where the knife is halfway in, the point of the limb is not completely certain; and in the operation on a nail, by chance the iron escapes from the hole and runs through the work, and many times it grows like it should not require an operation, and this I have observed.
The operation that is performed at the force on all the thread tie I have found to be advantageous from experience, as the forces cut precisely equally above and below.
For when you press your hand, if cuts equally at .i. throughout the length; but make sure the threads are well twisted inside the skin; and adopt the method of the first operation so that it makes the child think about whether they understand, that you apply force only to twist the thread around the penis just like that, and then let it hang in all ways possible that you can. Then let the person place it straight in your hands and return strength to your hands or under your feet so that the child cannot see them nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the penis and blow or pinch, and pull upwards until the head of the penis is inside. Then clean it well from the accumulated dirt, then tie its opening with a double thread, then tie it under one inch by another; and hold it with two fingers across the second strand at the scrotum and the first phalange, and place between the two threads, then lift the knee quickly and pull off the head of the penis.
Then let the person place it straight in your hands and return strength to your hands or under your feet so that the child cannot see them nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the penis and blow or pinch, and pull upwards until the head of the penis is inside. Then clean it well from the accumulated dirt, then tie its opening with a double thread, then tie it under one inch by another; and hold it with two fingers across the second strand at the scrotum and the first phalange, and place between the two threads, then lift the knee quickly and pull off the head of the penis. Then let the bleeding continue little by little, for this is natural; and put powder here and there on the powder. Apply a paste of one day's worth of beaten hard-boiled egg yolk mixed with pink water, combined with rose oil that is good and fresh, and leave it like this until another day, and treat again in other treatments until he becomes sane.
The form for the process of purification is as follows: let the two heads be held and be penetrating, and make sure that the heads are also large as the fingers equally:
The error of the world's transformation happens when the kidneys inside start to leak during incision; therefore, it is necessary that you stretch until your fingernail, so that the kidneys can create an abscess; and handle them evenly, and if you cannot hold with your fingernail, then use tweezers, and then treat them.
And if they penetrate for three days, and the one near the penis is swollen, let him wait until the formation of an abscess subsides, and gently scarify; handle them as much as you can move, and avoid touching the part of the penis, it will not harm it.
Therefore, treat the limbs of things that cause pain in powder as we have said or treated with powders. If you handle too much of the knee and it goes beyond, it will not harm; therefore, treat them as we have said until they are healed.
The retention of urine
The retention of urine can be due to the presence of stones, or blood that is frozen, or a bowel obstruction, or dead flesh, or similar things, which we have discussed in our division;
And if the urine is not being expelled and you see that retention is due to stones or blockage in the neck of the bladder, it must be that the patient lie on their knees. And their feet should be placed under their back, and spread out their abdomen above their back, and restrain the patient so they cannot move; then the neck of the bladder is forced to express the stone above, which allows urine to be expelled;
And if it does not come as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer an extraction to all the instrument that is called "syringe", which has this form: and let it be finely crafted, feather-light hair, such as a bird's feather; and may its rod be of long length half a palm, and let it be finely crafted at the head.
And the method for draining urine is as follows: take one double thread and tie it to the tip of one piece of wool or cotton, then insert the thread into the syringe head; cut off any excess wool and stuff it up to the syringe's mouth, then grease the syringe with oil or butter and add beaten egg yolk. Have the patient sit on a seat and moistly apply olive oil and water to his bladder and penis.
Then gently place the syringe into the penis until it reaches the root of the penis. Then pinch the penis upward towards the opening. Next, insert the syringe tip before reaching the bladder, and let the patient feel for the urine to come up to the empty thing. This is not done according to this order because what guides it twists. Then untie the thread from all the wool piece by piece, and the urine follows the wool, then remove it gently, making sure to dispose of the urine;
Continue with the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and relieve the patient.
diseases of the bladder
When burns or blood come into the bladder, or when pus has assembled there, and you see distilled waters and medicines, if you make for all the tool called 'clepsidra', and it is in this form:
She is closed and has three small holes: two on one side and one on the other, as you see; and the tube passes through there so that the medicine can penetrate well into the bladder without adding anything else, if moisture needs to be drained, and it can be done when necessary;
And when you see that your medicine is flowing in the bladder, place the cumin seed in moisture and send it to the one who is there; if you draw the moisture with the cumin seed, then vigorously set him back again; if the moisture enters into this condition now, and comes towards the bladder, so that the patient will feel it;
And this is the form of the subtle enema that one uses to irrigate the bladder: thus:
And it can be made of silver or bronze, and the shoulder should be positioned higher; and you perform this: first take a sheep's bladder and place the moisture in which you are going to irrigate the bladder, then connect the ends of the two sides with a good double thread, and heat one end of this moisture on fire; then insert the enema head into the urethra, then hold your hand over the bladder until all the moisture has reached it, so that the patient feels when this moisture has reached the bladder;
And if you don't have the bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make one circle, then pierce it roundly inward. Next, tie a strong thread at these points, then join the circle like joining two halves of a shield, and put in what you see from moisture and fluid and water, and attach this inside the instrument; do this as you would with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture is released into the bladder.
from the stone
We have discussed in our division the methods of stone extraction and amalgamation of medicines; and we explained the difference between stones that are removed surgically like kidneys, and all their signs, and on which stone one should perform a size operation; and about the bladder and penis; and I will explain it openly and briefly.
I state that the stone inside the bladder often occurs more frequently in children, and this is a sign that there has been a urinary tract ailment similar to an internal one; it opens, and causes great pain for those afflicted, and they can perform many actions, after which it heals; and at times of these occurrences, the base becomes weak; and until the child reaches four years old, their recovery from illness is relatively easy, but is much more problematic in older individuals, particularly those transitioning between youth and age. And generally, the treatment for children with larger stones is easier compared to those with smaller ones.
And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first of all to cleanse the patient through the bladder, in order to drain out all the fæcal matter within their intestines. For at times they are obstructed by trying to expel a stone.
Then take hold of the patient's legs and lift them up, moving them away from the body, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, leaving it not high above; then have him sit between your hands, with his arms bent at his sides, so that the bladder is fully hanging downward; then you should examine and touch it from there.
If you feel the stone in the space, hurry and cut on the stone now. And if it doesn't move at all upon touching, moisten your index finger of the left hand with oil from your hand's right side; if it is soft, or your middle finger, if it is medium aged but fully developed; then cut into its base and hold the stone, and when you feel it on your finger, cut it off at the bladder's neck; then press onto your finger, and cut the stone through where you see to cut.
And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and instruct him to extend his right hand above in front of his other hand's fingers, and hold the skin that is over the testicles in the part where you make the cut; then he should squeeze out the semen sac containing this form:
And make the cut between that which is between the testicles and the base, not in the middle but at the side of the left thigh; be straight on the stone, and let your fingers touch or reach to the base, and make the incision so that it is wide outwardly and narrow within, according to the size of the stone, not too large.
By chance the pressure that I must apply, which is or becomes a foundation, will jump out without effort; and you should know that there's stone where angles and margins are: if it's to emerge; and if on the other hand it lies below, resembling a walnut, and round, from which the release is easy.
In the case where there are angles and margins in the sky, make the size larger; and if it doesn't jump out, then you should apply force with the tongs that are as sharp as a file to strain against the stone so that it doesn't escape; or you might push through from below .1. fine thin tool bent at the tip; and if you can't contrive it like this, then widen by .1. point of sharp edge, and if it is without a decortication, then strain with vitriol;
And if there's more than one stone, start by pushing out the largest from the neck of the bladder first, then dig upwards, and apply force, and afterwards remove the smaller ones if there are any. And if it's very large, you should cut, and make a larger wound. For two things happen to the patient: either he dies or his urine starts coming through without being able to weld; but always strive for extraction, or with tongs, until you pull it out piece by piece;
And when you have completed your work, dress the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, bind it, and place one moist handkerchief under oil and wine, or under oil and cold rose water and water, to soothe the inflamed abscess; then apply the patient gently upwards towards their neck. Do not loosen the binding until the third day.
And when you loosen it, rinse it well with oil and water, then treat it with the ointment of dyafinicon and basilicon until it is clean.
And if the abscess is inflamed in the wound and corrosion occurs, or blood clots form in the bladder causing urine retention, which results in a condition where one must urinate without passing any urine: then apply your thumb to the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will inflame the bladder and cause decay;
Then clean the wound from water and salt and dirt, and support him in all manners that you know, as long as he is healthy; it is necessary for every treatment you give him, to tie his two legs together, and apply medicine on his body.
And if the stone is small and it's located near the penis, being inserted deep inside, preventing urine from passing; then when treating as I have described, cut him multiple times, making allowances for the cuts due to this treatment method. I have already proven this practice effectively.
Take one iron stake according to this shape and have three points fixed in one nail:
Then take one thread and the tie around the shaft of the penis up to the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then insert the tool lightly in the penis until you reach the stone. And turn the tool with your hand in the stone bit by bit, until you can pierce the stone from another side; if the urine starts coming out, then press your hand on the one remaining part of the stone that is inside the penis. If it breaks soon and urine comes along with it, and then takes care of the patient's injuries.
And if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, tie one thread around the stone and another above, then place the penis in the space between the two threads. Then pull the tool through, and remove the thread, and cleanse the frozen blood clot in the wound; and treat until it becomes clean.
from the vagina of women
Sometimes, the stone can become trapped in women and if this happens even once, it requires a cure. It is forbidden for three reasons: one possibility is that perhaps the woman was a virgin; and secondly, no one could find a married woman who knows how to protect herself from sight, especially when she is chaste.
And the third way is that perhaps one cannot find a woman who knows well this art of hands; and the fourth way is that the stone in a woman would be more forward than the stone in a man, so it requires deeper cutting, and there is great fear involved.
And if you must resort to this, it is necessary that you seek a skilled midwife and approach her properly. If you cannot find one, then ask for advice from a well-chaste woman with some knowledge of the art of women's affairs. And present them with a wise and experienced woman in female matters, or someone who knows part of the art, and command her to do as you instruct on the examination of the stone;
And make sure the woman is a virgin: then it suits her to press on her pubis or foundation and seek the womb; and if she finds it, you force her to bear onto her pubis beneath her, and advise that she presses her pubis against the ailment, and forces with her left hand upon the bladder formation.
If she finds it, you must move it gradually from the entrance of the bladder all along to beneath, until she comes to the root of the thigh; then press on the womb in the root of the thigh against the middle of the pelvis, where the vessels are found, and feel the womb in that area; and do not move her pubis above the womb or beneath it, and make sure you're working with small movements from the start.
Then press on her pubis in the lower abdomen, if you feel the bone increase the wound until the bone can come out freely, and know that there are many kinds of bones: meaning small and large, rough and smooth, long and round, and those with grooves. You must recognize their characteristics to know the exit path.
And if the [missing part] doesn't hurt you, place it in sulfur broth and hold it for an hour until the [missing part] is cooled. Then return to your work until the stone is hard, and have the tools I've told you about in stone extraction ready for your assistance in your task;
And if it's not painful when the artery is cut, apply powder on the wound and bind it with bandages tightly, don't repeat this process again, leave the stone alone without trying to remove it in case by chance the patient dies; then heal the wound.
And when the heat of the blood has subsided and the limbs have recovered, then return to your work until the stone is hard.
of fatty hernia
Aqueous sprouts are nothing else but assembly of moisture or white yolk, which is inside the cover of the balls, that contains the egg; and it's called "yolk", and once properly in the membrane of the egg if one thinks it's an .i. other egg; and this is the skin under the balls containing the white yolk we said; and this does not have a hole.
And the formation of these aqueous sprouts is so weak that it comes to the balls, and this substance spreads out.
And it never comes from striking the balls, and this moisture has many colors: or it turns to yellow jaundice, or there is no redness, or it's black, or it's a white aqueous color, and this happens more often.
And these are the signs to recognize this assembly, for if it is or white yellow like we have said, then the pus balls appear, that is, long as an egg figure, and do not open the veins, because there's moisture throughout.
And if there is moisture in the original fabric, then the pus balls appear with part of the egg, and because of this we think it's another egg;
And if the moisture is between the skin of the veins and the yellow substance, you will feel it well; therefore, when you know the color of the moisture, you should examine thoroughly all the inner part, as described previously. So, according to what comes after the inner examination, judge about what is inside.
So, according to what comes after the inner examination, judge about what is inside. And when we heal it with iron, it is necessary that the patient be cleansed according to our ability and the restoration of their body; then support it on its back, on something a little high, and place wool underneath them.
then sit on its left side, and instruct the minister to sit on the right, and extend the rod towards one of the two ribs near the heart.
then take the spatula tool, and cut through the skin of the heart area from one end until below the knee, making sure to do this in a straight line when cutting through the heart skin up to the white flesh, and gently scrape off the fat using our ability.
then pierce the white flesh completely with water, drain all the water out, and then place the forceps, ensuring that the white flesh is above the piercing. Do not touch the heart area, but only the white flesh; remove it completely or in parts from his skin carefully, for if it's not removed properly, water might come back.
And if the egg jumps to your task, you reset it in its place as soon as you have completed the task with syphilis; then join the two sides of the heart incision into one stitch, then treat it like other wounds until healed.
And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, it is necessary that you tie the vessels that are hanging down, while doubting about blood flow; then cut the foreskin to all hanging parts, and remove the egg, and treat it as we have said.
And if the wound has been divided into two parts, know that these are two stumps. Then cut the other part in the same way as you did with the first equally, then clean out the blood, and apply wet wool saturated in rose oil to the wound;
And apply a different wet wool in wine and oil, and place it on the two kidneys, and cover it with double cloths, then bind it up securely following this form:
Then take two cloths, and fill them with matted wool according to this shape, ensuring they are joined together in the waistband of the breeches. Place one of the shoulders at the foundation up to the back, and the other near the edge of the hand; place the second pair on each shoulder bone, making sure all parts are gathered into the loop of the girdle;
And once this cautery ramie is treated like iron, you should take one small surgical cautery and cut the skin of the kidneys. Heat it up as we have instructed, so that the white water in the steam becomes visible;
Take the fire cautery according to this form, and pierce it at this spot with your fingers, and burn it gently with this fine cautery tool:
And cut it in every way that you can until you are able to fully remove it; and be sure not to let the fire touch the egg; know that this operation is more successful; and beware of blood loss during operations, and remember the importance of size of cuts.
And if anything goes against you, or if pus accumulates or there is too much blood loss or any other issue, address what goes against you according to what has been said previously.
And if the patient is fearful and cannot bear this operation due to its severity, then perform a puncture as I have instructed you, and understand that once you are certain based on what we've discussed, that the watery part of the illness is present,
Make the patient sit on one raised seat; then puncture the abscess in its lowest part at the entire surface width, and make the incision as long as the body's length; and ensure that all the pus drains out.
Then place cotton on top of it, secure it in place, and let the discharge of pus continue. Once the wound has healed, then treat it further until the injury is completely cured.
And if the white bandage does not allow pus to escape from the wound, it is necessary that you insert a feather or an instrument used for the treatment of pus in dropsy patients, as described above; and open up half the length of the wound, and know that the pus will return, and after about seven months or until the end of this period, and when it has returned to its original state, like before, then the patient's days of illness shall pass.
From the abscess of the kidneys
Know that in this section there are various ways to handle fear, because I believe it's better to just let it be.
and I will tell you about the work and the appearances of the abscess.
So I say that many abscesses come from orbes and even from kidneys; and this happens by chance.
This is to know through excess of sour and feverish matter which spreads throughout the body, or from impact;
and it has the color of pus according to the color of blood; and you do not find any pain, and it is pus-like;
And by chance there is a green and pebbly pus, and it has a yellowish color, and never comes from any artery, or swells veins.
When it is due to an artery, you can tell by the position of the pus when you press it with your fingers; And you must not touch it.
This one, made from swollen veins, is known by its arrangement under the palpation of the fingers,
And it can do very well to measure this resemblance and on other parts; And be sure to hold the right side of the belly, then place the egg at the top, and pull the white string from it, and free the suspensor from all around the egg.
If the egg is already stuck with these new-borns, then it becomes necessary that you pull out the egg and its shell.
And if it's in the uterus or inside the vessels, then it is necessary that you deliver all of this fluid, and remove the shell in a circular motion.
And if the birth of the child is or behind the belly, it becomes necessary that you remove all around it, and extract the egg, as we have said.
And when your operations are completed, dress the wound with wet wool in oil and wine, then treat it with other remedies until it heals.
From the removal of pus from the anus
This is an abscess enveloped in an envelope resembling one-half inch in size, with softening of the anus, And when it goes, the patient feels severe pain in the anus;
and the treatment for this disease is similarly thorough as described earlier,
And still we will tell you about this work of it, according to what the old ones did.
It is necessary for you to make the patient sit on an elevated stool, then hold up the scrotum above the anus with your hands, all the veins that are near to the penis, and the testicles you hold in place, and extend them forming;
then cut into the saphenous vein with a sharp incision wide enough to reach the veins, as long as they are exposed,
And then burn from each side, as we have said in the extraction of arteries which are in temples;
Then prick with an awl or needle where there is a thread of 1. and bind it to the first bone where the screw came, and bind straightly to the other end; Then cut them in the middle straightly, according to the length of the body, and remove all the corrupted moisture.
Then treat the wound as with others where one wraps around, so that no vessel bleeds that nourishes either of the kidneys;
For it brings no harm, and if at all the veins come visible, then bleeding should be done on all veins; so that the intestines do not lose their rhythm due to the incisions of the veins, and dry up and cannot be aided.
from the rupture of the uterus The events of this part are through the section that comes about from rupture or the stretching on the abdomen in the area of the ribs, because the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the intestines;
And this rupture is where the syphilitic sore exists, or from the stretching of it, and these two ways of causing it come about: through percussion, or a jump, or by shouting, or lifting a heavy object, and similar actions.
And the signs when it's from stretching of the syphilitic sore, are that they happen little by little over a long duration, and do not come suddenly. And the abscesses are equal until around the anus, because the syphilis presses on the intestine.
And the signs are present when it's from the section of syphilis, causing sudden pain to appear at the beginning, and the abscesses are variously noticeable, near the skin area, and this is due to the exit of the intestine and the body part behind syphilis.
And every time it happens that the loops come down with the intestine, and are held back, and cause great suffering to the patient when pressed, even if it is pressed.
And in these iron treatments for fear, one should avoid them.
And the method of the operation is such that you instruct or tell the patient to pull out the intestine with their hand inside the wound, if it can fit. Then sew up his neck, between your hands, and lift the legs;
Then they trim above it, and cut away all the skin of the cows until long. Then cut through the belly skin in inches according to how you need to open the wound, and do so in such a way that the intestines can come out if needed.
Then remove the fat on the stomach where it is under the cow's skin, until all sides of the white fat are exposed.
Then place your thumb on the side of the cow that is under the fat and skin where the fat is between the white fat found beneath the eggshell, and also between the second layer of fat.
And let the one behind the egg, and between the second testicle; then move with your right hand inside the belly of the beast, and have the white part of the egg up at your left hand's top, and gently lift the egg towards the belly area; And command the minister to extend the egg upwards, and release the one that is behind the joint;
And check with your fingers if there's any part of the intestine wrapped or white testicle hard, and if you find no such thing, then push it towards the belly.
Then take a needle with one and a half large threads made of ten separate strands, and prepare it by passing the thread through the posterior part of the syphace, which is after the skin of the kidneys; after that, pinch the parts that appear from the strands until there are four strands left. Then join them one on top of the other in a cross-like manner, and bind the syphace, as we have said that it is under the skin of the kidneys, with a strong thread of two parts. Then wrap the parts of the threads, and bind them firmly with two parts each, so that none of the wires inside them can enter into it, preventing any abscess from occurring. And make the tie at first according to the longer first link of two inches from that, and after these two links leave some slack which is over the knee of the bow on the inside, about the size of one inch.
And afterwards follow the roundness as he wore it; then cut in the area that is near the leather of the knees, until the brace and the bow fit him, just as we said before.
Then apply moist wool oil to the wounds, and place it on them, and put in the brace that we have described. And once the white silk that we have mentioned has been cauterized, after the incision, in case of bleeding.
For this happens many times, and let the string stay until it bleeds for him; and if he takes too long to bleed, then heat the water, and place upon it what we have said, until it bleeds.
Then treat the wound with another cure, until it is healed perfectly.
regarding fatty hernia
In this branch, I never see anyone who dares to perform the treatment with iron.
And it was said by the old ones that this is done like a branch that is assembled in a way where you tie the veins, after trimming them gently above the fingers;
Then follow me, and treat the abscess of the one who is working, as long as there are veins bleeding. And treat it in the way that we have said, until it becomes healthy.
Never let the belly rupture in anger, as we have said, and open their insides; and do not allow any intestines to fall out except if it's because of a specific issue, for otherwise, it is rare. Fix everything continuously.
And even if they stay too long at this point, assume the wound or the abscess has formed, as long as the intestines are falling out.
And this happens through the extension of the syphac which is in the belly, as we have said, because it extends, then it softens and swells up their insides and opens.
and the treatment is by cauterization, as we have previously mentioned; and there are times when it's treated with iron in this way:
and if the patient lies prone on their back between your hands, then lift the part that's swollen outward in a wide arc according to the size of three fists;
and then extract the fat that's under the skin where it follows, then take hold of it and place it on the outward protruding part of the fat.
and then press forward towards the belly, then cut the two protruding parts of the fat on the edge of the fat next to the middle of the fat, and cut both.
Then extract the head of the rib, and do not cut it in half or extend the egg anywhere else, just as I have instructed you in treating the pineal gland of the intestines;
Then treat it by healing wounds. And when you cut the threads, if you remove and heal the wound until it is healed.
The heart is confined, and does not show itself in the operation, and the cautery becomes wetted in this place, and closer to salvation.
of softening the skin of the heels
Many times the skin of the testicles in some men becomes soft due to the fluids within becoming softened and it can be observed; and when one wishes to treat them, one must make the patient relieve himself on his back, and let out the softened skin towards the natural skin. Then it is necessary that upon wishing to heal them, one frees up the discomfort on their back by removing the soft skin from three stitches or four firmly; then cut between the stitches, and sew the wound like any other injuries until it heals, and cuts the thread.
of punishment
Know that chastremens is excluded in our law, and because of this I would prefer not to mention it in this book. And they are necessary only for two purposes: one being that the person understands when asked about them and knows how to treat them; and the other, since we often need to chastremen some animals to help us, such as with goats and sheep and cows and others. Therefore I say that chastremens is performed in two ways: either by attraction or through cutting.
Of hermaphrodites
Hermaphrodites can be in two ways: one way is that between the two openings at their genitals they resemble a woman's natural figure, having hair and sometimes urinating there. And another way is for women, with something on their belly like a penis and two openings. The treatment of this type and female hermaphrodites is to connect all the parts properly, then treat them as other wounds; in the second type, from men whose urine jumps through the skin of the genitals, there's no treatment required.
Of the measles
Measles is an afflicting rash that appears on the natural body parts, it's so ugly to see; some women also have them as big as a hand, and this needs treatment. It's necessary for you to color the excess of measles on your hands or forearms, gently removing it; don't remove too much at once, in order to avoid bleeding, then treat with another method until it heals; there is another rash that appears near the mouth of the pregnant woman, she applies it and sometimes burns, resembling a cow's appearance, and for this they called it the old "cow disease". It must be treated as we have described measles and its treatment until it heals.
Of cautery from fire command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Erratic is the one who fails to perceive the nature of the female body or has a small defect; it's natural either by birth or due to accidents resulting from disease; it can be caused by impurities in food, or due to subtle or coarse substances that are taken internally; and it results in symptoms being felt across the front, back, sides, or wherever it may be. Understanding this requires observing the womb and fetus. If the issues are superficially apparent, they might be near your hands or knees.
Regarding piles (hemorrhoids).
Wounds are openings of veins which without customary treatment, and when wounds become hard, they turn into thorns; we've mentioned these aspects in section divisions, as well as signs, and I will now speak about those that respond to treatment. I state that wounds and the thorns, once they settle deep within flesh, cannot be detected by touch until they are treated with a metal rod. Those located at the opening of the wound can be felt, thus able for treatment. Hence, you should place the woman in a cold room, then apply the thorn using forceps; treat her roots afterwards, then powder with medicine that stops blood flow, such as comfrey and dragon's blood and incense, among similar items. Then bind her feet to her bed for an hour, then submerge her in cold water; should bleeding occur during this process, immerse her in a decoction of sumac, inner pomegranate rinds, and gall, among similar things, afterwards take barley flour, mix with honey and almond oil, make it into two plasters on her back. If it stops bleeding, that's good. Shouldn't work out, should she bleed from her back and nipples using force; then take sheep's wool, make a poultice of plantain juice or elderberry juice with old wine, heat this over fire to her. And when the abscess settles down, treat her flesh with ointment until it heals; one called 'albathir' is red, and resembles a hardened thumb nail, like thorns need to be treated similarly; then continue treating her until she's healed fully.
The contents of the wound
Many methods of abscess occur in the armpit, such as gangrene, stone abscesses, herpes, and other diseases that I mentioned in sections. Therefore, it is necessary to describe in this treatise on the hot abscess occurring in the armpit, which isn't one of the abscesses that heal with poultices; if you see the signs for iron treatment, observe whether the abscess becomes inflamed and full at the beginning of its appearance, and is filled with heat and fever, and if it turns red you can see it. Therefore, don't rush to pierce immediately; wait until the pain subsides; then have him lie on a single pillow, place two small pillows under his knees which he leans against, support his back and gather together his feet towards his legs; spread out his buttocks, place his arms under his knees, tie them well with a strong bandage; then bring up the armpit towards his right side, and apply the tool used to open the wound, the shape of which will be described later; it is necessary that when you see this tool applied, you make the first cut in order to know the depth of the wound, so that what enters the tool does not penetrate deeper than it should, and does not hurt the patient; if the tool is too large, then cover the depth of the wound with bandages, so the tool doesn't cause discomfort; it should have a funnel placed above the wound and cut the tool. And when the abscess opens, and you find it soft in hand, then apply to its head or sumpill hole; and once the pus is drained out, you must put oily bandages filled with oil roses into the wound; place the bandage at the depth of the wound, spread it under the wound and under the armpit with clean oily bandages that have been boiled in water or cooked with lily roots; then treat after two days with an ointment suitable for this, until it heals fully; and no time should be lifted the armpit and the wound by water and honey, and then water or lily roots long boiled; then revive with the ointment. If the wound has healed in the armpit, you should avoid iron treatment, but treat it as we said in sections.
Of childbirth
The first profession in labor is recognizing the natural birth figure, and these are signs: when you see a woman rush to give birth, and desire to smell amniotic fluid: then the baby should quickly come forth; at this point you know that the birth process follows its natural course, and happens through her abdomen, followed by the second stage with it; and when you notice these signs, gently pressing her stomach is advisable so the baby comes out promptly; because as soon as it descends from its head, the second stage comes with it, and its placenta is born naturally cleaned of excess. Any other birth process does not occur naturally. It either occurs on its feet and involves parts of the body or limbs, or it involves her belly or breasts, and turns unexpectedly around its neck through other harmful positions; therefore, a midwife must be wise and astute in these matters and avoid error and deception, and I will show you all the figures on how to assist properly.
When the baby descends through its head by a natural outlet, and the woman experiences severe labor pains, if her strength is weak, she should sit on a stool or have women hold her. She should eat food from fenugreek that has been cooked, and then have the midwife place between her fingers a small spoon (spatumile), as shown: And cut the second part, and remove until the moisture that is within has left; and press on the woman's abdomen as the child descends, if it doesn't descend then you should administer castor oil to her along with fenugreek seed oil; afterwards have her take ginger and drink water, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: once the child is now out. And when both of those two hands come out forcefully, then gently insert them little by little; if they can't enter then put the woman on a stool, and lift her feet up high; then remove the stool from underneath her, and cut near the woman ensuring she doesn't urinate during this procedure; and if her hands still can't enter and the child has died, then take her hands with the knife previously mentioned, extract the child, and gently massage equally.
from the birth of the child on his feet And when the child comes out on its feet, it is necessary to lift it up high; And then turn a little bit by little bit, until they are even;
Then hold one inch of the thread and extend it a little bit by little bit.
Can he jump up to the thighs, if commanded, and make it emit smoke from consideration; If he can jump, may God will it.
And if it doesn't adhere as we have said, if you twist a little bit by a little bit, until it is according to the natural shape. Therefore, make it lightly.
And if it doesn't follow as we have said, take a handful of alum, and oil of sesame, and ground gum, and grind all in one pestle until it is done. and apply this balm inside and outside the woman's body. then have them sit in hot water up to their ribs;
and when they are sufficiently moistened, give them one spoonful of myrrh, and place it there, letting it stay for an hour; then have them sit on a stool, then make them sneeze and restrain their mouth and nose, and gently rub their abdomen, for the fetus is now jumping. from the birth of the child onto his knees When the child takes this form, if you put your hands on it gently and gently.
from the birth of the child which proceeds with one hand during It is necessary to engineer to bring back the hand: If one cannot bring it back, then make the woman lie down and walk around;
If it can't walk, make it lie on a bed with its feet outwards,
then perform the massage that I have described;
and if she does not give birth, make her sit on a stool, then try to assist in the delivery of the hand; And guide the child according to its natural form, and let it sneeze, and instruct that she should hold her breath until the child comes forth.
From the birth of the child at its neck, have it spread its arms, and twist its face towards its mother's back. It is necessary that you wipe the baby's hands, then gently turn it little by little, and guide it lightly;
And when it is equal, place it in the natural motion of raising and oiling, as we have said, then instruct that she move little by little;
And when you have done this, if she should be seated on a one-legged stool, then command her to kneel; and make her sneeze. In the same manner for all the second part.
In the same manner for all the second part. When it comes to this way into the second part, if you cut off the second part at your finger, as long as the moisture is drained;
And if it swells up on its face and around its neck, when you cut from the belly, ensure that it is not held back, and let the child die. This part seems to contain instructions regarding some medical procedure or treatment, possibly related to abortion or childbirth, but please note that interpretations of historical texts can vary, and understanding this context might require additional research.
Then guide the child inward, as long as you place it correctly, and instruct the woman not to give any single command at all times.
from the birth canal You know that twins are born often, and sometimes three or four at once; this is not an unusual thing, and it doesn't happen frequently. Two things are removed, and do not live, if you do not name them;
I know this, that they be multiplied, and are destroyed by the seed which produces them, which is connected to the womb;
And no less than naturally come forth as all under, just as we have said.
And if they come forth painfully, using the treatment as we have said, and making the belly subtle, then do what she does quickly and gently. And do this as quickly as possible for health. of many children
of many children They are formed in marriage once or twice or three times or four times or five times, and up to fifteen times, and they are all formed like infants according to the measurement of their glory.
and it should be that the boy knows all this, because such a thing might happen to him; Do as it should be done.
of the dead child
When you treat a woman who has lost her dead child or miscarried, as I explained in the division section, if it does not come out, and you are forced to operate manually; It is necessary for you to know whether the woman is in good health and does not have any accidents or fear of death;
It is necessary for the woman to lie on her back, and have her shoulders inclined downwards, and the legs lifted.
And let the minister place the pincers at two inches, or she be bound to the bed so that she is not treated in the downward movement of the child;
Then rub the mouth of the pregnant woman with moist olive oil and musk from rosemary and fenugreek seeds, then smear her hands with these oils and these musks. Then gently put them on the pregnant woman, then take one inch where she puts the onions that are suitable for this purpose,
And take care so the child is dressed when it goes up on its head; if you put the pins in his eyes or around his neck or in his mouth or on his palate or under the beard or in the armpits or near the ribs,
and if it falls off at joints, then insert or hold onto them with your hands halfway up the body;
and it is necessary that you hold the pin in your right hand, and place the bend between his fingers of his left hand, and push on him with all his hand lightly, and insert the pin into none of these places that we have mentioned, until he reaches the empty thing;
then fix another acinus against it, or the third if necessary, so that the extractions are equal;
and then move it evenly from one side to the other so that nothing is left out, and make sure the acini have teeth to hold in place, as this is how they look:
And if there remains a part, and you can find none of its duties elsewhere, apply them to that part, and pull out the other part.
And if there's no remaining part, place this cautery or even higher up on the body, and do this until it comes out completely.
And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be brought back by squeezing, If that's the case, you should wrap with a piece of linen around it until it comes out completely;
Then apply the paste at the joint of the foot or on the hand, and similarly for the other hand, using two pieces each.
And if the head of the child is large and it's caught at the exit, or if it has an assembly of its sharp head, it is necessary that you press against the sharp spinous bone between your fingers, and make the head straight and remove the sharp one. or you will have it at the tool which is called "almaidach", from whose shape comes with the tools or chapter that follows this one.
and in this way, make the children have a large head naturally. and then cut the bones with tongs,
and if the shoulder pops out and is held by force until it breaks, whether from moisture or worse, until that moisture or worse escapes.
and if it cannot escape, cut it piece by piece as you can.
and if it swells in the belly or around the ribs, you should pierce it as long as the moisture flows.
And if birth takes place at the feet, there is a light pull, and the connection to the mouth of the vagina is also light.
And if it gets stuck in the belly or the breast, should you pull it out using one and a half spans covered by your hand; and when dealing with the belly or the breast, until the moisture that is there has disappeared;
and if another bone is involved and the head remains, if they hold the arm up so that it's perpendicular to the ground, and guide it until it reaches the opening of the wound; then I lift or push one or two inches, and force it along;
and if the opening of the wound is constricted due to an abscess that has come in, then it should not be pushed further, otherwise it should apply moist and greasy things; And the attendant applies plaster, and so in water that is softening and moistening.
And if the child is under their chest, you can place them even, so apply what we have said about in utero;
And if one cannot do it all at once, then let the operation be done piece by piece, and leave nothing of the second part.
And when you have done this, apply what we have said about in abscesses that come to the mouth;
And if blood escape during this, one should use hot water to restrain it, and administer other treatments.
And I saw a woman in whom an offspring had died, then another one was conceived within it, and the other one was expelled by it. After much time passed, an abscess came in the belly, and inflated to such an extent that it opened, causing intense pain.
I was summoned for treatment, but I considered for much time, and could not secure the wound.
I placed it on a strong plaster, and from it came out a bone, and after several days another one. I was very amazed because this person's belly has no bones.
I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
I wanted to see the wound, and with my hands I searched for the bone until the woman was in better condition; And make the woman hold this for a long time thus, and there will soon be some blood flowing from her.
And I have recalled this chapter only because when the masters find an unfamiliar thing, they should know how to give help.
to bring back the wife to her place
Next comes the form of the presser, with which one works in the books; and at two turns for each pair of four limbs. Always, make horns more delicate than those of a reed, and craft them out of wood or horn.
and make the mouth of the tube two inches wide, and the edge of the trees one inch thick; and in length, half a palm. and in between the two joints let there be two joinings of this same tube, which must be firm in one and the other, half a palm or slightly more in length.
and these two joints are attached inside the mouth of the horn so that when one turns the two horns, they open.
Another form, as subtle and lighter in appearance, can be made of a cane or chestnut wood, according to the likeness of forceps; and has two joints, like you see, each of which is a palm long, and four bones wide;
And when you see the opening of the cervix to the entire instrument, have the woman lie on her side, with her knees hanging and her legs spread. Then place the two jointed pieces together in the cervix, and hold the tip of the instrument between her buttocks; Then use your hand on all the instrument, just like you did with the equal forcepss, according to the size that you see for opening the mouth of the clamps, as long as the clamp does what it wishes.
This instrument is all mounted high and multiplied in appearance; and when you see them arranged, work faster, and stand higher for their size.
Do not lose hope with the instrument until you have set it up, for its necessity is unacceptable.
When the second stage of childbirth is being held back by the mother, you must instruct her to retain her urine and then have her blow into a cup, and hold your hands at her mouth and nose. And if she jumps over him, it's well done.
If it doesn't, take a pinch of each powder and make a paste or cover it, then put in herbs that can open the mouth of the womb, such as poppy, rue, anise, chamomile, wormwood, lemon balm and thyme;
All these herbs, or any of them, be cooked or made into a paste in water on the fire; then put a spoonful or a small portion from the pot, and the other part in the mouth of the womb,
And let them remain until the vapours arise inside the womb; then make it sneeze, just as we have said. If you jump to the next quickly. And if she remains after this treatment and lacks strength, so instruct her to moisten her left hand with sesame oil or rosemary oil, then apply the paste in its natural state,
And when she seeks for it again; and once she finds it, take hold of and extend it slowly little by little, so that the spouse does not feel during extraction; but you must gently move it to the right and left, then pull; if it comes out and is relieved.
And if the mouth of the patient is very dry, we have said that gargling and herb fumigation are necessary.
and if she doesn't use everything we've advised, make sure you don't rashly squeeze the blood out;
but it is necessary that the one at the mouth of the vagina be tied to the woman's waist, then apply ointment from Tetra-Pharmaceutical medicine for enemas;
if it penetrates and returns, and there is bad smell coming out; but still, when it stops, if it causes a foul smell in the stomach and head, and affects the patient's well-being.
So, then it's necessary to use applicable fumigations for this: none of the old ones have proven that fumigation with watercress and dried figs works.
The shape of the instrument used to fumigate the woman during childbirth retention or postpartum is like this:
And it resembles the shape of a cane, and one places the delicate tip in the fire, and the joints are wide above the flame;
And let the fumigations be over the coals, and let her endure until she becomes exhausted, and begin another one.
To pierce the base
There remain children who do not have their base pierced, but rather it is made insensitive by some subtle skill. So then in the dance, let that person pierce it according to their duty, and do not let them touch with sharp needles, and guard the placement so as not to let her touch.
Then place on it wet wool in wine and oil, then continue with the ointment treatment until it heals.
And if you doubt that it will not return, place or insert a piece of treacle and let the hand stay for several days, then remove it when the child wishes to move into chambers.
And suddenly these blisters on the wound or abscess often occur; it is necessary to deal with this suddenness: if you treat them, as we have said about treacle.
of the fistula from the base Fistulas that come from beneath are nodules, and swell more than those coming from above, or in the space of two parts,
If there is one or more fistulas; and when that swelling exists for long, if it operates, and often gathers wet material of white or fine pus,
And these fistulas are not always present; they are known by the fact that there is either expulsion or suction when the patient expels, and sometimes in her direction.
And if there are fistulas that penetrate up to the bladder, and up to half of the penis; and reach up to the junction of the thigh, and up to the root of the scrotum.
And thus one knows whether the fistula is present at the base or not. And you bend your first two fingers or the base, and insert a fine needle or a spider's leg or iron into the sore hole when there is no winding.
And if it has winding patterns, you should insert a subtle spider tentacle or a horsehair as long as you feel the tentacle or hair at your finger.
And if you do not feel it, and there is no full evacuation or suction nor air movement, as we have said: You will know that the puncture has not been done; then hurry to treat it.
And when the fistula extends to the bladder or to the passage of urine, if the urine jumps in it, and cannot be soldered with medicine.
And if it penetrates up to the knee joint, then is the vein coming up to the top; And if there is no winding and inner pain inside, then it means that it is simply in the muscle, and cannot be treated with medicine or by application of a salve;
And for these fistulas that go through completely, there is no remedy except hard work and the futility of foolish people who interfere with them.
In this neither Persian nor old method, there is hope for recovery through iron, as I have found out.
And it is that the patient lies between your hands on their back; and you lift their legs up to their buttocks, and have their buttocks inclined towards their belly; Then place an araneus tent or a snail shell if there is curvature, as long as you know where the tent comes from.
If the patient feels it under the foundation, then you must press your index finger on it,
You then sense that your effort has been effective; and if discovered, or you feel between your finger the vein or the artery, then know that it is under your control; If there is no work to do here, one could not heal it.
Still, one can quite well heal some, but this happens very little.
And when we assist, if we heat the fine cautery according to the size of the fistula, as was previously mentioned; And pour heat throughout the fistula until it comes from under the foundation; and perform this twice or three times, as long as you know that these charred parts are burnt, which resemble a feather of a bird.
And then treat the wet cloths with butter until that burnt part comes out, then apply ointment to adhere to the burn and bond it together.
If it is done this way, it is right. If not, nothing else can be done in this manner.
And if it is prodded through, and does not pierce until the point which is or serves as a foundation, and in between your finger and the tent there's a thick layer of flesh or silk, and you can see the fistula at that place where the layer meets the skin; if it's during the beginning of the fistula formation, and it stays before the tent, then after that apply the cautery until it reaches the tip of the tent;
the tent will be removed and it will drain. Then remove those thorns that look like a bird's feather, and don't leave any behind.
And if it doesn't heal with the skin, cut between you and the wound, then apply either fire or an ague medicine cautery.
For the fire cautery brings together two important things: this is to say, the blistering of these heated rods, and the bleeding of blood and the evaporation of moisture;
then the application of greasy cloths or ground things to wet areas, until his limbs stop bleeding, and the heated rods burn within the wound;
then treat the wound with hot, sticking bandages, and use dry medicinal substances.
For when it is restored, if it is healed and does not recur.
And if a fistula comes just up to half of its depth, and is far from the body, seal it with your hand or the base, and inquire about this.
And if you feel the tentacle, and it's halfway between two threads or a string or needles, or it's almost about to pierce, but there is only a channel of needlework and hope outside, through the application of one of three methods:
or you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it down to the base, or if you can, use a tentacle and cure as the first step;
and don't go too deep down below, that you might cut the support of the base, and allow the discharges to pass voluntarily through it; then the treatment, as we have said;
then the treatment, as we have said; by chance if it is clean, or you remove that covering and wash it since it has been cut from under the root, either by probing or with another tool directed; then cleanse that which is sown in the wound as much as you can;
then strive to heal the wound and keep the pus within the lower part of the root: if it is easier for the patient.
And it is not done in this manner for any holes: and when you press the tent into the hole, and she is at the spot where the bottom lies beneath the skin above, take a tent pierced through the head according to this shape: And tie two twisted threads together, and press the tent into the hole until it reaches the head along the entire length of the thread.
If it is deep in the fold beneath the bottom, then remove that twisted thread as long as you hold your finger on the bottom;
And pull the head through the thread, and join together the two shoulders as one, and hold one to the other, and leave it for one or two days;
And hold them repeatedly until the threads have gone through these parts that are between the two shoulders, and unite them;
Then treat the wound until it is healed and has recovered.
If the fistula does not open, make an incision in all possible ways until it opens, as long as it is not too close to perfection.
For it is not suitable to do this procedure of placing a splint correctly first and then treat, as we have said, until it heals.
The form of the spinous puncture that one makes for the fistula is small and from one side and cutting; And on the other hand no, because what should not be done should not be done either, as you see here:
Excoriations occur in two ways: or they are within the foundation, like a piece of resin, and if there are small and large ones, bleeding ensues. and when there is one or more of them, they are found either outside the foundation and near its base; but those that are outside have little moisture.
and often when there is a bit of lemon water or a trace of blood, they have the color of the skin.
The treatment for those who have them within the foundation consists in commanding the patient to spread out under cover until the foundations pass through and you can see the threads. If you are swift, grip it with pincers, or hold it by your finger nail, then cut into its roots.
And if the limb cannot be held due to its moisture, take it by halves, or with cloth, or from a camel hair fabric; And extract them with your fingers, then cut them, and dust them with some hot powders that are used for cauterization. or you can sear them as it is said or according to the chapter on cauterization, and then continue with other treatments until they heal.
And if the foundations cannot escape, instruct the patient to apply a blistering agent that burns and is harsh to wash away what lies under or in the foundations, so that it might escape freely;
And if the body parts cannot proceed, and if the threads are too strong at the foundation, then the treatment should be gentle; And you should take them with your fingernail or tweezers, and pull them out, then treat them as we have said, until it is healed, and fears the iron incision.
It is necessary that you sew it in this manner: take one twisted thread, and put it on a needle, then pull the thread over and pierce the needle from another side, and twist both ends of the thread around the needle. And if it be large; and keep the thread in form, then tie the thread, and pull out the needle, and do so with all others, and leave one for bleeding off the excess of blood;
And then place one moistened pad in oil rose or as a poultice, and place it on the wound, and instruct the patient to rest;
And then leave it until the pus drains out, and when they have settled, treat with ointment and other treatments, until he is healed.
By drying through the fire or the foundation Many times, there is severe bleeding in the intestines, due to nature's compulsion and when the illness has become old and medicine no longer provides benefit.
It is necessary that you reset at the tip of a thorn or on your nail, which should not be left in moisture. then treat it while it is hard as it should be;
and if it cannot harden, redo the shaving with more force than before, until some flesh is cleaned off and it is properly scorched; Then treat him as long as he remains healthy.
with trembling Ants is a small false appearance beneath the body, and they move about within it;
And at no time does the real vein cool down, and one feels it also like death by trembling, spreading throughout the body, and more in the hands than anywhere else.
And the treatment is that you take a piece of goose feather or a strong vulture feather and place that stick over the twitching spot, until the purple circle encompasses the twitching completely. Then turn your hand until you grip all the stick as long as you cover completely the twitching area, and place it downward, and pull out the twitching from its roots.
And if you see fit, make it in the form of a reed or iron stick like this, and ensure it is thin going under and thick coming up.
Do not make it too thin; you must hold onto both ends and squeeze it. If you can see, use the cautery to cauterize the twitching as shown or described in the section about fire cautery.
From the shape of the bladder Never make a bladder out of silver or archaut, or molten iron or maillechet; and never make these small and large tools according to their intended use.
So therefore, when dealing with the treatment of children and those who are weak and painful, they should be small.
The shape of the bladder, whether small or large, is thus above broad; or the stomachs are bound in this manner:
And there is a condition where the belly and intestines are intertwined, as you see, and the head goes inside; and has two holes on one side, and one on the other.
And there is where the belly or where we insert medications from a beast's bladder or parchment, and it is pierced all around with tiny holes.
And there is between each hole exactly one finger's width of space, then insert into these holes two threads made from spun cloth, twisted for ten or twelve turns around each other, and attach the belly as if it were a goat. And when the medicine is inside, tie it with a strong thread in front of the tool, then seal it; and this forms like a circle:
And let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and smear the head with oil or yolk of egg ointment, or similar thing, then gently apply it.
Then spread the ministers with both hands combined, as long as you can see clearly, then extract the lump, and lift the patient's legs up to show.
And if the medicine seems to be going out, let it escape as much as possible; and if they sleep for a whole night, that is more help.
And if you use it in the disease of stomach passage and the medicine starts to escape quickly, redo it as long as it is safe.
And if they leak from their root or from an abscess, even if the bladder is so fine as through a child's finger;
and it's the form of a subtle bladder above which the skin is restricted:
of wounds
We have spoken about the treatment of wounds in our division; now we will discuss hand surgery and medicine according to completion.
I state that wounds are varied according to how they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and for why they are made.
The reasons wounds are made are through impact from stone, size of sword and knife cuts, or from spear, staff, or axe strikes, or through similar actions.
or depending on the parts of the body, such as a wound made on the neck or head, or chest, or stomach, or liver, and similar limbs.
and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and start with simple head injuries, because memory will recall it in its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound appears or the head comes out, and if the bone is not broken, take care to determine whether it's due to stone or similar things, and the skin has been torn completely and the wound is large, and you doubt slightly about the abscess: if it is done promptly with the surgeon's knife even if there is a little blood from the wound, and so the surgery goes against the severed part;
and let the patient drink plenty of wine and eat rich meats.
And if he does not want to be operated on, then reduce his meat intake, and do not drink wine, nor eat any kind of meat.
And when it comes to a wound, if pus appears there, use wet cotton dipped in rose oil or in a tincture of wine;
And if no pus is present, then apply to the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood and not disturbed by the air, a powder that I will mention shortly;
And if it has been burned, then apply some ointments until it heals.
And if the wound is large like that of a sword and similar, and the lips cannot be stitched together with bandages, then stitch them together, as I will explain for wounds on the belly, by stitching.
If the wound is revealed by bone and muscle, and it only holds for a little bit if you press; then treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard tissue instead of skin. And instruct the patient to eat large meats, such as kidneys and cooked wheat, also like chickens or similar things.
And if you find that the skin has turned to rot and it doesn't smell like bone, if the rot has reached all over, let it completely decompose and release its odor, then treat it;
And if an artery is located in the wound or vein, without a cut, and it cannot be stopped by medicine, if you find the artery bleeding, cut it, and if you discover that it has ruptured, sew it up with a thread. And if this does not benefit you, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, treat them with a light cure: and you should put on this powder which seals in such a way that when the heat has passed, it stays firmly.
And the way to make this powder is as follows: take part of incense; dragon's blood one and a half parts; live charcoal three parts, and finely powdered, And tend to the wound, and keep it bandaged, until it properly drains and fully joins its own blood;
And apply it well, and let it heal naturally without bursting; for one does not remove the medicine until it is healed.
And one performs this only with salt alone, when one does not have the incense or the blood of dragon, but when the medicine has healed the wound.
And if the medicine has healed the wound, even then, do not put this powder in it;
But apply on some poultices that have been digested, or oats flour made with water and honey, as long as it oozes bile; Then perform other treatments as long as they are sound.
And if the breaking of bones comes with the wound and it is small, then extract them with delicate tweezers;
and I will tell you about the fractures of the head later.
From the wound of the neck
That wound comes from the neck and it is simple; if there's no distinction between one and another in the neck or around the throat, but when the neck veins or the artery are cut.
If it's the nerves, then there is no other means than to leave the treatment, and not to put any restraining thing, because it harms the nerves and causes them to recede; And do not place anything cold on the wound, for the substance of nerves is cold, and that continues with it so they are connected to the brain, which is the highest member;
but if the medicine is liquid, such as when it's washed with mild water and mixed with rose oil, and also washed lettuce in mild water too, and other minerals in this manner, and wet applications.
And if the wound is large, one sews and binds it with bandages, then treats it as long as it heals properly.
And if the wounds are deep and filled with blood, one punctures them or deeper,
And if the artery is severed and blood starts flowing out, one must open it, heal it, and cauterize it;
And if the throat or ribs are severed, or the passage is kept intact through which meat goes, if you burn on the base of the throat, and do not touch the throat but instead adjust it according to its natural shape; and then tighten the dressing, and leave it for some days, then treat with dried dressings until it heals;
and if there is an appearance of bone in the wound, then take care of that; and if there are fragments of bone, remove them all if you can, and leave those that you cannot obtain until the wound heals; And when freed and cured of its trouble;
And if the wound is fresh, apply the powder that I have mentioned. And if there is bone in the wound and it has an opening, treat it as instructed in this chapter.
Regarding the wound from a spear or a knife.
If it's a wound from a lance or knife, and the injury is deep, when you look inside the wound to see if there is an obstruction: know then that the wound is fatal;
and if it's not deep and is full of blood at all times inside when fresh, should you not apply the powder right away in the first hour or tie it up because the blood won't clot properly from lack thereof. and warm him to his heart, and occupy the patient; but I apply an attractive ointment, and bandage it twice a day.;
And if you don't have anointment, put old cotton into the wound to suck out the moisture,
and make the patient rest on the wound for 3 days, or 4, or more; if no convulsions occur, nor harmful trembling of the heart, nor sudden movements; and when you see good signs, you know that the wound has been saved. Treat then with other remedies until the blood is clear;
and if it cannot be cleared and operated on, know that there is a fistula; treat it as one should.
And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut, and it's simple, or worse, or on the back, treat it according to the person in front.
And if it's large, sew it up; and if it's small, use powder; and if it's deep into the bone or has torn through it, clean the wound and remove any foreign objects inside. And if they are not cleaned, leave the wound to fester, letting ease the extractions;
And about other wounds on other limbs is the judgement similarly as we have said.
From the rupture of the belly
The ruptures of the belly are large, medium-sized, and small;
In a large wound, once the intestines or the ends of the intestines are exposed, due to their intrusion;
And the stitches are more difficult, and nothing beats the small wound over the large one,
for this reason one cannot insert the intestines again easily, unless they are done so step by step; because the intestines swell almost immediately when they sense coldness, it is no longer possible to insert them again.
And for this reason, we let the animal's wound heal, because in doing so, we move the intestines back to their place where they should be.
Know that the rupture of the belly occurs in four ways:
The two common stitches happen at the abdominal seam,
and the other stitches related to injuries in the body and two more specific stitches for other injuries are commonly used with other injuries;
And still they are more proper with the suture of the belly, and I will say each one and explain them.
I say that when the wound is small, and nothing of the intestine sticks out, And when it comes to binding up such a thing, this can be done in two ways: Or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, Because the intestines are swollen due to cold.
And when he is cold, warm him up in this manner: Moisten a sponge or use one part of molten wax dipped solely in water. Or cook in water containing lime and thyme, and spikes, And let the intestine grow until the belly button is removed;
And after this has been done with the wine strainers, and once it has been made muddy for the purpose of reducing swelling.
And when you see that the swelling is leaving, then moisten the intestine with water or with broth that has been cooked well. because through this, the entry accepts little of what comes in;
And if it cannot enter, they make a little opening at the tool with which one removes the hemorrhoids;
And the first treatment is to have the wound dried after being cut, That we should not cut it without great necessity or if there's no need;
And this is the tool to split it:
If you cut within the bend or outside, see this shape:
And when the wound is enlarged and the intestines leap out, if you place it back according to its natural shape in its proper location, if you can, because this moves them.
When the wound is broad, and it's located on the lower part of the abdomen, It is necessary that you allow the patient to lie on his back, and place his legs higher than his head; and if it's located in the lower abdomen area,
And also if there is a rupture in the belly near one of the two parts, and make sure that the part which was dragged goes higher than the other;
and thus, it is to follow what I say in great and medium wounds.
Treating small wounds requires you to provide what suits them,
Then hold between your hands...I. minister remedies that heal the entire wound with her hand, and bring the lips together; And this is the common method of sewing,
And this is the common method of sewing, And you should take one or more needles, according to the size of the wound's width, Then leave at the edge of the wound two inches, and insert one needle where there is half an inch of thick strong thread; And pierce the two edges of the skin with the two needles from the thimble,
then tighten with a doubled thread around the needle for half a turn, and join the two edges of the wound together.
And then leave one inch of space, and insert another needle; then weave the thread like you did with the first needle. and continue doing this according to your skill with needles, until all the wound is treated;
And use needles of medium size, between fine and thick ones, because the thin needles cut all the flesh, and the very thick ones cannot enter at all well: for this is why they should be of medium size;
and it is not good to have the needles sticking out too far from the flesh and the skin,
Let them not cut and open the wound before suturing;
and then pull out the needles, so they do not irritate the patient at night, and cover the needle holes with bandages or cloths to keep them clean, and leave them until the wound is stitched closed;
And this method of sewing with needles is more suitable for small wounds, for it takes one needle or two.
The second type of stitch is common, And it consists in sewing together two parts of leather and two parts of sinew with one needle, using thread that is half as thick as the material being sewn. And when you have pierced these joints all four together,
And when you have pierced these joints all four together, then pull the needle to the part where you started piercing, in the manner one sews threads;
and leave a space between each stitch as large as half a doigtm.
these stitches form the bandage,
And here I treat a wound where someone had or stomach,
who was pierced by a knife, and the wound was larger than a palm in size, and contained intestines as large as two palms,
And there was a wound in the middle of the belly. I brought back his intestine, and it was twenty-one hours since its removal.
And the wound healed up to fifteen days, I treated it, and it became healthy.
And they had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle;
And I would not cure with ointment, for I was at one place where none could be found or no remedies; And I would put cotton twice a day over the wound, and wash it in honey water until it was clean.
I will tell you the two proper ways of sewing:
Take the needle, and insert it from the outer part up to that inner side;
When she has pierced through the vein straight on, if it is at the neck or under the armpit where you have stuck the needle,
and makes her pierce from another side through the inner part until she reaches that spot below.
And as for sewing this seam, it's like how the tailor sews skins, so you should sew it in the same way. And leave one thread on one side, and then take another from the other, until you finish sewing all the seam.
The second method of suture, as Galen stated precisely,
If it's like what others do, bringing together the two parts naturally, and press one end of the needle to the other, like this:
stitch a needle or the end of the thread near the eyebrow, and only pierce that one. and let the two shoulders grow smooth; then turn the needle and make it pierce from the outer part down to the inner side, like the two shoulders smoothly;
then pierce both from the outer part down to the inner side, like two other smooth shoulders on the opposite side;
And this is the usual method of suturing and the most common way.
Galen spoke these words, and none would testify to them,
One must stitch the belly with two needles, or if there is thread in each;
And one should sew one needle from one side and the other from the other, like those who stitch coins.
and know that when there's rupture within the belly, then the stitches are more painful than in other parts of the belly.
The judgments for this wound are like those for other wounds:
and it's as follows when you find the fresh wound with all its blood, just as the art has made it. If you reposition it within the intestine, and then stitch; afterwards place the invigorating powder.
If you reposition it within the intestine, and then stitch; afterwards place the invigorating powder. And if there's any pus, apply no ointment until the wound heals; Then stitch the thread, and sew up the cut, then bind it. Then treat the wound as usual until it heals;
And if you don't have medicine, place it there, as soon as it begins to bleed, old cotton. and move it twice a day until it heals.
For you don't need any other medicines in various preparations when the wounds are simple;
and if you doubt that the wound might affect the main members, If it is necessary for you to moisten with a light oil of a warmed substance, or in an oil roasting heat, and place it inside the joints, and around the armpits;
and if there is pain or gangrene in the belly, and this happens many times, if you give him black wine enemas, and especially if gangrene reaches up to the intestines;
And it pierces internally, and you know that when it is the large intestine, it is lighter to heal than the smaller ones.
The intestine referred to as 'juvenile' cannot be healed when it is poisoned, And that's due to the location of the veins there and because of the subtlety of the entire body, and its closeness to the nature of the nerves.
And if the knot jumps out of the wound, then reset it back in the same way as the intestine when it is fresh;
And if it has become old and turned brown or black, then you should tie the black area, so that no blood flows there. for there are veins and arteries;
then remove what is between the bandage, and place both shoulders under the part over the wound up to beyond it for facilitating extraction when the ribs are broken, and heal the wound.
Of the rupture of the boil
When the intestine is torn, and the wound is small, if it can be restored in any way,
because I have seen that some were pierced in the belly by a lance;
And there was a wound on the right side of the stomach, and it became inflamed and turned into a fistula, causing both loss of appetite and flatulence.
I treated according to what I could manage, and didn't stop refining the treatment until it was healed, ensuring proper stitching for the wounds.
And when I saw the wounds stitched up, I doubted that the patients might have pain in their stomachs; And there was no harm, but stayed in better conditions, eating and drinking.
And it is said by some experimenters that when there is a small injury in the intestine, it should be treated in this manner: take large testicles, then gather the edges of the wound, and when the testicles open its mouth, place it on the two edges,
then place another compress in this manner as before, until the wound is completely saturated;
and cover the wound. Those who heat up inside their intestines, and cause no harm to the patient,
And one can tie the intestine with a fine thread that has been cut from an animal's intestine,
in this manner: take hold of this cut intestine thread, so that most of it is raw, And then at the head of this thread .1. linen thread fine twined, Then sew the thread in the needle, and stitch the intestine, then reset it at the incision;
And this way of sewing is not far off as long as it follows the path of love and hope;
And if the wound is large and broad, especially when it's in one of the parts of the intestine, if there's no obstruction or sickness, then use subtle technique.
of a sinus or if it be Know that every wound or abscess, when it matures, is universally called "sinus". And similarly when it's sealed and starts to heal.
A sinus is according to the truth of the hard swelling that is white and firm, where no pain is felt, and is also as hairy as the feathers of a bird;
and sometimes it is clear and thin, and other times thick; sometimes insufficient, and other times enough;
and I have discussed this in the section on wounds, that every wound not healed, and there is no pus, This happens only through one of the eight reasons:
It is known as, because of the weakness in blood or pus; or due to its malevolence; or because there is tough flesh within and on the lips that doesn't allow new flesh to grow; There is too much blood; or the lungs are congested, and the matter is of bad quality; or the medicine is not good in the treatment; or because the corruption resembles the plague; Due to its location being late in the digestive process, and health becoming slow, it escapes naturally; There are veins or bones:
and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the treatments with medicine in this section.
So it is necessary for me to inform you about the treatment of a fistula which is done by manual work.
Know that fistulas occur in all limbs of the body; for there are fistulas that originate from large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or at the stomach, or in the intestines, or in the bladder, or in any of the ribs, or in the spinal column of the back, or in any joint of the hands or feet;
And all the fistulas that are like this have trouble healing, and there is nothing but labor, and misunderstanding;
and if there is no fistula that does not stop until it reaches what I have said, then you are finished with the treatment, and you will recognize it, take a spider's web or iron wire, if the fistula is straight, try to insert it;
And if the fistula is twisted, one searches for a subtle probe to navigate it, because the probes bend and move within the twists;
and if the fistula is very narrow, it might be hard to find with attempts, if it's catheterized through one of the narrowed parts,
because moisture so quickly moves from one place to another, and spreads;
then cut carefully with your strength, that you may know if there is bone or nerve, and feel it well;
and ask the patient about the pain they feel when you press their hand, and determine the location of that sensation;
and once you have truly determined its location, and whether it is far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery or vein, In any of those limbs I've told you about, if the cut goes as I have told you,
In any of those limbs I've told you about, if the cut goes as I have told you, and for the rest, it deals with the decayed bones and cartilage inside; and then the treatment until it is healed.
and if the fistula has been well opened in a straight line, it's necessary that you cover it completely as much as possible. Then I immerse wet cloths in medicine broth, and pour them up to the top of the pus sac.
Then I immerse wet cloths in medicine broth, and pour them up to the top of the pus sac. until the medicine has corroded the excess that remains at the bottom;
and then I apply healing dressings until it is sound.
and if it does not heal by this means, then cauterize it as we have said,
And if the bone is corrupted by the ulceration, then it will heal. If a vein or nerve is affected or injures major limbs, as we have said;
And if the bone has been exposed, and there's corruption and blackness, then treat it until the corruption is completely healed. Then continue with treatments that strengthen the flesh until it becomes healthy;
And if it's not healed, and you reapply it as before, Know that you are not yet done until the completion:
If you discover and seek further, even when you're at the bottom: And remove all the corruption, then restore it to its proper place;
And if he is in this state of sanity, it's indeed well. But if not, know that the corruption has gone too far, you cannot restore it; yet there is no other option but to leave it to natural processes;
and if there's just a little corrupted bone, and you can remove it with forceps, if you extract using an instrument suitable for this task,
and if there are many bones, if you treat them all, don't leave any out;
and if moisture opposes this and there is no error or fear, if there's heat and moisture and flesh, and frees the bones.
And if you cannot remove them in an hour, if you place on the wound something that promotes gangrene, and leave it until the bones are completely rotten inside them.
then you will have lighter bones afterwards;
And if it's a large bone, such as from the leg or thigh, then only perform the putrefaction until the blackness covers all the bone, then heal the wound;
and if there is a large part rotten, and it reaches to the bone; if it suits to stay and cover until decay, and then treat as long as it is healing.
and I will tell you about a fistula that occurred in one's leg for a home. so that you may take an example and aid yourself in your work.
There was one young person around thirty years old who experienced pain in their leg due to a cause originating within the body,
While the substances reached the leg, and there was an escape of a large abscess, and no reason for opening;
but through their madness, they opened as much as the abscesses allowed, and they corroded much matter, and became a fistula, and brought much disturbance that all moved with joy and bodily moisture;
And many were treated for several years by two surgeons, yet there was no wise person in the art of medicine,
As long as I was called upon, and saw his leg and the remedies they were using for him, And what corroded through the cuts at large wounds; And became red like the skin of youth, and had a golden color.
I set up a tent at one of these knolls, and then searched all the knolls,
and found that each one was facing towards another from every part of the leg.
So I quickly moved and made a mark on one of the knolls where I uncovered a part of the bone, and found it rotten and pierced through, showing that the rot had reached inside the bone;
I was the one who saw this from the corrupted bone, and I thought there was no other corruption, only that which I had taken away;
and began to heal the wound using long-term medication, but could not stitch it together.
and then started again, and exposed the bone just as before,
and I found the corruption continuing in the bone, and I treated it, then removed it, and I was concerned to stitch up the wound;
But I would not venture to copy exactly half of the bone length, and then I would try on all its substance. then I would return it with medicines; and it was healed quickly.
and no longer needed to redo the operation except for due to the weakness of the patient, who could not bear it. and because of the fear of death that I had from him. For due to frequent blood evacuation, but it was entirely healed,
For due to frequent blood evacuation, but it was entirely healed, and in the place of the bone there formed a hard flesh, and it was well arranged and had no harm or opposition at all from beginning to end, neither outwardly nor inwardly.
and cover the head so that you can draw out the rotten flesh from underneath. and uncover the flesh on the bone where you see silk, making sure not to damage the flesh; And place a coal or a board under the bone to release the corrupted flesh; It is necessary to do as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and also to do it again if necessary.
And if the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part of it, then remove all the flesh; then place a coal under.
And then let there be movement from one part to another, and let the blood flow for as long as the corruption lasts, that is, up to a month, as we have said;
And if the corruption is in the joint, then treat the corrupted joint, and let the bone or what it contains on the other side;
And if the corruption is in the connection of two joints, if there's no other angle but to treat it;
And if the corruption is in the bend of the hand or at the ankle, if that condition is very severe, However, nonetheless, you must inquire about this corrosion, how it has opened to you; and cleanse it in all the ways that you can, but ensure that a vein or nerve does not prevent you.
and know that the saw and the awl are many, according to the setting of the bones and their appearance, and their size and their delicacy, and their magnitude and their smallness, and their hardness; And for this, it is necessary to equip oneself with each form of work their tool;
Know that the task will show you the instrument you will need according to the knowledge of this art, and testify to the ways of diseases; so choose the instrument you need according to what is proper.
The fire The shoulder comes out,
And when you have treated that corruption through the use of medicines and they do not bring benefit, It is necessary to cut off that limb up to its root where the corruption has come. if indeed the patient escapes death, or through evil intent, which is greater than the fault of the limb;
if indeed the patient escapes death, or through evil intent, which is greater than the fault of the limb; and when these signs appear, the limbs turn black, as if they have been burned by fire. and after the blackness comes the corrosion spreading from member to member, And spreads throughout the entire body; if you rush toward copper,
And if it's due to the impact of some venomous sea beasts, such as a marine scorpion and snake and similar creatures,
And the burning sensation is at both temples if you touch them, do not give it space to spread up to the hand.
And if it reaches up to the hand, if the patient touches them, so that the burning sensation does not spread up to the elbow;
And if it goes up to the arm, if the patient feels it there; and if it passes beyond the arm, that is when death occurs, And it is not worth staying outside beyond its measure of its strength;
And do this completely until the rust comes or the nail: if it comes in the first joint, then place another after the other joint;
and if it comes with the nail, then hammer the nail all the way through. And if it goes up to the leg, then hammer at the knee joint;
And if it happens above the knee, there is no other remedy than to let the patient die;
and the method for covering or securing a limb is such that you must fasten it both above and below, extend one set of straps down under one piece of fabric, and another set of straps up over the other piece of fabric. and you open the flesh that is between the two pieces of fabric with half an inch wide, until the bone is exposed;
Then take a cloth or linen band, and place one of these on each side, so that it does not touch the healthy part, And let the patient experience another injury and an incision.
And when blood starts to flow during this operation, if you must apply heat, quickly cauterize the wound, or you can put certain healing powders on it; then return to your medical treatment until the entire process is complete,
Then bind the misshapen limb with a dependable bandage, and treat it until it becomes healed.
and I will tell you what happened at one house in particular:
he experienced a darkness that seemed like an assurance of fire,
and that corruption came first to his two feet, spreading throughout the entire foot.
And when the body is corroded by disease, it seeks to cover its flesh, and becomes healthy.
And after this long time, the corruption returned or touched with my hand, and it came to me.
And I placed things responsive after the purification of the body, and could not stop the corrosion;
and it was that I should touch him with my hand, and I did not want to, hoping to reactivate the matter; And I also doubted whether if I cut off her hand, she wouldn't die. For the strength of his horse was weak; and he lost all hope, returned to his land, And he held up his hand to cover it, and became sane.
And I have only related this story for the sake of those who might need it elsewhere.
No pus ever comes within the fatty tissue, staying for so long as to cause a great gathering of worms; And then they will penetrate and perforate, and the worms jump inside them, and the veins remain, just like vessels; The skin above is also as delicate as a single piece of fine cloth, And they do not extend up to the bone or to the nerve, and such diseases are called "healthy",
but if it extends so far that it reaches the bone in the middle, then it is called "fistula";
and the cooking is such that you cook the entire skin, and likewise when it's subtle, just like a piece of fabric; and doesn't swell due to its putrefaction.
And if you have noticed that the skin is burning, and the corruption isn't reaching its peak, and if the skin is thick with flesh, then treat it as such:
look to see if the breasts are large, and if the organ within has a foul smell, then prepare the Egyptian cathartic remedy as follows: Take it easy, oil it, and apply a tincture of argyrol evenly, then cook it in one dish on the fire, until the medicine remains red, and becomes as thick as honey;
and then take from this according to your need, and make it with water and honey, and administer an enema to the abdomen, and restrain the straining; And let the medicine stand there for two hours, then remove it by squeezing;
Do this number of times, until the breasts are free and hollowed out, and make a hole in the flesh;
and each time wash with water from ashes, when this medicine is not present, and you take ash from the vine's wood, and pour water over it,
Then the pus comes out, and by enemas, as long as you know that the intestines are well cleansed;
and if the patient cannot bear it, neither will the Egyptian remedy nor the water of ashes; if an enema of water and honey is tried or there's a little beryl powder in it; or if you try an enema of honey and mixed wine, where the honey has properties to purify and cleanse; And the wine makes him feel better;
and when you have done this, and you have ensured that his hands are well cleaned, if he has been subjected to the process of birthing a child with him,
and that you apply plaster bandages thinly, and do so using rose oil and wine; You will prepare a cluster of medicines and applications; I have spoken of their properties or written about the remedies;
And if his nipple near the breast is small, and the bladder of the cluster cannot enter, If it is slightly widened by a rod, and you place an ointment tent from the Egyptian eaglewood, A ointment of basil,
and if the wound is too wide, so you let it be only as much as allows for the thumb or little finger to enter,
and should the pus that exudes is above the wound, so let it be cut either higher or lower than where I am. And when the pus is at its peak, do not allow it to swell with flesh; and if you cannot cover the area below like what you see, then arrange it in such a way that the wound reaches as low up as possible on its own,
and if you cannot cover the area below like what you see, if it separates unevenly: let the arrow slide down slightly, and do not remove anything from the arrow; and take consolidative remedies to be applied in the wound,
and cover it with one piece of linen that covers all the wound; then place it in such a way that it fits closely over the bottom part of the breast, about an inch larger than the original. For apply some oil, sauce on one piece of cloth according to the amount of the loss. And place it on the loss of the breast to alleviate the pain, and leave only a small piece of cloth out except after many days once;
And the one who is over the loss in the breast, often removes it to relieve the pain, And know what comes from the pain, whether it's poison or little or enough, or if it is absorbed or not.
And prepare to note if the patient feels pain or not, and whether there is an abscess or not,
And when your medicine has spread somewhat like this and you see the nature that leaps onto the shortness under the breast, If you realize that the breasts have swollen now, then approach with care;
And then untie it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you open the wound, if you change one layer of linen, renew the ointment.
And if the breasts give off undigested excrement after many days, know that the breasts are not feeding properly. And when subtle poisons remain for a long time, do not despair of health,
for healing is on its way. For there are men whose recovery from injury in their wounds is delayed, and there are those who do the opposite;
And if the food undigested jumps after several days inside your chest, know that the heart doesn't function properly;
And if the heart is delayed in beating, and it's distant, then adjust medicine with dry powders having moisture and substances that are dry by virtue. just like an ointment for cooling effects, because it contains a large part of vitriol, and this is the last medicine;
take the cooling ointment, and make it with rose oil, and soak it in old wine of equal strength.
Then let him rest and use it; and do this very thing with cooked, fattened honey. when dressing wounds is present,
or you take myrrh and aloes and incense, grind them together, and apply the powder mixed with honey when it has been toasted; then add one spoonful of gum and spread it on the chest, and administer this remedy regularly for an equal period of time. And roots of this heavenly thing, which is also like flour many times and thyme;
And roots of this heavenly thing, which is also like flour many times and thyme; And in using simple herbs or compounds: grind them, make them into powder, and place them on the honey I said, and use it; and if the treatment takes a long time and is not cured by this remedy,
and if the treatment takes a long time and is not cured by this remedy, then know that corruption has penetrated deeply, and it makes an impression in the bone, or in hard parts of the body, or in joints; If dealing with the treatment of fistula wound, as we have said earlier.
of the abscess under the nail
Panarice is an abscess that appears in the hand, under the nail. or under the foot, or by chance appears in other toes;
And when it has become old, if no care is taken, then an abscess will form. Then cut and bleed the nail as long as it reaches the root of the nail, and by chance cut all of it;
Then come to the corrosion up to the bone, as long as there is stinking pain, and when the shoulder joint is two large, and its color has changed.
When you treat it as we have said in the section, and the treatment does not benefit at all, It is necessary for you to cut away all the excess that has remained of the nail, then cauterize the wound afterwards. The fire cautery is greatly helpful when the bone is healthy, and the nail is healthy;
and if the nail grows too quickly into the flesh, starts poking it, and causes inflammation, If you need to place the tool near the nail so that not a bit of flesh, And the wick at the top, and remove this small piece of flesh gently. And place on the wick of the flesh medications that are hot and corrosive to remove everything;
And if the corruption is within the bone, you should treat it, using force, because as much of the bone that is corrupted, it cannot heal.
And if you see the thigh rotten, treat it with the same method as in one bone, as previously described. then clean it until it is healed;
And if it's hard and swollen, and it smells of great pain, you must first heal it; Then cut the nail of the sharp thorn by cutting across above it,
and make sure the cut does not go through to the flesh under the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain;
And if it happens, place something that soothes on top.
The joints are adjusted by chance with hands of some men who are very muscular, And by chance there may be a bone or it has an angle, and no time is there a joint,
And none are born in the root of the joint or the birth is from no place in our limbs. Those that are born in any part of my knee do not move, And he who comes into being at the knee joint by chance does not move;
The size of him who is well built is light, in such a manner: Shape it at its root like a broad spatula.
That which comes into being at the root of the joint is difficult to treat: hold onto the copper if you can.
In the one who is being born or must be delivered later, it is necessary for you to grasp until the round flesh up to the bone, then grip the bone with a suitable smoothness, then treat it as long as it remains sound.
The connections that come together at the joints are due to birth, or by the healing of wounds, or by welding with fire, or by similar actions.
If it is necessary for you to repair that weld, so that it is restored according to its natural forms; Then place between two wet tents or cloths soaked in rose oil, or you place between two pieces of fine wax, until the ears are joined together, as is appropriate.
When soldering, do it without using your palm, take care to perform the soldering properly as required.
Of low quality
The veins are large, filled with excessive melancholic substances, that come from multiple body parts of the torso;
And it happens more in legs of those who walk and work and carry, than in others.
So you should then administer to him one time the cleansing of colic, and then heal him of the basilica.
The iron treatment has two methods: One is that you force them to bleed, and extract black blood; And another way is that you lift the vein, and guide it with all your strength.
The procedure is as follows: first raise the leg of hot water very strongly until the large vein becomes thin. Then keep stretching the leg from the knee upwards until it reaches the part below the thigh; Then make a cut in the vein of about one inch, or two inches, or three inches, depending on its width;
Then lift and drain the black blood from your hand, from one end to the other, as long as as much blood flows out as can withstand the virtues of the illness.
and then let it be known, and instruct that it is rubbed with meat juices to darken this blackness;
and resume the evacuation and cleaning whenever the veins are full, which harms the patient.
The method of treatment for this is as follows: elevate the leg of the affected area, if there's any hair; Then immerse it in a hot water bath, and let the leg be immersed in the warm water until it turns red, and the veins swell;
And if you don't have a bath, heat it over the fire, and then apply it directly to the veins from the top down to the knee, or in the area below the ankle;
Then scrape off the skin with an awl, and remove the vein from each side until it turns red when touched.
And you will see it turn red and black, and when it enters the skin, it seems as white as a string.
Then place the rod up high, until it is raised above the skin, and then move it to the artery gently,
then make a cut three fingers' width above three inches; then burn the skin over the vein until it reddens, then lower it to the sun, just like you did before, and move it to another inch, just like you did first;
then make a different size of the rod, or more if necessary, then lower it, and place it at two inches above the knee.
Then you guide and lift it until it reaches the size of a second; then you stretch it from size to size, as long as all force comes out, then you pull.
And if you cannot guide and lift it, you stick in a needle at the end of half a yard of strong doubled thread, And you tie and guide it, and insert another half yard at the end, and turn your hand on either side, until there's some release; And make sure it doesn't pull out, for if it pulls out, one cannot guide or lift it, and it causes harm to the patient.
And when you have treated it completely, put moistened wool in the wound with wine and rose oil; and clean until there is no more bleeding.
And if the body is twisted and bent together in one bundle, and it isn't straight, as we have said, It follows that you should cut it forcefully, but do not cover it; and treat it in the manner as we previously explained.
It follows that you should cut it forcefully, but do not cover it; and treat it in the manner as we previously explained. The shape of the iron with which you cut the hair is curved, and does not slice, so as not to cut the vein;
And it is of large curvature, for if they were subtle, they would close the vein, but being large as we have said, and this is its shape:
From the civil vein
This vein is confined in legs, on warm parts where no herbs nor tree are born, and in land which lacks moisture;
and sometimes is born elsewhere than in the legs, and this happens due to corruption that arises beneath the skin,
As if within the body there are snakes and worms, bind between skin and flesh.
And if the signs of this vein's beginning indicate that there is a severe inflammation in the leg, Then change the limbs, and begin the vein to emerge outwardly, like the root of a plant.
When the shoulder joint is opened, it is necessary to wrap internally with a piece of lead of one and a half cubits up to two and three quarters, and secure it in place.
And let the plaster remain on the leg, and every time there is movement at the outside, if the skin has enveloped around the plaster, and the new wound; And if it is too long, if one cuts off a part, envelop the rest back on and don't cut at its root until it is completely out; because if you cut it too much, it enters the flesh and causes pus and decay or infection at that place, leading to a bad illness;
for this reason, it is necessary to treat her little by little until the end and leave nothing or excess;
And it is no time when this vein when it is treated of two to three long palms, or of four, And one hand came to me, from which it was four long palms away, and when you grasp it, if you pull out one or two or three, and pierce until you reach the bottom,
And let everything come out; and evacuate all the matter that's inside, and apply anti-inflammatory remedies in the limb every day, then treat it as for abscesses.
And never at this vein from the skin inward, and similarly when it opens in the joint of the bone, or on the bone, And there is much pain involved, and they cut at the flesh; thus then treat it as we have said before.
Worms that are born between the skin and the flesh.
This illness is called in our land "cow disease", because it often affects cows,
And there is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, and it travels throughout the body going up and down, And one feels it well as it moves from member to member, until it escapes through the skin where it was going, and jumps out force.
And it is bound by putrefaction of some fluids, such as coming towards worms and snakes and maggots and roundworms or in the belly;
And there's doubt about its nature, for when it travels through the body, and it ascends to the head, and comes to the eye, By chance it enters and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.
When you see him being treated and drained, one can only hope until he is about to:
Therefore, it is necessary that you tie the area around and below with a firm rope tightly,
Then lift it up and drain it, and make sure it's completely submerged in the water, and you won't find it, if you apply a fire cautery to it, until it heals;
and the greater harms it causes, if they go to the eye, as we have said;
and if you see it coming close to your eye, if you cover with your thumb immediately, then lift up and pull it strongly;
it is necessary to use the remedy of purification of bodily fluids using solutions of medicinal substances for the ailments caused by bodily humor.
And if there is a rash from meat, it indicates putrefaction.
Of the pain that comes from wind irritation This illness is called in our land "vakirir", and it is a pain that affects some limbs, And indeed it moves from member to member; and I have seen what I am telling you.
I was summoned to attend a sick woman, and she uncovered my arm, showing me a small swelling in the vein beneath it;
And just then, I saw it rise as if a worm to her shoulder, As soon as nothing at all, like freshly cut silver when it is cut from another;
The pain left that part and settled into the shoulder,
And then a little later corrected throughout the body, until it reached the other arm;
Then I noticed that she was turning inside the body right away, as I saw.
I marveled greatly how she moved from member to member in such a way, for I had never seen this disease like this before. Still, I have seen many times that people would move pain from one part to another, But I do not want to mention it, as I see it in the woman;
and I thought it was because of this that women had hot bodies and exposed veins, and from this appears that constrained windiness is evident;
and does not appear according to this reason in those who are delicate, and who have wet bodies with covered veins.
And when you see the treatment of this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it opens as we have said, if you speedily remove it upwards and around, then cut as long as that wind-force restriction yields to its place; and apply the cautery to the area; and if you do not see it at your eyes,
If the treatment for one who expels winds, as with fetid pills, pill of serapin, and similar others.
Of arrows
Arrows are diverse, depending on their appearances and the locations of their impact on the body.
The diversity in them is such that there are arrows with large points, and small ones, and those with feathers, and those glued; And of those with two angles, and of those who have tongues, and of those where there are fragments; And the one who urinates in no part of her body but according to two ways: or from a primary member, it pours out;
like the brain, heart, liver, spleen, lungs, intestines, bladder, and similar organs. And when she urinates in no part of these organs, and the sign of death, which I will tell you later, appears: If you need to perform the extraction of this arrow, because death comes later in various situations; And when you don't notice this bad sign and the arrow hasn't been completely removed, then pull it out and treat the wound.
And the brain sign when the arrow exits and pierces the bone, causing a gust of wind that is above the brain, This occurs when blindness and numbness and vertigo are with us, along with a flushed face, and inflammation and red tongue, and spasm and confusion of mind, and vomiting of bile; And perhaps it affects the nose or ears; and by chance loses speech and voice. It causes a moist white swelling resembling a boil in the wound, and also burns like burnt flesh.
And if you notice this sign, adhere to the treatment, and extract the arrow if it is still inside.
The sign for the arrow when it comes out or hits bone is that it's near the left mammary gland, and also feels as if it's embedded in something hard, not empty. And by chance the vein may also become inactive like the hair, and in black blood, and brings coldness and cold sweat, and fainting: So, be aware that death follows with doubt.
And the sign of the arrow that never reveals itself is when there's no frothy discharge from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient's face changes color, and they sigh loudly with coldness.
And if the arrow exits through the back of the thigh, it's below the small ribs; and there's intense bleeding and pain and sighing; and all limbs from the shoulders downwards move.
And if an arrow or stomach contents escape through the wound by chance, there is no matter of undigested meat in that.
And if an arrow or stomach contents escape through the wound by chance, and there is nothing passing through the intestines in that jump, then there is no hope for treatment, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
And if an arrow penetrates into the bladder and urine escapes by jump and leaves, causing great pain to the patient: know that this wound is mortal.
The other body parts such as the arms and neck and throat and shoulder and elbow and shoulder blade and back spine and ribs and the legs, and seemingly similar limbs are safe according to various arrangements. When the arrow is in your nerve or artery, and it isn't venomous, as I will tell you what happened to me, because you did something else.
It happened when someone shot an arrow at him in the left lung at the base of the neck: I tried it, and from another side across the fat of the ear, it was perfectly healed without any pain.
And he aimed an arrow that fell into the fatty tissue near the paper under the eye. And the arrow had been returned, and one could not reach even its tip towards the shaft. And the arrow was large as an Ottoman bow, about one and a half pounds without ears; the patient recovered, and he did not suffer any adverse events.
And extracted an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabian with ears:
I pulled out the barbs, and after extracting them as I pulled, the Christian recovered.
And shoot an arrow to one's half body, where it stuck or was embedded either in the chest or abdomen, and thought that they were dying;
and then after having passed thirty days, if it had not changed its position; I cut into the arrow, and attached a mechanism to it, and I forcefully pulled it out, and there was no bad incident.
And if you find that an arrow has fallen or been driven into one's back, and the wound has healed;
And allows the arrow to remain within, and does not restore its natural positions, nor finds harm in any of its natural works.
And for another man, who was struck in the face with an arrow, and had his wound stitched;
and then continued to endure great pain; and many others were similar.
And a spear was thrust for 1 home of the princes to the king, who had it stuck in his neck midst the battle. and it was somewhat leaning towards the right side; and the spear was entirely upright.
I was called for the treatment after she had been pierced for three days. I found the wound to be very narrow.
I tried all sorts of subtle tests on her, and did not feel it at all; And he felt a wound and pain all over his right ear. I thought it was from the tip of the arrow.
I put on his head a plaster that absorbs and digests, because the ears were inflamed; And I saw the tip of the arrow in the ear.
And I saw the tip of the arrow in the ear. I applied the plaster for several days, and resolved the wound quickly, then prolonged the patient's discomfort for a long time.
Until he felt the arrow within his nose; and I told him about it. I applied corrosive mercury medicine to the wound for several days until it was opened.
And I tried it out, and felt the tip of the arrow as it stuck in him; Then adjust during the opening of the wound through this blood-purifying medicine, until the head of the arrow becomes visibly apparent;
and make sure to reach deeply into the inner part for about four months,
then stretch it if the wound is too tight and I found the scissors were needed, and pull from both sides, but could not come out;
so I kept trying to refine and devise ways of tools until I managed, on the second day, to use well-made scissors to extract it. According to how its form will come at the end of this chapter, as long as I am treating it, and will heal the wound.
And they judge that the cartilage under the nose cannot be restored: I will do so then, and the wound shall be sealed, and completely healed of the malady.
Thus I have told you about the quality of extracting arrows, if you place your treatment on what I do not say, because books cannot take everything into account;
but the wise masters compare well to a small amount of things, and on what is present and lacking; find nine works, and the ninth instrument, for the removal of foreign objects that occur in this art.
I say that arrows are within the members where they are stuck according to two ways: By the arm where they enter, or from another side;
And the one that enters through an injury or where it goes in, it's an arrow entering the flesh, and there is no such thing anymore.
And if it does not leave now, let it stay until the wound heals internally, and expect its outcome.
And similarly if it's stuck in the bone, and cannot come out, let it stay like that for some days, and remove it every day.
And then it jumps, and if it doesn't jump, if one pierces through all with a single fine needle, as long as the bones inside are widened, and then proceeds.
And if the arrow has returned to within the body so that you can't see it, if one seeks for it with the whole effort; And if you feel it, guide it to any suitable instrument;
and if you cannot do it due to the tightness of the wound, and because of the depth of the arrow, and there is neither bone nor nerve or vein, cut it as long as the wound becomes large; and pull out the arrow if you can, and if there are ears holding onto it,
and pull out the arrow if you can, and if there are ears holding onto it, If you extract a bone that is stuck at two places, remove it as far as you can reach. and then break or bend the arrow's ears (feathers) until you can drain it completely;
and then break or bend the arrow's ears (feathers) until you can drain it completely; Do this skillfully so that you do not break the arrow, but drain it more firmly.
And if you can't achieve this in one go, leave it until the arrow shaft is completely rotted, then remove it, as extraction requires agility. And if bleeding contravenes you, then apply what we have said about treatment in our chapter regarding bloodletting;
and guard against cutting the nerve and vein, and apply as carefully as you can to extract the arrow without risk,
either quickly or gently, firmly or clumsily; and guide the patient according to the form they were in when the arrow struck them, because this is the greatest aid that you can provide, and if you cannot do so, place it according to what the symptoms show you.
The arrow that comes from another side, or where it pierces anything inside him, or the skin is swollen in that place so you can see or feel it apparently:
Then lift up, as long as the tongs can hold, and then stretch: if the arrow jumps now.
And if it is held in the bone, twist your hand round as long as it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then pull it out.
And if it cannot come out, let it still be there, and then start pulling it out again as long as it does not come out.
And if there is an arrow involved, hold it to the entire shaft;
And if it's bone, and you see it being administered by hammering, then apply a tool for that purpose. so that the arrowhead enters into the groove of the tool; and then strike with force,
And if the arrow is stuck in deep, use another tool with a pointed end to facilitate its extraction.
And if the arrow is embedded, it's necessary for you to pull all the flesh inward around where it enters, if you can. then treat the wound as seems appropriate.
And if the arrow lodges in the leg or arm or abdomen or bladder or ribcage, and it's close to vital organs, and you can remove it, then lift it up; if you can remove it.
and be careful not to pull the vein and nerve with it, then extract it, and then sew up the wound, if that's what is required. And the treatment until she/he is healed.
The shape of the forceps used for arrows resembles a bird's beak, and here is the shape:
And they come in various sizes: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
from the veins of common bodies From the veins from which we cleanse oneself are thirty-one, from which there is a head of sixteen.
This is to know: two small things which are after the ears, they are called "the two grasses"; and the two arteries that are in the two temples visible; and the two veins that are in the corners of the two eyes, they are called "aspires"; and the vein that runs on the forehead; and the vein that is near the nose; and the two tendons which are at the neck; and the two veins that are above in the cheeks of the mouth, and these veins are called 'aughers'; and two veins that are along the tongue.
The veins by which we usually treat are five in each arm:
One is the occipital bone, and it's located on the left side of the head, and they call it the "blood vein of the head"; And the middle one is called 'sawdust', and it's composed of the occipital bone and the basioccipital bone; And they call it 'the blood vein of the heart'; and the basioccipital bone is either on the left or right side of the head, And they call this thing 'breath of the belly', and it is above the navel, and it refers to that which heals, whose opening becomes clearly visible at the scrotum.
And the bloodletting tool is the vein located between the index finger and the ring finger, and if it's one inch long;
and in the leg and below the knee are three veins: one is at the back of the thigh on the left side near the groin; And here comes the second sentence to translate.
And in the other leg are three veins along those ones.
The health of the veins that are behind the ears helps with the old plagues and migraines; And the qualities of the healer, as I have told you, and that you heal the head with pain.
And the qualities of the healer, as I have told you, and that you heal the head with pain. And rub the area where the veins are with a rough cloth; then pinch the patient's neck at its base. Until the two veins become visible behind the ears on both sides of the head: Place them then under your right hand, and where you feel the pulse under your right hand, touch gently;
Then take the scalpel and place it just below the vein up to the bone, then raise your hand all the way above the vein. And cut and loosen the skin and the vein very carefully two inches deep through which to pass, and let blood flow out as long as you see;
then tighten and bind it until it is healed;
and I have already spoken of the incision and the cautery in the first book.
The health of the two arteries that are in the two temples serves as old grapevine grafting, And so, and accustomed to surgery, and at the body of feverish tears for the eyes;
And that which makes the surgeon is just like what I say: And when the patient strangles their throat until both veins are clearly visible; and feels the pulse on both sides of your neck, and then judges by palpation;
Then lift the knife above the vein on top of your thumb, and hold the scalpel ready. And lift the vein at the top, and cut it, as you did in two other veins, and let out the blood according to your need;
Then release the patient, place your thumb on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on it.
And after that form the vein again, and leave it until it has healed. We have discussed this along with their incision and extraction elsewhere, starting from this chapter.
The treatment of the vein on the forehead is just as important as that of the frontal sinus in ancient diseases, and for migraines, and for redness;
And the quality is such that the diseases twist their necks, until the vein becomes visible. then take the tool called a 'digger', whose form is as follows:
And place the tip on the vein, and press with your hand or another tool, allowing the blood to flow according to the amount you see; Then release the neck to the patient, and tie the vein until it is healthy and no part of the operation has been done with a wide flame.
Every time, it should not be that the flames are too strong; and the healing from the side, because the bone is close, and by chance the flames might break when they are subtle.
The healing of the two veins that are in two eyelids affects the eyes, and at the nose, and at the cheek, and in the ear at the earlobe, and to the diseases of the face;
And the quality of their healing is such that the patient contracts their throat by twisting some string, as before;
Then heal it, and make the healing passage through it, somewhat like the length of a flame, somewhat long, because there is no flesh.
And if the flames are subtle and accidentally break, then make correction with blood, as much as you need to, and then bind on cotton, and tie it well.
The healing of the vein close to the nose is valued for fever, and sudden relief, and diseases of the face, such as migraine and redness that comes in the face, and likewise when it is old;
And the quality of health is such that the patient restricts their throat, then narrows their nose with your left hand, and take the fine flame long, and insert it into the lip in the space that is between the two noses, for the vein does not open well yet, and the blood will now begin to flow;
and do not let it burn too deeply below the skin, and bleed gently according to your need, then stop for a night as she heals very quickly;
The health of the two kidneys helps in tightening the arteries, and at the beginning of mixed diseases, and for various illnesses, and in edema, and corrosion, and herpes, and embolism.
And the quality of health is such that the patient's throat tightens around both sides, as we have said. and let the masters remain at the head of the patient's illness, and the ill person lies for one day,
then cleanse the vein along a length somewhat widely, then treat with a temperate blood flow, or as much as is necessary;
then repeat the operation on the other vein, then release the knot, and gently restrain the veins halfway. So the advice is for those who have a condition to let their hair grow long and even; and if it starts pricking at its base when they are young, hold them in place so they don't move until they fully grow.
From cleansing of the lungs The cleansing of veins in the mouth helps to alleviate issues within the mouth, and leads to tooth decay, and gum infections, and cracks in lips, and dental pain and discomfort.
And the quality of health is to make the sick person stand before you, and hold their neck back just as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one is on the right lip and the other on the left side, and you can recognize them because they are black, and because in them there are small black veins: now hold both of them, and if you do not know which one it is and you're uncertain,
now hold both of them, and if you do not know which one it is and you're uncertain, If you take the largest from each part, and do the same for the two veins that are above and below, because it is a similar method.
From the healing of the tongue The healing of the veins that are below the tongue assists after the healing of the head, and this is at the constriction of the throat, and with diseases of the eyelid, and with diseases of the mouth;
And the quality of the healer is that when a patient's illness becomes evident under your hands in front of the sun, and you raise the tongue, and look underneath on each side there appears a black vein:
Then heal both of them, do not overdo it too much, because near are the arteries.
The veins in one's arm that are commonly healed are treated according to two methods:
if you prick them with one flame for a long time, or with an olive stick if there's no knife handy, and they're called 'anisel'; and they are wide and fine according to the size and narrowness of the veins. The shape of the fire cautery is greatly renowned, and it is quite wide as you see:
And one must open the veins full of large visible blood, and that contain large blood and disturbance; and it is the shape of the olive oil flame:
and it is more pointed in subtlety, and used for purifying veins in subtlety, or there is citrine subtle blood.
The treatment of a basilica vein, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that affect the throat, and the collarbone, and the belly, and the chest;
And it is incumbent on the surgeon to treat carefully, and to be aware of the artery that is nearby. And if he hits the artery, and bleeding occurs, then it is incumbent upon him to stop the bleeding, as I have said; And it should not be clamped with fire, but cut like a skilled butcher.
And if the basilic vein is not clearly open, it is necessary for you to extract it, and change another one; You should not have any fear about this, or you can cut into its place instead of it, the vein opens clearly; And cut the artery before it swells up, as we have said.
And if you know how to find the location of the artery, it is necessary for you thus: when you are pulling on the arm, press as far as you can feel the pulse; Then mark the place of injury, and then bind the arm, and cut the vein before it inflames.
And remember not to cut into the artery when you see the wound swelling up, because that's from the artery. Listen carefully then.
And if you see it bulging up like a child's urine at the top, and the veins are red and delicate, know that this is from an artery: take care. Hasten then, place your finger for a while, and when the bleeding stops, that has happened many times;
The person ties the arm, leaves it like this, and does not move it. And there is fear, and do not move until it becomes well.
And if the wound is not bleeding, and it suits you, and the medicine does not reach you, if you need to open an artery, because the head of the blood retreats; stop the bleeding.
Take a bark of rue, cut it, take one half and bind it well up to the other joint;
If the wound stops bleeding, that's good; if not, apply it as we have said, using powders that stop the blood.
And the bandages are not often tightened excessively due to the small size of the wound, and the strength of the arm's connection.
The surgery in the middle assists that it treats blood from above the head and below the chest, and across. because she is made up of the basilica and cephalic (parts), as we have said;
And it is necessary for the surgeon to be aware of the nerve that is located there, and if it isn't too deep, and he finds the nerve; And it inflates and health is affected, and by chance cannot heal;
And this nerve opens many times, and if it doesn't open in any parts due to its intricacy, then you must use the surgical tool beforehand; and listen for the nerve with your ability.
And if there is a vein between the two nerves, cut it long.
The surgical treatment for the scalp helps, as it drains blood from the head, and aids with pain;
And it is necessary for the surgeon to use the olive oil lamp or the myrtle balm lamp, because this is the safest of all veins, as it does not destroy the nerve or artery.
Otherwise, it's necessary to try for the lightest weight and don't worry if one fails at first, just retry; And by chance, some limbs might swell in certain individuals even when attempting for the first time, but it causes no harm. The quality of surgery depends on your thought process.
The first thing you need to know about healing, it is that healing should be conducted only for the purpose of maintaining health,
and to avoid future illnesses; And let the healing take place through one of the three veins that are there: this means, the cephalic vein, the femoral vein, and the basilic vein; And let healing begin at the beginning of prayers while kneeling, and in autumn and after meals during winter, when the sign of fullness appears;
And let healing begin on the first or third day, after two hours or three days.
The healing administered for illnesses does not have a set hour, but only when the need is daily or nutritional, at all hours and in all circumstances;
And nursing infants up to thirteen years is not advisable, nor pregnant women for more than a quarter of the months up to seven. And one should not nurse the old who have passed sixty years.
And when some wish to be nursed, in whatever way that might be, it is necessary for them to cleanse their intestines with a gentle enema. If there's much of urine retained, so that the vessels draw away from the intestines the superfluous matters harmful to the main parts;
One who is excessively fat from meat, or one who is drunk, as long as they are able-bodied, or those with dropsy,
And if after a colic passion, and vomiting, and stomach cramps, and frequent visits to the toilet by the woman, and from work, watching over things, and joining in activities, or when someone loses their vigor, or due to something from an injury or from physical labor;
Then carefully balance the body fluids, if they are excessive due to meat, drinks and medications, then use a poultice.
Then within or during bathing, if no obstacle is present, for purging of the blood,
and cleanse from the body down to about a third of the waist, as we have said;
and abstain that day from work, and pain, and excess, and similar things;
and be bound and seated, and let the bandages be higher than where you are being treated, and rub your arm twice or three times.
Then stretch halfway over it, because when it is too tight or too loose,
and then rub the shoulder with your hands until the veins swell and you can feel them;
then moisten the wicks with a little old oil flame, then place your left hand's index finger on that vein above the shoulder a bit where you want to apply pressure; so that the vein doesn't rupture or break upon being pressed. For there are veins that flow like strings when they're healthy, and there are others that are full of wind. yet if one places them over the flame, they draw to the flame and cannot open the vein, and thus one is of those;
and if it opens the vein, then the wound is too narrow, for in this situation one should have knowledge of such matters among the surgeons.
And if the veins open on the first try, it's good; but if not, you can still try again right there or at a slight distance from that spot or hastily, as long as the area isn't swollen.
And if the limbs are swollen and the patients feel discomfort, let them rest for one or two days, and do not tie the arm: By chance pus will come out at the wound; do not go into water or bath, then restart the cleaning if it suits the patient;
And if the wound is small or the opening in the artery is subtle and you doubt whether it's not bleeding as much as you see, then pierce that opening directly throughout to all its flame;
And let the wound be elevated for a little while, in this way that the limbs swell; because this happens many times, when the wound is small.
If you see the limb is inflamed, do not restart the healing process and apply a little oil instead, because it lightens the body's burden from blood, and heals in that area where the oil is placed.
and thus apply the oil-based remedy to each healing you do for veins, in order to stop the flow of blood;
And similarly perform garlic and ginger with wine, when you place it on the limb; if the herbs are too strong they cause a lot of pain.
And if it comes about that there are large abscesses, which happen often, even when the healing is not complete because only in this case or when the opening of the vein is small, If you are ready, place on your head a sponge soaked in water and a little salt heat for an hour;
It is necessary that you do this after the blood escape from the vein, and if it remains on your head for several days without any darkness or greenness, if it does not harm it; And if you see something, place on any thing of aloes or of myrrh made into a juice from comfrey, mustard, or similar.
Many times pus and appearance would occur at the healing of the basilica: therefore place your hand there, and if you find the head soft upon applying pressure from your hand, then that appearance is bad. So then you should not apply anything from what we have said, because by chance within that without the artery; but let it dry for one bandage to harden the place, then treat it with another treatment until it is sound.
And lead each person to some blood according to the amount of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
But if their veins are black, let them bleed until it turns red; and if you see that they are large, let them bleed until they become subtle; and if it is too hot, let them cool down.
And it suits the one who is full and strong, needing blood extraction, to make him have a larger wound, and let the flames be wide;
And for the one who is weak, do the opposite, and it suits well to care gently yet often, and you must care by cutting across, not simply cutting straight.
And this way of care saves from the bleeding out and constriction of nerves, and is better than a long cut compared to a wide one.
And for the one whose body needs care in healing, you should give them moistened bread made from juice of quince apples; if they are feverish, then cool it with blood three times or four times.
And if they have a cold constitution, eat moistened bread before the healing process in a syrup made with honey, or in an aromatic honey syrup with spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, ensuring it has a pleasant scent.
And if it fails in the healing process after a bit of blood, then it is necessary for them to inhale soup made from fat, and an aromatic subtle syrup.
and use other things that we have mentioned in the section or chapter of syncope, for the evacuation of veins.
And if he wants to breathe with his arm and heal again, then when he is weakened by much healing, it should be that he heals little by little, according to the quantity of its strength continuously.
And if he wants to breathe with his arm after the first healing and has strong veins, then heal him 7 hours after the first healing or after the new hour.
And if someone wishes to heal on another side, then one should heal the second day or the third.
For there is much blood inside the body that has heated up, and it causes fever; so one must drain large quantities, and widen the wound until it discharges through the suture. After you have treated all aspects of healing, and place your hand on the heart when it heals, so that death does not come instead of the stitch. This occurs many times when the healers are negligent;
And it is not right when you see a dislocation of the arm, and making blood flow out the second time, and if there are gaps present, If it is curved, stretch out the arm quickly, for this would be badly done;
but let it until it heals the second time; or you should place the tip of the flame at the end of the wound, until the blood that was frozen in the gap flows out, and place on one pinch of salt that has been dissolved in water, and press gently.
And if the artery has been cut, let it alone and do not compress it until the abscess subsides.
And if the need is to drain blood a second time, then place the healthy one in its own location, or in another artery, or on the other arm.
The vein in the arm is made in such a way that it can be replaced by the main artery because of its composition.
And the method of this treatment is that the patient immerses his hand in hot water, until the fingers turn red;
Then tie it somewhat moderately, so that you can see well inside, then now heal him/her through it, not too wide nor too long.
And make them somewhat broad, and heal very close to the wrist joint, and do not let it go through, then put the hand in hot water, and allow the blood to flow with the water until you have enough.
And if it's in this state, do not re-bake the hand in hot water, because you put it more in winter than in summer;
And healing from this vein is saved from all other veins, for there is neither artery nor nerve.
The healing of saving the right hand for all liver diseases, and this is the method:
Stretch the hand, and immerse it in hot water, until the vein appears, if you can see it; and when healing from the side, and if you hold it all over completely, so that nothing hurts;
and don't go too far around it either, because all the nerves are completely devoid of flesh,
And then place your hand in hot water, if there is freezing present at the wound site, it will not be able to escape.
And when you have treated the blood as much as necessary, place an incision where there is a leak to seal it quickly, and then do this for each individual case.
The health of his left hand is against the disease in the mouse [or perhaps 'the mouse organ'], and do everything as I have told you regarding the right side.
The health of the stomach is against all diseases that are within the body, If it relates to diseases of the heart, and retention of flowers, and disease of kidneys, and old diseases of thighs and legs, and similar diseases.
And the quality of its health is such that the patient bathes in hot water, and rubs their veins until they bleed. and above the joint of the ankle; and the vein is at the ankle, and above that joint, it goes into many parts of the kidney;
Then it is healthy wherever it goes larger towards a kidney, or at the ankle, as long as it flows.
And if you cure it on the foot, be aware of the nerves that are there, and heal through the middle just as when cutting a log; let the flames go ahead.
And if it cannot come out, then place the foot in water and allow well for the vein to drain properly.
And if it heals the first time, then for the second attempt go slightly above it the second time because the legs are salty; Do not doubt about nerve damage, as we have said, and do the same treatment for the other leg equally.
The muscles of the sciatic vein are at the ankle's bone, and its health corresponds to the pain in the buttocks, when it is due to internal bleeding.
And the quality of its health is such that the veins enter or swell, and they constrict above the ankle up to three inches by twisting.
but otherwise, the vein does not open; and if it does open, heal it in every way you can, and across it; and take care to have it bandaged, for the muscles are bare, and it is very responsive to human hands.
and take care to have it bandaged, for the muscles are bare, and it is very responsive to human hands. And if you can't find it, if there's no opening or pain in the front or back of the knee, and towards your little toe, be careful of the nerves.
And drain the blood as much as you see fit, and then release the knot, and place a cotton bandage over it and tighten; now it is healed.
Bloodletting with suction cups
Suction cups are made of horns, or spiders, or leeches; and bloodletting can be done in two ways: either by piercing and drawing blood, or without piercing.
And this suction which can cause injury is done in two ways: it can be performed with any fire, or it requires fire;
and the other two are in the two sides of the neck; and there is suction under the chin. And the suction of the two shoulders; and the suction over the pimples; And the suckers on the two arms; and the suckers on the two legs; And the suckers on the ankles; and suction therapy does not involve much blood, but rather small veins that are scattered in the flesh,
and thus it does not weaken me at all, as we do for health of veins; And it should not be administered, nor with any fire or sense of heat, in any illness that comes from fullness, until all the bodies are emptied.
And if suction is required due to illness necessity, or by custom, let us administer it each hour at the beginning of the month, or at its end, and continuously throughout every period.
for there are those who, when they need to suction, weigh it heavily;
and for such people, if they find fullness and redness on their face, and in their head, and at the neck, and they are troubled by these things;
And those who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have fainted, and are coughing up blood; And if there are any such people who fear, see by the nose blood and noses and wounds and similar things.
And when we see these signs, and indeed even during the last month, we instruct to fast after three hours of the day.
The care of the mouth helps with the cold in the head ... where it comes from the eyes, and it is not right for this to happen after the evacuation of all the body;
And this suction is in the place of the treatment of the occipital region,
And it should not be used by those who have a cold constitution, or who suffer from catharsis, because to them it causes much harm;
And for this reason, it should not be used by those who wear heavy clothing or suffer from cold diseases.
And the one who often uses it becomes forgetful; for this reason, it is necessary to place the suction cup slightly lower by considering the risk of forgetfulness.
The ventilation process near the neck is located at the place of healthy wind and the basilica, yet for this it benefits with compression on the foot. and through the incision in the chest, immediately, and to replenish;
And it is better not to pinch too much, for if she holds too tightly, she may cause obstruction or stomach and heart issues.
Ventilation at the two ribs near the neck helps with chest pain, eye disease and toothache, and in strangulation, and with pain in the roots of teeth.
And it is in the location of the health of the basilica; and it behooves you to command the healer that he exposes his hand upon placing it, not to compress the artery, and not to let blood flow intermittently.
The ventilation under the chin corresponds to mouth diseases and gum decay, and similar illnesses that occur in the mouth; it is related to the health of the two lips.
The ventilation of the shoulders corresponds to sicknesses that come from heat and fullness.
Ventilation under the armpits is as important as three veins in the arm, for she has bled from these large veins;
and instructs the surgeon not to cut too close, for the artery is bare at its base, and lies beneath the skin and veins.
The suction cup on the back is suitable for bloodletting near the kidneys and internal illnesses. It's necessary that the suction cup be large and made of horn, as it needs to be handled well. By chance, if it were thin, it would break; and making such incisions causes great injuries.
The suction cups on the legs are applied openly because they drain blood from the entire body and are effective for old kidney pains, bladder issues, and uterine problems; they also help to weaken the body over time with prolonged use, leading to weakness in various conditions.
The method for applying the suction cup is to put it empty first, and apply a steady suck, then quickly place it, moving evenly, and keep doing this until you see the area turn red and swell. Once you perceive the reddish color of blood, then release, and replace the suction cups; be vigilant about the position of the parts involved, for some have thick flesh and clear pores: only one cut should be made in them, and large cuts with slight depth are to be done; suck lightly.
And if the area is thick, it may require two cuts: the first one to delicately clear out the large blood vessel path.
And if the vein is very dense, it may require a third cut; and when we aim to draw out blood gradually and gradually, we only need to make one incision.
And if we wish not to have much blood, then we often begin again; and if the patient is faint, we give them strength, and the ends are such that the veins are pierced suddenly.
And it is necessary for those who have thick skin and hardness, and who have contracted sores, that you grease their ears with suction cups where an opening appears and a disintegrating agent: if it is in the state of inflammation, of violet oil, or of sweet almond oil, or of pumpkin seed oil;
and if it is in the form of pus, use rapeseed oil, or linden oil, or chamomile oil, or any similar.
And if the excess is large and cold, take oil of myrrh, or of balm, or aniseed oil, and similar substances.
And if one seeks to strengthen the flesh and large pores, there should be no need for any oil,
but it is suitable to wash after bloodletting with pink water, or cold water, or water from a rose, or water from a cucumber plant, or water from a porcelain dish, or other similar substances.
And for those who have much moisture, if they are lifted with help or with water from wormwood and sumac, and other similar things.
And those who have large excesses drink old wine, or water from vinegar, or decoctions of nettle or chamomile, or others alike;
and there is no cure of suction cup before or during the bath, but after the bath for one hour or two; and do not sleep afterwards during suction.
and it should be noted when he is to be suctioned and when he has been suctioned. And take care of those who are being treated if they are hot-tempered, and if their body is too active and inflamed; If it requires cold things, such as apples of summer, endive leaves, lettuce, and similar items;
And minced rabbits, and the meat of castrate animals, and moist meats.
And for those with a cold constitution, they should consume syrup of honey and fragrant half-aged wine, which is between old and new wines, and eat small portions, and minced rabbits, and minced castrated animals, and young birds and chicks;
And on the day he feels better, he should drink more than he eats.
And it is necessary to give no one men any thyme or muscatel before or after ventilation, or afterwards, to strengthen the main members; And season the broth well, but it is not good for him who sweats to drink.
The suction cups that are placed to irritate are those that are placed on the liver, and on the spleen, and in gout, and on the stomach and the intestines and the kidneys and the hip, because this member does not endure being irritated by needles.
and do it only to draw blood from one part of the body to another, as when we place our hands on the nipples as soon as the child is born; to remove the viscosity that is in the body, as we apply suction cups on the belly and on the buttocks to reduce the size of the body;
and relieve the pain, when there is an obstruction or stone, and by its attractive power it may relieve the obstruction, or remove the stone from its place;
and in this way, when it is placed on the liver and the spleen if there is retained viscosity,
and these suction cups are used empty solely for drawing out fluid; and they are never applied together with fire, and not filled with water.
As in illnesses with weeping pain, and in such a manner that one fills the suction cup with hot water, or with water where herbs suitable for this have been cooked.
The shape of the suction cup to be used on fire is as follows:
And it has two and a half fingers wide in length, and at the center in the middle is an object of one small notch, like to pierce a needle,
and may be made of iron or silver so that it doesn't burn the patient upon placing it on the body;
And there is an inch long piece of a spider or iron rod in the middle, to place a candle on.
And for them big and small according to the illnesses and age of those who take them;
for the suck-stickings for children are different from those of old people, and those for thin ones than fat ones.
And one should place this suck-stick thus on the member:
Take a candle wax plug or one inch long, and place it inside the suction cup at the tip of the penis which is within the suction cup, so that the heat remains in the bottom of the suction cup and does not burn the scrotum;
and then place it on the member, and hold it either at the part that we have mentioned, so that when desired, if there is a vapor, remove the suction cup;
and apply the paste in the same way as before, and repeat it often, if you need to.
In the suction cup treatment for diseases of pleurisy, during all stages of fever, there should be neither too much nor too little fluid, and it is administered only when it is full of water, and placed solely on the body part.
and it takes this shape:
Suction cups should not be applied except in parts of the body where it is possible to place suction cups due to their size limitations, such as lips and gums, and similar areas; and on the bare skin of wounds, such as arms or legs, and other similar areas.
And the quality of this user is that when you find nerves that are in sweet waters without infection, if you take them;
And place them in sweet water until they become familiar and have nothing in their guts; and then cleanse the wound and use suction cups, after that rub the limb until it turns red, and place them on the nerves;
and when they are full and start to hurt, if you can place suction cups there, do so, because this works very little afterwards.
If not, lift it with dry force first, and then with wet force, quite well, and afterwards apply the incision;
and if the limbs are too stiff after the body of the surgery, moisten with .i. a linen cloth dipped in cold water, and place it on top, until the skin has turned red;
and if there are multiple wounds, then place powdered vitriol or garlic and similar substances on top until the skin has turned red;
or you place half of peeled beans on the wound, and leave them until they burn through the skin, which will stop the bleeding now;
And if you need more skill, take other means.
And if the veins do not wish to open up, rub with a fresh blood source, or you insert an arrow until blood flows from it. and then place them, and as soon as they sense the blood, they start moving;
And when you see that they are bleeding, powder a little aloes and ground wheat on them, or ash; they will start moving now.
This begins the book of fractures
This chapter is many times necessary in the art of medicine, and in the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Know this, dear boy, that the leaves of this chapter would have been lost from this book, had it not been found in any of the old books, nor had anyone ever read a letter from it;
And because of this reason, the knowledge has been lost in our land, for I have never found anyone good with it;
And know this not from anything else, but solely by the knowledge of ancient books, which I have studied so much that I applied the art in them, and through experimentation, and through my life's habit.
And I have described in this chapter what is contained here and summarized it at the end, clearly showing the forms of the instruments that are used, as I did in those two chapters before this one.
Therefore, it is necessary for us to outline the contents of this book in our preface and specify the chapters where wisdom places its understanding, and remain faithful to truth. So that those who have experienced it may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when fracture or dislocation or twists or sprains occur to any part of the body, it is necessary for you to quickly tend to the patient from one side and the other, without causing them too much pain, especially in cases of weakness due to age, children, or elderly individuals;
If the cautery is too tight or too cold; and consume cold joints, meaning cold jousts, and liver and buckthorn meat, do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and do not fill yourself with too many foods that fill the veins with blood until you have doubt of an abscess becoming hot, or spreading of matter in the limb. If the patient gets better under your first rule of treatment, which he has used.
And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary that you nourish the patient with meats that are rich in nutrients, or have viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, and rice, and peas, and pies, and veal liver, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things. And with this kind of nourishment, healing occurs more quickly and the break heals better.
And know that bones broken in old and weakened people cannot be properly set or sutured according to their nature due to the dryness of limbs, nor those also which are too tender, such as the bones of young children;
but take care, reset the broken bone. i.e., apply firm pressure and join the limb together until it is as strong as before; and don't let him work too soon at his task, for this requires being nourished with large meats, as we have said.
And know that fractures are various in many ways.
For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot or leg, and I will tell you all about fractures in this chapter. For there are fractures going to an arrow wound, and others while sharpening, such as when cutting the tip of a feather for writing.
For there are fractures going to an arrow wound, and others while sharpening, such as when cutting the tip of a feather for writing. And if it's a fracture with injury, and a break due to a small crack.
And each one has its tool, and its own instrument proper for restoration, according to what memory brings to its place;
And one recognizes the fracture of the bone by how the limb is twisted, and opens well through it, and its sound when squeezed with the hand;
And when there is no twist or curvature at its end, and the patient does not feel significant pain, if there is no break;
but it may well have twists, or crack, or a small fracture. But it is not appropriate for you to move it with your hand, but apply the following remedies and then gradually constrain it now in a subtle way.
And know that the fracture that was in the arm and the two parts are disjointed, now you should put them at the same level so that abscesses are applied on each side;
And if pus appears, if he lets it be for any day, until the pus is calmed; Then treat it equally with the means you can use gently and wisely, knowing that its restoration is easier than if there were pieces involved. Then apply, as follows.
And if there are pieces in the bone, and it is split into two parts, whether it's hands or feet, or near your hand for small limbs, or at two strings, or at one string and with your hand;
and place the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the member are healed, you reattach all additions in their original places with means as you can, and remember that through your action do not bring about harm or pain to the patient;
And properly adjust both ends of the bones according to the best shapes.
And feel it well with your hand if you think it's not quite right: if the positioning is beautiful, and don't strain it too much, don't press as those who extract by their art do for pus discharge and muscle tension, as we have wanted many times.
And when the limb is in place, restrain well the patient so they don't move it, neither while awake nor asleep, neither upon turning, nor in any other manner; And make sure that the limb is so secure that the patient does not feel any pain. For when he feels no pain, nor is it at ease, and he should be placed in such a position that he does not feel any pain.
For when he feels no pain, nor is it at ease, and he should be placed in such a position that he does not feel any pain. and keep him straight, so that no twisting occurs when he is being put back in place;
the quality of the limb broken should be according to what I tell you.
Know that limbs broken are varied in size and extent, and in shape.
For there are small limbs, such as arms and legs and alike; it is necessary to wrap them in soft and fine linen cloths;
and those that are larger, such as thighs and calves: it is necessary to wrap them with a wide and firm bandage; for wide bandages embrace the entire large limb, and constrain it equally from all sides, so that there is no unevenness;
then place lighter bandages around them, either three or four times depending on the limb, and apply your hand a little to every part of the bandage, then move up past the wound and constrain it less, so that the wound can slightly separate from the skin;
and soften the bandage little by little until you cover a large part of the healthy area, then apply another layer of bandage and return to the wounded area again;
After returning to the fracture area, it moderately restrains it, neither too tightly nor too loosely, as we have stated in the first instruction above;
Then place linen strips or bandages over it until they are the same length, then tie everything up with one loop, and afterwards place your well-made stars on top. If there is no abscess or swelling, do this.
And if there is swelling or an abscess, then place something soothing on the area to reduce the swelling and alleviate the pain, and leave it for a few days;
Then place something to hold the stars in place, and they should be half the width of a standard walking cane or sharpened to a point, or from wood used for making hammers, or palm leaves, and they should look like this:
However, it is necessary for the emulsion that one places on the break to be a bit larger and wider than the others;
and also as long as it fits according to the size of the limb, whether small or large;
then hold it on the emulsions just like you did in the first application, then tie an additional thread above it, similarly to what was done in the first application on the break;
tighten this up slightly, not too tight; and it is necessary that the thread be medium-sized, neither too thick nor too thin, and they should be made of soft linen;
For if the threads are thick, as I want in works where they make their loops on linen cords twisted, and this is great mistake, because the loop cannot be even if it is too subtle, and it does not suit that there be less than two inches of space between each thread.
And if the muscles are injured by the pressure of the shoulder pins after constriction in their healthy areas, then place them with linen or coarse woolen patches, so that they do not blister.
When the wound is under strain and the ribs are broken, I will say the treatment after this.
And know that it is not fitting to forcibly stretch all broken limbs on the first day. For when the limbs are large, it is not fitting to apply braces immediately but only after five days or seven, or more according to your judgment of each new case occurring.
And here is the method of ancient plastering to restore fractures, dislocations, and twists: take corn that settles on mill walls, mix it with plenty of eggs, make this concoction neither too dry nor too thick, and use it. This is a common way of using plaster to restore fractures in various positions, as well as for women and small children, because it is neither too expensive nor too cold.
Another method of plastering to restore fractures and dislocations: take 3 egg whites, ladani, anise, asafetida, and gum arabic, each in quantity of .x. Z; myrrh and aloes, also each in quantity of .v. Z; garlic Z viij.; make this into a powder, then mix it with plenty of eggs; if the composition is hot, use this plaster because it has good composition, and quickly restores broken bones, and is beneficial for many people.
Another method for plastering in the case of twisting: take mugwort and valerian, each 3 parts; myrrh and aloes, each 8 parts; achillae 4 parts; boric acid from Armenia 10 parts. Grind these together well and mix with water or a generous amount of egg whites. Apply this preparation.
Another method for dressing broken joints and fractured bones, relieving the pain they cause, and aiding in their healing: take new wool, cook it with its grease and oil, and apply it on top of them. This bandage doesn't fully heal, but it is better to soothe abscesses quickly, and appropriately relieves bone pains.
Another method for dressing broken bones that heals them: take dried fig leaves and earth-pine leaves, grind them together, and make a dressing.
Another way to apply plaster in restoring bone fracture and aiding the removal of pus. Take root of comfrey, chamomile, violet flowers, cornflour from each one part; grind it together, mix it with wine, and if your limbs are heated, mix it with coriander water or just water, and use it.
Another method for applying plaster more forcefully than the first when pus has come to restore the member. Take roots of comfrey, and sesame seeds, balm, melilot, and winter savory, and violet and chamomile flowers from each one part; grind it together, mix it with salt water or sweet water or wine according to the heat of the limb and its rest period.
In his book, Ippocrates states that one should apply on the broken member for restoration only a salve made from beeswax and oil, and nothing else, and asserts that it should be neither too soft nor too hard between two.
And it seems Galen suggests that we should place upon the broken limb for restoration, things that are dry but slightly warm, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar items, as we have said.
Another way to plaster for injury and pain: take mugwort and ome feathers or bird feathers, and sage, and equal parts of them, grind them together, make a plaster from it, and use it.
And then after a little while, take care so that the patient does not feel any pain and their bone in its place is not moving; if it doesn't dislocate by hand movements.
And if pain occurs in the limb, or itching, no peace or swelling is felt, then hurry, and dislocate it again, and apply the plaster now; take a light cloth, and a wet sea sponge, and dip it in water, and hold it over the area until the itching stops, and the pain is soothed. Then let the limb rest for an hour, then place it on dry wool, moistened in water or oil of rose, and secure it with a bandage until you are sure of the presence of pus.
And let the inflammation subside in the limb, and alleviate the pain, then resume the gentle re-wrapping, and a bit of plaster, but do not bind it as tightly as before; and apply it with subtlety until it is healed.
And if you see that pus is discharging and turning red with pain and swelling, indicating an infection throughout, then you need to apply plaster and bandaging, so reapply it in the same manner as before.
And if the limb does not show anything of what we have said and is not relieved even after three, four, five or seven days; and each time let it rest for twenty days, according to this, as long as there is swelling and until the joint begins to heal.
Then keep the restraint longer than at first, and increase its flesh, as I said before; and if you see the skin dry more than it should, know that no scabs will come. Then take the water that has come from it, every time you remove it, and let this happen once a day, and scrape off a little of the wound;
Through this work then cut off the scabs from the limb, and hasten what the foolish sight does, that restores the limb in a twisted manner: it is bad, and this makes the work useless, and I see nothing else but to rest and to open it straightly.
regarding various methods of breaking up Many ways of fractures exist, and various forms, and their causes are assigned;
For there are fractures caused by the impact of a sword, and the neck bones crush all the bone up to the symphysis which is below the bone, like when using an axe or staff; for this reason, this type of fracture is called "axial fracture".
When the sword penetrates through the bone from above without piercing it, this type of fracture is called "complete" fracture; and both large and small wounds result from these two types of fractures.
And if there is sequential impact or a crack or a fracture in the stone, or through a stone, or other similar occurrences.
And if there is a fracture present, which comes close to the ligament that surrounds the bone, or above the bone, and this wound can be large or small.
And if there is a wound that penetrates into the bone as finely as a hair, and this crack is small, and for this it is called a "hairline fracture".
And if the wound is made or caused by striking with stone, or falling, or by any similar thing, and causes a piece of bone to enter below, and they are so close together like when craftsmen work on vessels when they strike them onto the vessels; then the stone enters within.
This happens more in those who have wet bones from their head, such as children's heads;
And happens in all these ways of breaking, that small fragments are lost as with bones; and I will speak about this properly.
And let us know all ways of breakages by their diminution upon them, and the investigation in tests, and by the corroded flesh which is upon.
The appearance of hair is known through this: when one has revealed the bone and rubs it all around, if there is an opening of black breakage.
In the treatment of a breakage, beware of the illnesses associated with hair loss, and if you do not encounter any harmful incidents such as vomiting bile, mental confusion, extension, pallor, fever, and other symptoms appearing in various conditions, there should be no doubt about recovery.
And if you do not see an alarming incident, yet still hope for recovery, begin your treatment.
And when the first snow comes to you, and it's winter, you should remove the bone before the fourteenth day after the snow starts.
And if it's winter, hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that pus forms under the bone and the incidents we've mentioned occur.
And if the bone breaks until it reaches the membrane covering the brain, you should split the broken part like this: take hold of the edge of the bone in your hand and expose it completely on the surface of the bone using any method possible, and especially exposing as much of the wound's appearance as possible.
And if blood flow is required to reveal the bone or pus pocket, assist with what is necessary and use wet cloths filled with rose oil to fill the cavity; And let the wound rest until the pus pockets are calmed and there is assurance of blood flow; then begin inside towards the bone to remove, and this is done in two ways: one way is that you cut in a narrow line in front, and this forms:
And then use another cut larger than the first one.
And the second method is that you have several different sizes of cuts, some narrow and others wide, they should be pointed, and made of metal; and apply them lightly to the work so as not to pierce the head.
And if the bone is hard and tough, it should be pierced through (from both sides), so that cuts are made with needles, not completely through until they pierce beyond the bone at the tip, and there should be a margin or a circle above the point, which doesn't let the tip pass beyond the bone; and you need more than one, so that each goes to its place in the thickness of the bone, so that you have needles for all sides; and this is the shape of the three methods of needles:
The quality for piercing through the broken bone is that you place one needle on the bone, and turn with your hands until you know that the bone has been pierced. Then put the needle in another spot a bit after, and do this throughout, then carve out the distance of the bone which is between the breaks using incisors, as finely as you can, and gently, just like we said, so long as you are able to remove the bone with your hand or any tool you have such as forceps; and make sure not to touch the brain or the spinal cord.
And when you have pierced and treated the bone, it is fitting to reset the preparation that has remained of the bone with all one instrument similar to a canine tooth, but it must be thicker and more delicate than another canine tooth;
And if there remains nothing of the small bones, nor any scales, gently remove them with one instrument. Then heal the wound with bandages and ointments as we have said.
And another way of treatment is this which Galien stated, which is safer; and the force is very much, and that's his word. It is necessary first to uncover a part of the bone where the break opens outwards, so that once you have uncovered that part, you will place under the tip of this lens-shaped incision tool, which is its shape:
And do not cut from one side, and have the part divided into two ribs, so that when you are cutting you are towards the bone; then strike with a small hammer from above, such that you gently touch the entire bone, and be well aware of the cloth that is nearby;
If it's pressed against the bone, gently do so because you can feel the bone without causing harm or fear.
And if the bone breaks without piercing through the cloth, and the bone is cut only from above, and there are small pieces left, then after that abrasion, use the subtle scraper to remove scales. You should have various quantities of this tool so you can provide the most suitable treatment for each area according to the workpiece and the shape of the break.
If you stand before many rough judges, and then even more subtle ones, and never stop doing this until it's done properly.
In each other's haircut trimming and subtle breaking, it is necessary that you adjust according to their orientation; this thing cannot be answered by the one who has devoted his studies to this craft.
And if the sinew is discovered, it is necessary that you take 1.25 drams of linen cloth according to the size of the wound, mix it with oil rose, and place it on the wound; Then take another piece of double linen cloth and soak it in wine and oil rose, then place it over the first cloth; and do this as gently as you can so as not to weigh down the sinew, then apply another layer of thread above it without pulling it too tight that it only touches the wound.
And let it be like this for one or two days until the abscesses subside, then dislocate, and administer remedies such as root of garlic, flour of cloves, incense powder, and aristologue, and similar things; from these make a powder, put it on the wound, and immediately after apply medicinal powders without causing irritation.
And ensure that the wound is thoroughly clean, do not leave any ointment there nor allow bandages to stick too firmly together. For when bandages stick together under the brain's cloth, they can spread and cause great harm to the patient; for if one applies something irritating above it, it causes irritation from above.
Therefore take care, should any unfortunate events happen to the patient as we have described, if it remains uncertain without doubt.
And if noor does not come out only because of the medicine we have put on, and if that virtue exists, then it is necessary for you to take a part of honey, and three parts of rosy oil, and one spoonful in glue, and then apply it onto your skin; And then follow the ways of healing as it should be until they heal.
Know that neither of the two parts below the nose are ever broken or only one by itself, because these are two bones; and this lower part is cartilaginous, it does not break, nor should you twist or bend it, then heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, it is necessary that you bend your small toe or press against the nose, and set this break evenly within your index finger, and outwards towards the tip, until the nose revives according to its natural shape; And do this gently, and watch that the patient does not feel pain through your action.
And if the break is in the upper part of the nose, and cannot reach to the nostrils, you should place it level with the tip of a small stick somewhat thick.
And if the break is in two parts, then remake the splint, and hasten to restore it on the first day, if you can;
But if not, after the seventh or eighth day when the abscess is pacified, then apply to the head of the nose a bolster made of linen bandages, if the break is in one part.
When you apply heat from another source on the other side, if breaking occurs; and make the attempts so large that they fill the nostrils.
And say that we must moisten the attempts with butter and change each day. I don't think this is quite right, but it seems better to moisten them in preparation for an egg broth and powders from a mill; then leave the attempt until the bone is hard and the cartilage hardened.
And whenever you use goose feathers in lieu of attempts, and if you have one egg broth all around, and the wound stays intact, and blows on the patient from within; do whatever you see fit.
And if abscesses come to the nose as you're working on them, then put in a wad of moistened cotton or balsam-soaked cloth, or a pinch of wormwood oil.
And if the abscess is not present, then apply a plaster outside, made from sawdust powder and incense powder, mixed with beaten egg yolk. Then place it on light bandages, do not tie them too tight.
And if the fracture is small and it breaks into small pieces, then use suitable tools for this purpose to extract them. Then open the wound, cleanse with things that burn away flesh, and stitch, using plasters and ointments suitable for this task;
And if there is no injury within the nose, then perform the treatment, and place flax on it until it heals.
Of the rupture of the jaw
When the jaw is fractured inside and there's no wound on the surface, and only the breakage is outwardly present, not broken into two pieces just inside, but rather like a fracture within, one can easily detect it.
It is necessary, if the fracture is in the right part, that you bend your index finger into the mouth towards the patient; and if the fracture is in the left mandible, then bend your right hand's index finger instead, apply gentle pressure to the fracture internally, and move it with the other hand outwardly, ensuring equal force.
And if there is dislocation of the jaw bones in two places, it's necessary to provide an extension of both parts until they are equal.
And if movements of the teeth occur, or a rupture, then stretch them with a thread of gold, silver, or silk. Then place on the broken mandible wadding, and put on one piece of double cloth; and put on this cloth a large wedge well made, or a piece of leather equal in size, long and wide according to the mandible, and fasten it there as much as you can, and instruct the patient to rest. And have them eat light meats.
And if you notice that the figure changes, release it on the third day and then readjust what has changed; apply plaster, mix it with powder from the mill along with plenty of egg or almond flour after you have removed the wadding; spread a light woolen fabric over this plaster. If the plaster hardens and the patient's position does not change, leave them as they are until they recover; many times recovery occurs within three weeks.
And if it comes to incisions or wounds that require dressing, you should carry out what we have instructed many times.
And if there is a breakage and wound together, reward none of the bone piece in has been removed; so delicacy is needed for using tools suitable to this.
And if the wound is narrow, enlarge it with fire according to your need.
And when you have removed all these pieces and there remains none, if the wound is large, place one dressing suitable for this on it to encourage growth until it heals.
by force of necessity The strength is broken many times in front of the shoulder joint, and breaking occurs in three ways:
And the procedures are as follows when there is a breakage that occurs with injury: you need two assistants, so one can mark where the shoulder joint has broken and feels the broken strength; while the other extends their neck towards the affected area. Then place the breakage evenly on your hands, so it forms correctly and lacks any appearance or movement.
And if you need to extend further, place a round piece of cloth or wool under the shoulder towards the leg; make its size according to your needs. Stretch and lift up the strength, hold the ball in your hand so that you can evenly place the breakage as it should be.
And if you cannot draw the head of the force by force outside, because it comes forward, it is necessary for the patient to lie on their back with their shoulder, and place a half-sized pillow under the shoulder. Then have someone support the shoulder downwards until the bone of the force is raised.
And then apply the crushing to your thumbs, and if you find any debris inside, it is necessary to cut through; and gently pull the pieces apart. If the bone cannot join under any pressure, cut at one of the incisors that you have made. But when using this tool on the force, place it near so as not to miss it:
It should resemble a spoon, it is not to be placed too close, and it should be as wide as necessary, depending on the size of the bone and the strength of the work; and have two ends, just as you see, and make one broad, and the other narrow, just like the wound you made when you treated the bones;
And when you are certain of the presence of pus, if you clean the wound, and if the rupture is small, or if you doubt about pus being present, then cover the wound with bandages and tents according to its quantity.
And when pus comes out, if there is moisture, spread oil of roses, and alcohol, and wine, and place them on top.
The dressing of the bone, when it involves wounds and cutting, is to apply a plaster made from ground powder and yolk of egg on the bone, and place light cloths on top. If necessary, put a ball under the wound area. Then take a very large band about the size of a palm wide, and place two layers of cloth on top of the plaster, then add more plaster. Next, take an elastic strip about three fingers wide and long, wrap it around this band, ensuring that the ends are hanging down from the band. And place the cauterizing tool on the burn area, and turn the metal stick towards the neck, and around the healthy wound, and around the diseased wound; and reset it in each section, and when you see that the healing takes hold of the burn addition, and you clearly see that the cauterizing tool does not move above the broken bone, then reward it daily, and when the ligament is removed, then restrain it;
Let the disease heal on his back, and place him when he sleeps in a small pillow under the wound to raise the shoulder; this will ease the pain from the broken bone due to the positioning of the shoulder blade. If you can lift the dislocated shoulder by aligning it properly, or if you tie his arm around the neck, do not let any harmful accidents happen until twenty days.
Then restart the plastering if you see it needs more, and hold it in place as it is until recovery occurs. It should be fully recovered by twenty-six to thirty days at most, with no exceptions for any individuals.
On the breaking of the shoulder
Sometimes the shoulder breaks or moves out far from its place, or it is dislocated only halfway; if this happens through contact; then treat according to the shape of the breakage, and reset accordingly in its natural form. Do so in all possible ways that you can. Then apply with coarse mill powder mixed with plenty of eggs, and gently tap until done. Apply two layers of cloth. Then place a large but slender pillar, slightly wider than the shoulder; ensure there is no disturbance around the shoulder area. Cover this with strips of linen, making sure the pillar fits evenly; then tightly bind everything into a large firm bandage so that the pillar doesn't move from its place. Check the binding every day; and each time it loosens, tighten again, ensuring the pillar stays in place even if it feels loose, and has the patient lie on their side. The shoulder is restored within 20 days or 25.
And if a bone fragment moves ahead and does not touch the knee, do this: treat an abscess that bursts outwards, and follow what we have said about treating a dislocated elbow to cleanse the wound.
Of the breaking of the heel
The feet are sometimes broken in the middle but this happens rarely; they often break at the front. And when it is broken in the middle, if you lift it up, there will be pain felt down below, and lack of circulation, and nausea, and sometimes vomiting blood, and it opens the movement inside the broken bone, and one feels well the situation.
And for restoration, if the patient is lying on his back, you should place him on his side, then press down with your shoulders, and join the ribs of both sides using your hands, and carefully put them into equal positions as you can, until the shape of the bone is as it should be; then lay over plaster casts above this delicate salt mold or another light substance, cover it with one cloth, and wrap it around the broken bone so that it does not move; and turn back to his front side, adjust carefully, and every hour apply pressure on the wound, if it heals it will tighten further; and if it needs to be loosened due to corrosion, itchiness, pain or pus coming out of the wound, do it quickly and release him, remove the plaster, treat according to how you would for such conditions; then reapply the plaster until healed.
From the breaking of ribs
Know that the breaking of ribs happens only after the back muscles and inside the head, it does not break due to anything else; and one feels this well during examination in the court.
And if you need to repair it, make the break even as it should be. And then apply the plaster and bind it with a strip, if necessary.
And if the break in the ribs is deep inside, the patient will feel extreme pain and sharpness, like weeping, because the bone touches the lining; they get blisters, and all over and immediately vomit large amounts of blood, it's a painful illness, and the old ones have put great effort into recovery.
And if someone says that it is necessary to eat meats which swell the belly, in order to relieve the windiness outside.
We do not follow this advice, that pus and worms do not arise without having already been there. And if it has come about, then heal it.
And let no one amongst us use suction cups on the body to suck out matter, because it seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the suction cup draws away excess through the weakness of position.
And it is said that when covering the body with moist wool in heated oil, and to place cloths between the ribs for equalizing the warmth inside, then proceed with the treatment of pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
And if the wounds feel great pain that cannot be borne by the bone piercing the skin, there is doubt in the patient whether to cut through the body of broken rib and whether it's necessary to place a tool under the wound; then you must cut into the bone, drain gently, and then stitch together the two edges of the wound if it is large, and treat with plasters until healed. And if abscesses come about, put damp cloths in rosy oil on top of them and place them on the body; treat continuously according to what suits the abscess and always be mindful where they are located, until healed.
Of the breaking neck
No fracture occurs at the neck's bones, and it does not bend; similarly with the spine in the back. And when this happens to no one, and you want to know whether it will heal or not, if you see that his hands are softened and swollen and dead, and he cannot move or extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, if he does not sense anything. Know that it is fatal in many situations, and if the hands are unmoving and well sensed when held still or not, know that the joint of the bone has been saved, and that the patient is cured, if care is taken.
And when this happens to the spine in the back, and you want to know whether it will heal or not, if you take care to see if its joints are softened and the conditions are such as those of the hands, and a gusty wind and loss occur without desire; and when one has treated him on his belly, if there is a gusty wind and loss without desire. And when he is treated on his back and wants to sit up, if he cannot. Know that it is fatal: if she does not labor in her cure.
And if such accidents do not come to him, it is a simpler thing.
And the treatment is: if there is an abscess to drain, you do so; if it's inflamed, apply oil or egg yolk on the spine or on the spot; until the inflammation subsides. Then place it with a soothing plaster and let it dry, bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; do not sleep on that part where there is pain, until you feel better. And if any bone is fractured, it must be covered with a poultice of its own nature; remove the bone, then join together the two edges of the wound if they are large, using stitches if necessary, then treat with an ointment that binds and heals until you feel better; and if there's a fragment from the bone, which is called 'the chip of the knee', hold your left hand pouch against it and place it evenly on your right hand at your power, then apply the plaster and elevating it as needed. Then compress it; and if any broken bone needs to be done so, do it upwards, remove the bone, and treat the wound until it heals completely.
From the breaking of the bone in the hip
Sometimes the hip bone breaks, and when it does, if there is a little pain in the head; and it stretches long, and declines to the kidneys, and comes with pain in the limb, and bruising, and swells up what is broken.
And the restoration is that you extend your hand upwards as long as you are at the breakage; and know where the breakage and its shape are; and if the breakage is only in the head, place an equal break there until it reaches its natural shape.
And if the breakage extends along or declines inwardly, guide the patient towards their abdomen until your restoration of that break becomes apparent. And when you have made it even, place it on a splint, then put onto an iron or copper rod stand, and hold the wound still so it doesn't move; and fill the back with the material, until the wound is even.
And instruct the patient to sleep on their side, or on their back.
And if the abscesses burst out, do not touch them until the abscesses are soothed, and place them as we have instructed previously. And then return to the restoration process, and tighten them according to how they should be tightened, if there is no bad incident; and this is how it should be done.
from breaking the splint
The aids are those between the arm and shoulder's head, if it is broken, you must restore it according to one of these two ways: where one way involves taking a single medium-sized stick, in this manner:
And tie as two sticks together, and place them upwards, and bind the wound on one spot; then lay your broken arm onto the stick until it reaches the elbow, holding halfway with the stick's curvature. Then position anything or have assistants hold it from below; next, place the torn skin evenly between their hands as long as the torn skin returns to its original shape as it should.
And the other method is that one binds the wound on their shoulder blade, and ties the hand to the neck, then instructs two assistants for each side that one shaves where the torn skin is at their hands, and the other shaves around completely up to the middle of both sticks, extending each person to their part.
And if you see that the extraction is more forceful, hold one ligature over the wound and above it, spreading each minister to their part. And if the wound is close to the head of the shoulder, it is necessary to place one ligature halfway under the joint, and another towards the knife, under the wound; and similarly if the wound is facing the knife, it should be necessary to place a light ligature without effort, as long as the wound is even above the top and above the knife; then make an even incision, according to need, and hold, so that no pus comes out.
And if pus starts coming out, do not tighten it for up to seven days, and place it on greased linen or in oil, as long as the pus coming out is calmed; then tighten, and use this method of tightening: when you put plaster on the incision, then assemble the arm over the shoulder, and place your hand on the shoulder or chest; apply the bandage, and tighten it on the shoulder, and on the arm, so that the arm stays in its usual position, without anything preventing it, or if the bone is not broken.
And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use braces, and place a larger and stronger brace over the incision than the others, with one inch of space between each brace. Make sure each brace is large enough to pass the wound by about three inches on either side; then tighten them according to how I explained at the start of this chapter regarding wounds, more firmly but not by pulling away.
And if you see the place where the bones meet and their constriction, as we have said, in your first attempt to restore the broken limb, and if you are uncertain about discharging pus (as an incision might be needed), then leave it bound for seven days, as we have said. Then check each day over three days on this tie-up, making sure no itching or swelling occurs around the limb, or that any complications cannot reach the limb because it is too constricted. If you notice anything amiss, as we have said.
And if no such incidents occur, or if it is released only after two days or more, and the patient remains in bed with his hands on his stomach; and place under him one cushion filled equally with cloth, and observe each hour of the day or night that the figure of the broken limb does not move or that the bandages are no longer moist. If this happens through the virtue of medicine, and he regains the flesh we have placed before, in such a way that the meat becomes tender; and when it starts to heal, if it is large. And it is customary for the shoulder and leg should be replaced within forty days from start to finish; and then you must release him and administer baths and medicines of ointments for his recovery. If the constriction is ugly or tangled, then he must remain in bed for two more days or a month.
of the break of the arm
The arm is made up of two bones which are called the pair of 'fosciles', from which one is small, it is the bone that supports the pit; and the other is large, and it is the bone located underneath, towards the little elbow; suppose only the larger foscile breaks or perhaps the smaller one, and suppose they come together.
When the small fosciles break, restoration is light and healing; and when the large ones break, the healing becomes ill-fated, and worse than if they had broken together. If it's only the small foscile that breaks, then a slight extension should be suitable and made equal.
And if it's the large foscile that breaks, then you should strain harder; and extend over one cushion, and raise the hand's pit higher than the others, and make the small bones lower than the others' bones, and ensure that the patient's side is crisscrossed with him alone, and another cushion above him so high that his side does not suffer any discomfort. Then extend your assistants' arms towards the part under their hands or at one elbow, and another assistant at one arm above. And then place the bed perfectly flat according to its best form.
And if in the break into pieces, you place each in its location; and if there's none that sticks to one of them when you grab it by the heel, then you can't restore it to its place. So do surgery on it, as we have said before.
And if in the case of injury that leads to a wound, I've mentioned this specifically in another chapter; take the treatment for it.
And if during the beginning of the restoration process, there are pus clots present, then coat .i. with a wad made of rosin and white beeswax; ensure it is neither too hard nor too soft. Bind this wad gently above delicately until the pus clots have been calmed. Then remove the rosin, and apply the plaster containing ground powder from a mill mixed with enough egg, place the needles, ensuring they are positioned closer to the injury at first than elsewhere; make sure there should be seven or eight needles in various positions: whether the injury is within one bone, two bones; bind more above the injury compared to other places, following what I've said at the start of this chapter; ensure that the cloths covering the injury are moist and soft, not too hard nor abrasive. Use threads made from linen that are neither too thick nor too thin, as we have discussed. And keep up with re-bandaging the limb and joints for several days. And if any unfortunate events come to the limb, for example itching that comes to the limb, it is necessary that you immerse the limb in hot water until the itch is relieved; and let the limb not be forcibly restrained. And then begin tightening again, and when the bandage is undone and the bone is exposed, and something like this happens, direct your efforts towards resetting it.
And if one takes care that no injuries can occur to the limb because it is too constrained, it's necessary to soften it with a poultice, and leave thus for some days, until the pains subside, and then retighten.
And if none of these things that we have said comes to the patient, or if the loosening lasts up to twenty days or more. Or else after this time, then put his hands on his neck, and make sure both sides are equal, and beware of movement and agitation, and sleep on his back; and know that this strain is restored in thirty days or thirty-five, and by chance in twenty days, according to the compositions and the complexities of the virtues.
Of the breaking of the hand
Know that on the back of the hand and in its knuckles there are few injuries, and they only bend many times.
And when the heel of the hand is broken or bent, it is necessary for the patient to keep their fingers together and straight in front of them equally; then place their hand on an extended surface, and extend the fingers of the broken bone, placing them evenly side by side until they are well aligned. And put a plaster and bandages, if no abscess forms, then place an elastic band according to the size of the hand; and wrap it in one linen fold.
And if the break is in the inner part near the belly of the hand's sole, make a ring out of linen and tell the patient to place it on their broken heel; and then stretch it with a long piece of linen, and have the band wrap around as well as can be, just like how big the hand's sole is, and stretch it, according to what fits.
And if the breakage is at the front, it is necessary that you place one support above and another below on the heel, so that the hand is open and straight, then tie everything together throughout the hand, and seal the connection between the fingers.
And if the breakage occurs on any of the fingers, it's essential that you treat them equally, just as is proper; and restrain with the heel, and should you see if placing a small upright support helps to lift the breakage, and doesn't move; and if the breakage is in another finger, like in the index or one of the others, do the same, and tie it using the healthy one that follows; or tie them all together with a single band, until you can properly treat it, or place a support similarly, as we hold them. Pay attention to the restoration and arrangement of each wound separately, and take care of those who come before you, just as I have said.
Of the broken foot
The bone of the thigh is often broken, and one can see this when it turns in front and behind; and its restoration thus consists: i. the joining above the breakage, and ii. another below. And in the patient's abdomen, then extend each minister his link to its equal part; and this is when the break has entered into the bone.
And if the break is close to the root of the thigh, then one link goes towards the knee and the other links go under the breakage. Similarly, if it's near the knee, then place the ligaments below the knee, and the extension downwards; then set the eye of the bone equally with its two hands, as long as it follows its natural shape, and then apply the plaster, and the link, if pus doesn't come out.
And if there is an abscess to be treated with cautery, let it heal before you return to your work and treatment; the incision is made in such manner. It is necessary that you cover the wound .i. with a bandage made of two layers or three, and keep any excess, then lift your leg so that the heel reaches to the root of the thigh, and insert one thread long between the knee and the leg, underneath the kneecap, and tie this thread at the top; then cover the wound with this, and place an end over the bone in the leg; then insert a piece of eight inches between the leg and the knee from the cloth to evenly apply pressure, then begin to bind firmly .iij. or iiij. times around the wound; and as you go beyond the wound, tighten less; then take two pieces of thread that you have inserted between the leg and the knee, and tie these three pieces over the wound area starting from underneath until you reach below the foot; and tighten it so that it doesn't move in its place, then leave it like this, and wait for no other sign such as pus or inflammation.
And if it happens, loosen the binding and address what has occurred, just as we have said many times. And if there are pieces of bone that are being gripped, if it is possible to cut them off, do so; and if you can't, it's appropriate to cut through the cloth and drain out force (hemorrhage); and treat it in the way we've described, until it heals.
And not once is the flesh broken like when we insert needles, such as in the shoulder and arm; nevertheless, no complaint comes from the patient during this kind of restoration.
And know that the flesh is restored in one week, or somewhat less, or somewhat more, according to the diversity of constitutions.
from the knee joint
Know that in the knee joint there is little breaking but it bends many times. And if it does break, it's usually just a crack or half an inch (one Roman inch) of separation and can occur with or without injury; one feels this well.
And the restoration is this: you should put in equal what was removed from its place until it can move freely again when assembled. Then apply plaster and add a round splint if necessary, then adjust as needed. Proceed with all the preparations we have described for other fractures, such as abscesses or similar occurrences. For each situation, apply what suits that particular case while maintaining soundness.
Of the breaking of the leg
You know that the leg has two bones. One of these is named 'right' as 'mustelz', and the other is called 'foscile'. And any sort of injury or breakage can happen to it just like on the arm, and for this reason, the process of restoring a broken leg is similar to that of an arm, and all the techniques are exactly one.
And if the two bones are broken together, then turn the leg in every direction.
And if the delicate bones are broken, then turn towards the front.
And if the large bones are broken, one feels great pain and sees it clearly; then turn around. So apply extension, make them equal, and tie the ligaments equally; however, when the breakage is obvious and there are multiple fragments, the extension should be less intense and more gentle; and support them according to your skill.
And when you have completed your task, take two furs of horse hair that strengthen the leg on both sides, and they should be as long as the length of the leg from the knee to here. Then wrap them in two strips each over and under it, and tie them in the middle, so the leg cannot bend either right or left, and thus it is well; and no one administers a bandage that is as long as the leg, made of fur, and they place the leg to ward off movement, and this must be done precisely where there was injury; and move the leg every day to see if there are any signs of an abscess or other accident; treat it until it is healed.
Of the breaking of bones due to injury
Ankle injuries do not come from breaking, but in bones due to injury there is a break sometimes and the bones themselves, only distress occurs in various positions.
And if there occurs a break in the bones due to injury, and you see these bones mount over one another, place such wounds on the ground like they would want to go, also as it were. Then put your foot on his foot at that point where the bones are raised, press them so much that their life returns; then put the plastering materials in the middle, cover them up, and place a small table under the belly of the foot with two shoulder-width planks, then bind them to the foot's inner side. Finally, wrap cloths around them or other things you need.
And when three days or four have passed, if you release the bandage, because you will find the bones even, whether broken or dislocated.
And if any of the ribs are broken, mend them, as we have said for the ribs of the hand; then place upon the broken rib an elyptical piece according to the length of the rib, and slightly larger, then put under it the table I mentioned, and tighten the attachment; and if there are two or three, or more, break them, if on each rib you place an elyptical piece according to its size, wrapped in one linen sheet, and tighten the table under this piece; and stay positioned on the top of the table facing down towards the belly beneath it, so that it cuts well.
And you should not forget the other things I've said about other injuries, once we have discussed them; and treat each case according to how it should be.
of the breaking of the bone in the hand
When the bone of her nature is broken, she must be made to sit larger, then incline her towards the lower part of her back, and hold her by behind; next fill up the space in her nature with cotton, and place some as big as a thumb inside it; then get her up again and lift her bottom little by little, and when she has jumped off the cotton until it reaches to the entrance of her natural opening, and the bone returns with the thumb; and when she wishes to urinate, remove the cotton, and once she has done so, put her back in position and do this for seven days or so: if there is healing, take a goat bladder, tie a stick to its mouth, fill the bladder entirely inside her natural opening; then blow into the stick strongly until the bladder swells up internally: nature will restore the breakage; after that fill it with cotton and leave her like this for some more days, until she has recovered.
And when the bone of the hand is broken, or that of a woman, if it's restored in this manner as we have said for the hip bone; and these fractures should not be ignored by those who study and use them, and read my book. For the breakage signifies through multiple positions the right path to restoration: hence understand it.
In the case of a broken penis, take an oxtail and fill it with the penis; then wrap it in bandages all around, and leave it for three days or as long thereafter, and it will heal quickly.
Of breaking with wound
It is necessary for the one who has a break with a wound, even if it's large, such as the bone of the rib or shoulder or resembling others, that it should be now cauterized, so that the cauterizations which we have mentioned testify to this.
And if the wound is healthy, you should still apply vinegar to it, even if you don't have anything else. Proceed then to restore the break in the same hour or day, or at least wait for the pus from an abscess not to come out.
And if pus from an abscess has come out, allow the restoration to continue for another day or two, until the pus subsides. Don't touch it at all on the third day or fourth day, as you might provoke a bad setback.
And if you see the bone broken appearing on the part uncovered by the cut, it is necessary that you place your hands gently on it, in a small extension.
And if the extensions do not appear for you to place evenly with your hands, then take this tool made of iron, which is about seven inches or six inches long, and its width should be according to the size of the wound; and it's necessary for the surgeon that he uses three or four of them, depending on what he needs for each cure of broken bones; and may be round and a little thick so that they do not bend under compression on your limb during surgery, and may be smooth in front, and thick at the center advancing, like this:
And it is called "palainche" for that reason, so the curved bones should be placed on top of the visible part of the bone; and strike once with it, until it returns, and make them even against each other. And if the breakage is subtle, and the tools cannot properly grasp the bone well, then you must hold the tip of the bone as long as the tools can have possession of it.
And if you cannot return the bone, as we have said, using an appropriate tool for this purpose, such as an incisor or saw, with your power; then cut that which is remaining in the hard and small scratches of the bone.
And when the bone has been returned and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place. Do as much as possible to make sure it's in its right place, then apply once or twice with a black stenchy ointment, and properly if it’s in this state; and do not put anything like wax or other things where there is inflammation, so that no putrefaction or corruption comes about; then give these remedies after you have restored the bone, and let the wound be open, and cover it entirely according to the size of the wound, and make sure that the wound is not strained with breaking; and many times this has been done by fools, causing death or corrosion on the patient once; and let your compresses be softer and more soothing than other injuries.
And if the wound is bad or large, and you suspect that harmful incidents may occur there, as we have said, and you find pain in your bones, then it's not appropriate to apply these remedies; but wrap it completely instead of applying them, with hard cloths and secure them. And when you see after one day or two days an improvement at the wound, remove whatever you placed on it entirely in wine, and apply a healing ointment for wounds, such as the tetracycline ointment and similar ones.
And it is necessary for you to dislocate the limb twice a day, in the morning and at vespers, until it is healed and sound.
And it is necessary that the limb be braced in such a way that the joint moves slightly backwards.
And if the days pass and it cannot be joined back but allows movement of the joint, you should know that there are small bone fragments causing this pain, so it is necessary for you to treat the wound with traction, and remove all these worn-out pieces that cause this pain.
And if a fistula occurs at the site or in another way of corruption, you must treat it according to what was instructed in his chapter before. And when bone is broken and exposed on the limb, such as the bone of the shin or shoulder blade, or other similar large bones, do not treat it because death often follows; but let it heal until it turns green; perhaps discharge from it after twenty or thirty days, then treat the wound if you can; and if you cannot, leave it.
The blows that come from sweat
The blows come often after the healing of injuries, even especially when close to joints. It's a thing to see how the member's shape changes; and by chance can't perform its natural tasks on the member.
Take care therefore when it comes to swellings: if you administer any stictching medicines such as aloes, incense, myrrh, sarsaparilla, senna, and the likes; or whatever among these things you choose, or all together, mix them with stictching wine or with enough egg or with garlic; and apply them on the swellings in poultices, bind them well, do not remove them by hand for days; then remove them, and start again another one until all the swellings are gone. Or you can bind it to a properly made piece of plaster; for the property of plaster is that it removes all swellings from the limbs. And if the swelling has turned hard like stone, as needing removal, if it is covered, cut away the excess and make its excess visible; or remove it with any barber until it's gone, then treat until healed.
When the breakage of the bone is restored, and after that the limbs are weak and subtle, this happens due to various reasons: because it was bound too tightly and wasn't bound as it should have been; or because there were too many bindings, and couldn't come into alignment with the limb; or because of excessive swelling; or because of too large movements, not in their proper time; or because they have little blood in their body, so it's weak.
And the cure involves having you eat the herbs, and make the body tender, until the healing spreads within him; then he should take baths and have fun and rest. After that, apply grease to the limb, so that the grease draws towards the major swelling, and washes it with cold water repeatedly, until the swelling aligns with the limb; and restore his natural shape.
If the member is twisted after recovery
When the limbs are twisted after restoration, and if you break them open, even though the shape of the limb is distorted, it does not lose its natural function: do not believe those who say one should break the limb completely anew; many have done this in our land, and these methods are criticized, leading to great harms, perhaps even death. Nonetheless, when fractures and injuries are fresh, it's fitting that they be immersed in hot water or that medicinal plants like the leaves of basil, roots, and meadowsweet are cooked, such as with dyaquilon well made, and you use a musk paste from basil, mixed with fat from gelatine or oil of sassafras, and make a plaster out of it. Or you take greased figs, grind them with charcoal ash, and similar medications that reduce inflammation.
And at no time should you rub the dislocation with wet hands continuously and for a long time. And it is advised to move the limb in each hour.
And if the twisting is hardened and stiff, like bone, and needs to be treated with iron, should it come to that point where the iron has to be applied up to the bone, gently incise through the thin opening; and apply cautery and careful study in the treatment.
This begins the book of dislocations
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation occurs to any, if it happens now to be properly returned without injury.
For if one delays, the joints swell up and by chance it is set into place in its wrong position; because one should not move it at that time when they are swollen: many times it brings on pus and other pains.
If this happens, if you find a patient in such condition, let the barber-tailor tend to them first, until the abscesses have subsided; then immerse the limb in hot water and oil, gently move it afterwards, and treat each member according to how they come back into place.
And I have organized the chapters concerning shoulder dislocations up to this point.
of the jaw
It happens that the jaws are dislocated downwards, and the dislocations of both occur in two ways: either they are somewhat osseous at their joints and slightly softened; or they are completely dislocated and hang towards the bottom, causing saliva from the mouth to leak out, unable to hold it, nor can they close their mouth, and wrap their tongue with speech.
When dislocations are small, they can return through several positions.
And if it is whole and completed, you must reset it quickly, without hesitation;
And in such a manner that the doctors cut near to the patient's head where there is flesh from the wound, and pushes the bone behind the dislocated jaw at the root of the jawbone inside the mouth if it's dislocated by half; and the other hand should be placed outside with both hands level; instruct the patient to soften their jaws and move them in all directions.
And he should gently place the bone until it returns to its place when it wakes up.
And if returning it is difficult, indeed if they are the two jaws together, so immerse them in hot water and oil, as long as you gently move them back; do not apply force during the return, just like we have said.
And when they are returned evenly, and the mouth of the patient is closed well for soothing, then place moist cloths in a poultice made from rose oil and beeswax, then bind them gently with soft threads.
And let the patient rest on their back, and keep their shoulders between two cushions, so they do not move nor to the right nor to the left, nor try to twist at all, but prefer light food, until the pains subside, and secure the jaws.
And then test the ability to eat lightly, and make sure there is no effort in opening the mouth for eating and drinking until the mandible is well healed and clean.
And if the two mandibles cannot be returned to their place within an hour, and are not naturally converted to their usual state, it leads to fevers that settle in, as well as abdominal distention, and sometimes vomiting of undigested food.
And when you see this, then know that it is a loss; and many times, death befalls the one who encounters this within eight days.
from the strength
The forces cannot dislocate from within the continuous structure of it and from its bottom, and is dislocated only outside once, and one feels this well.
And the restoration is such that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms; and then presses with their hands onto their chest, and they return it to its original position. Then place them on a plaster board and cover them up, restraining them.
And the head of the shoulder does not dislocate in front of the blade; if it does not, and if it does dislocate once, you must reset it to its place as we have said; then place them on a plaster board and cover them up, restraining them, and command the patient to rest until they are healthy.
And in this same way is brought back the shoulder blade, when it has been dislocated from its place.
from the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder can be dislocated in three ways: one way is when it dislocates towards the part of the socket below; and the second way is at the part from the heel; and sometimes dislocates upwards on occasion, which happens rarely;
And it does not dislocate behind for the shoulder, nor inwardly through the nerves; and many times dislocates below towards the socket, even in those with little flesh, because they are quick to jump outwards; in those with enough flesh, it jumps up to its height and returns to that height.
And by chance happens to some men due to impact or fracture, and inflames the shoulder in an abscess-like manner, and they think that it is dislocated because of this.
So then you must verify it, until you are certain of it; and then begin the treatment.
And recognize dislocations when it moves towards the back, and you will make a distinction between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find clear differences between them; And you will find a hollow at the head of the shoulder, and from behind to the pit, at the head of the shoulder, like if it was a hole; and the patient cannot bring their hand back to their nose, nor move it in any way;
And similarly, if it is dislocated upwards and not hidden, for you will clearly find it at the pit;
And this manner of dislocation must only be done to reposition it, when it is new or when the child is sick.
And the method is that the minister raises his hand from the malady up, then places his fingers on the joint and lifts the joint upwards with force at the place; and the minister raises his hand and extends it upwards, placing him there; if he goes too quickly.
And if it does not come as we have said within days afterwards, then the sick person should be bathed in hot water; and the minister must gently soothe and alleviate them, as with decoction of rue and fenugreek and thyme in water, and they should be administered.
Then wrap the sick person on their back, and place a pad of similar thickness under the joint, neither too soft nor too hard. Then place the heel under the pad, and lift the shoulder blade upwards, and move the head of the shoulder in a virtuous way, guiding the hand towards the ailment.
And another minister cuts the neck of the patient, so that it doesn't move downwards; this shoulder now returns completely, and if you see to reset it according to this manner:
And make the person present at home, that he/she be larger than the patient; and face it towards the right side, and hold up one shoulder against the ribs of the patient, and lift the rib cage upwards, so that the patient hangs down in a bow-like position; And another minister pulls the hand of the patient downwards towards the abdomen. And if the patient is too light, place something heavy on him/her instead, and now the dislocation will return.
And you can also reset it in another way: and you should place a one-inch long stick in the ground, so that the shoulder is also placed like two bullets, and neither too big nor too greasy; Then have the patient lie on their side, but with a soft cloth under them, and let the affected area remain long and flat;
And if it does not return through all these things that we have said, then perform this treatment: take one rib from two strong pigs and four large ribs, which should allow the head to move fully into place while on its back, as follows:
Then bind the trunk with a cloth underneath to prevent it from rubbing against the affected area; place it on its back under the affected area; and extend your arms along the trunk up to its full length, bind the shoulder in place on the trunk, and position your hand's arm at its base; then place your arm on one thick stick of about the same width, and keep your hands down, leaving your body hanging from the other side: the joint will now return immediately.
And when it is set, however manner, that you must place a thread equal on the joint, then apply plaster covered in powder from the mill, along with incense and yolk of egg, over the entire shoulder and around it, then remove the plaster once the process is done, and re-tie the bandage on top of the plaster, and hold the hand near its neck, and let your hands stay like this.
It is necessary for him to eat a little, until the limbs are strengthened, because he will heal faster; and then increase his meals after five days or seven, and move them; and if it is firm and not softened, he will be healed.
And if the joint is weakened by being wet or due to another reason that it has come about, you should apply four cauterizations to it, as was described before in the chapter on cauterization.
And if you do all this, and it dislocates after seven days, and the joint doesn't stay in place, and cannot lift your arm up, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is either cut or stretched or weakened; and know that the joint would never settle back into its place.
The dislocation that occurs near the buttocks and breasts, or behind, is caused by pushing and stretching of hands, and it's administered elsewhere; treatment should be given as long as one remains healthy.
And if after healing there comes stiffness in the limb, and gradual movements later on, then they should use warm baths repeatedly until this stiffness disappears, and returns to its original state.
From the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder joint is dislocated at its peaks and returns there; it has been dislocated from all sides, both in front and behind, and the dislocation cannot be remedied because you can see it clearly and feel it well; and it is dislocated according to each figure. And when you join the shoulder bone with your sound part, if you can see it clearly. For the joint is wavy, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch his shoulder to any extent.
And it should be that you reset it in this manner as for pus wounds, because if pus wounds came about, there would be trouble in bringing them back; and by chance they cannot be brought back entirely, even when it is at the rear; it is worse than other dislocations, and causes more pain, and by chance death comes from it.
And the restoration is as follows: when it is such that one can return it to its position, you extend your hand of his two hands; and his arms are spread out, and his hands are turned towards the center according to the circumference of the elbow from inside, outside and underneath, and force the joint back into its place together or at the base of his palm, until it returns to its place.
And when there is a dislocation of the head, it returns whenever he doubles his hand over his own hand, and brings back the elbow that has been dislocated to the base of the palm.
And if it doesn't return to its place, apply strong stretching; and when both of you stretch the arm, and hold each other's hand firmly, so that it doesn't move during stretching. Then turn the arm from each side, then once you have covered a long and wide cloth around it;
And when you grasp the joint by hand, if you apply some oil to soften the joint, then force the joint into place until it heals.
And when it is at its place, set it on dry plaster with the yolk of an egg, force it into position and allow the arm to hang by the neck near the body, then let it rest for a few days, then remove the bandage.
And if the joint is firmly in place, remove the bandage and leave it as is; and if you notice that the joint does not settle well, redo the plaster and the bandage, then let it be like this for a few days until it is firmly set; then remove the bandage.
And if it feels painful after the joint is reset and it moves again, bathe and rub it nicely until it is relieved; or place a piece of fat lamb's wool on the joint, then leave it for one day and one night, then remove the bandage, and have him take a bath. And when they sweat, you should rub the joint with precision, then place it in its original position, and afterwards immerse it in water; and thus perform this process twice or three times until it's healed; and if possible, apply moistened cow fat with butter on top, and keep it in place; it will return to its normal state.
the dislocation of the hand
The hand's joint has dislocated, and the return is slighter than with other joints. Whenever it dislocates, you should bring it back to its place immediately while it remains dislocated or when a heat abscess forms.
And the resetting is such that you put your hand on the diseased area on a table, and extend the minister's hand, and make them look equal, so that they place their palm against the appearance of the joint, and hold it until it realigns.
Always, you should check if it is properly in place; then have the patient lie the back of their hand on a table during extension and retraction. And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, have the patient place the back of their hand on the table, and make them place their hand against the appearance of the joint. If it returns to this position now, that means it's correctly placed.
If not, if it's treated by removing pus with plaster poultices, and lets it continue without restarting the process.
And if he cannot bear it, and you're unable to place it back in its position after some days, if the joint stays twisted;
And it does no harm to the patient as long as his hands are immobilized, and he cannot hold anything at all: so know that a nerve or artery has been cut; if there is no other way but to apply a cautery in this case, and perhaps there is nothing else that matters.
And when the hand is in position, place it on the plaster as we have said, then apply pressure and leave it for five days, then remove it and let it be like that.
And if it cannot be moved well, and there is no break, with hot water grease, and rub it until it becomes clean.
Of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Neither are the fingers of the hand dislocated on each side, nor from the back of the palm or belly.
Therefore keep the fingers and prevent the dislocation in the joints until they heal. Then support the head of the finger, and bend it towards the part that is out of joint;
And let it be for two days, and then make him equal on that day; and don't leave him without lying down, as we have said, and then remove the lie from this day, and make him move, and then tie him up again at night; and do this often, until he is restricted.
And do this in the same way, if it is dislocated at the wrist of the hand, and do it like you did before, until he is better; and do this similarly, when it is dislocated on the other side.
In the reduction of the heel, in the back.
When it is dislocated at the back of the heel or neck, or multiple are dislocated, if there's no treatment, because time quickens the disease.
And the signs for this are that the evacuations happen spontaneously without control, and they cannot be held in check, and many times various parts of the body soften, or both feet or either two arms or one.
And it often softens into four parts; the part that softens at the back is called 'gilbositez':
The treatment involves rewarding you if 'gilbositez' has come from childhood: there should be no remedy or healing until then.
And that which comes from falling, impacts, or similar situations, according to the old methods of treatment using grandiloquent words, it does not bring any great benefit in all.
But I have shortened it according to my intention, and formed instruments in various ways.
I say that when the illness comes before the groin, neither disease nor healing occurs;
And also that which goes straight to the two ribs, and it cannot be cured outside of what specifically comes to the back, as I say;
And it is that diseases extend over his belly for one hand length evenly, and have strain upon him, so that he does not blister;
Then insert one stick in the ground to form a cross, and another at the base, then tie a band around the joints of the muscles, and another at the hips, knees, and ankles;
and let those who attend know about the bands, one at the head and the others at the base, among the two stakes;
and be well closed, the stake as we have said, and let her place her palms on the ground formed by it until she regains consciousness.
And if she does not regain consciousness through this treatment, take a board of three arms long, and place it under her, and if the patient's back is straight, have her head on one side of the board. Then put the center of the board on the ground. Place the sights of his feet on the other end of the table and press firmly until he regains consciousness at its place; and if you can see it, perform this maneuver when turning to the hand that turns in the direction of the limb.
And when you insert two sticks at the elbow of a large limb and opposite his feet, place them so that between each stick, directly above and below, is about an inch in length.
And place two pieces of wood in each stick, or where the elbow is located, and ensure that the sticks are firmly planted in the ground so they don't move; and between every pair of sticks, place another stick turned, according to how the bone twists, and place two small sticks about an inch long between the turning sticks for twisting the elbow.
And then join the two threads between the elbows and the neck, and the other thread towards the hands to the other elbow, and each servant twists their elbow for the whole length of the thread, and the master puts in an equal spine as we said.
And when they are equal, place them with a desiccant plaster and plenty of eggs, then fumigate, and then apply an ointment from a tablet of one and three quarters inches long. This should cover the area of the boil and the healthy part of the spine. Then join them with a thread as we said, using gentle stimulation until it is healthy;
And if anything comes during the recovery process, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines with the fumigation we have described earlier; and whenever it's administered, use one piece of parchment.
And no appearance comes in the back vertebral spine of the back, and it should be that this is dislocation; and it's the bone which opens, so one must not have any assumption about it: by chance it could bring death.
of hip dislocations
You should know that the joints of the hip and the shoulder can only experience dislocations alone, unlike other joints; and the hip joint is dislocated according to four parts: within and outward, and in front and behind; it dislocates more inwardly and less forward and backward.
And the knowledge of its dislocation inwardly is that when one joins the diseased leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and opens more on the diseased side than on the healthy one, and cannot bend the knee joint as far in heat. And it is the limb which is swollen with pus beneath it, because the head of the shoulder comes to it.
And the sign for him who approaches fire, it is that such accidents are contrary to these before.
And the signs for him who encounters ahead, it is that his leg must be well according to accomplishment; however, neither double its ankle without pain, and if one wants to make him move, he cannot beforehand, and he holds back his urine, and swells his foot, and when he walks, he does so on the heel.
And the signs for him who encounters behind, it is that he cannot spread his ankle or double it, and this leg is more twisted than the other, and his foot becomes relaxed, and the head of the shoulder is in its place under the ribs.
The restoration of this illusion of dislocation is that you must understand that when dislocation has occurred and it remains according to its position, without any treatment, and there should not be any assumption made about it.
And for those where the dislocation is recent, and there are four ways of dislocation, if you hurry you should return the joint, stretch it inside and outside, and move it to the right and left; by chance if it returns, no other treatment will be necessary.
And if it doesn't return this way, you should apply one strong remedy, and hold the leg strongly with two hands, or on a stick that is tied to the knee; And another remedy should extend his hand on top in such a way that he pushes his hands under his armpits, then he pulls it with one strong effort against the knee; and another holds the head against the stick.
And extend both up and down at once, until the patient is lifted off the ground at once, and remains hanging.
This method of extension is common among four similar situations, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is well.
But if it is not like that, then you should treat according to its appearance. When the dislocation affects the paxedons (a possible term error), you must lift up the patient on their healthy side and then place a bandage at the root of the arm, followed by the elbow being above the armpit. Then, secure the bandage upwards towards the armpit, and further towards the forcele (another possible term error).
Then take another assistant to hold the patient's arms, and embrace the thick part of the diseased arm, stretching it upwards in form: if it returns to its normal position now; this way of dislocation is lighter than others.
And if you can't compress it in this way as we have said, then you should tie the two feet of the afflicted area together with a strong rope under both the heels and under both knees, and let the affected leg extend more than 2 hands compared to the others.
Then have it hung from the top of a post, and let there be 2 spans of length above the ground; then instruct one servant to hug onto the head of the stock, while another servants hold onto the afflicted area with their arms wrapped around the stock, for they form the stock. For the joint is now quickly returning.
And when the dislocation is in front, if it lies to the side as we said in the one with flexibility, and holds a rope tightly on the affected leg properly, and also around the foot.
Then put two prongs, one on the head and another at the feet, then insert one prong between the thighs of the patient in the form; and place wet cloths around it, to prevent the patient from getting burnt, then extend each minister towards him, and set their position equal to his hand in case of dislocation.
If it returns, that's good. If not, place him on a table and press him like we have said in the gymnastics, and lie the patient on his healthy side.
And when the dislocation is in front, it must be extended as soon as possible, and according to what I said; and make the patient feel their pain on the wrong side, then press with the other hand, and extend downwards towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is at the back, it does not suit to extend the patient backward or to raise them up from the ground, instead they should be positioned as their hip was previously dislocated towards the back, just like we said about lying on both hips. And should be at their face, and the line extended as we said previously, and one must press on the joint from the table;
And it will be right when the limbs stretch their legs and they are equal. So adjust the hips, put on the plaster, and strain with a bandage, so that the hip does not move.
And let it rest for three or four days, then release and put on the plaster again; and if you see that they are equal, strain in the same manner as before, and leave it like this for another three days; then release and allow it to move completely until the limb is strengthened.
Of the dislocation of the shoulder joint
The shoulder joint is dislocated in three ways: this means, inside and outside, and behind; and it does not dislocate forward.
And the signs for this are that you instruct the patient to bend their leg at their knee, and if they do not straighten at their knee, know that they are dislocated;
And the restoration of all this is that you make the patient sit up straight, and extend their leg if they can, and place your back against their buttocks, and put their foot on your feet;
Then take his knee in your hands and pull it between your fingers, then bend the two sides of the knee. And have other assistants extend their legs as far as the knee returns to its place, until you see that the leg is comfortably aligned with the thigh.
Then place the dressing on it and have them move their leg from knee to thigh, then hold them together firmly for 1.5 or 2 days, then release them; do not disturb the injured limbs until the body parts are strengthened.
And if the limbs aren't properly set yet, apply strong extension, as we have said in treating the hip, until it heals well.
From the dislocation of the heel
The heels are never fully set and always partially dislocated, both inside and outside.
And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and tends forward to the part where it is dislocated:
The reduction should be easy; when it is properly set, you should gently extend it with your hands only if it was correctly positioned.
And when it is reset completely, you should have the patient stand straight, and hold them up with two assistants behind by their leg, above the ankle;
then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then with your left hand as well four times, then stretch them up high, and firmly hold the foot up.
and do this twice as we have said, while holding and pulling the foot; if it returns, that is good; if not, restart the process because it will return.
and if it cannot return this way, make the patient sit behind their back on the ground, and place a stick firmly in the earth between their buttocks, and tie cloths around them to prevent the patient from being hurt.
Then let the surgeons cut the knee, and other surgeons extend his feet or up to two inches, so he ties them around the neck of the foot; Then extend each surgeon equally, and have them place the tools directly between the knees of the patient so they can hold the patient when one extends.
Then place the mirrors equally on both sides of the dislocation with your hands, and have other surgeons cut the healthy leg at the knee, and the dislocation will return quickly.
And when it is at the right point, apply the plaster and bind it tightly on top, then firmly tighten everything, and tie the foot to the leg, and watch the nerves that are above the ankle bone, making sure the bandages are not too tight.
Then leave it for two or three days, and if the wound heals up, restrain it; then release it on the third day or the fourth, and direct the patient not to move for four days afterwards; And if he goes beyond this period, it's not safe that he hasn't been dislocated again.
And if the abscesses come out, then it is necessary that you soothe them, as we have said elsewhere, until they are clean.
do not specify
When both shoulders are dislocated, if they fit beautifully to extend with work, and this is a minor matter.
And if the dislocation is in none of the bones of the back or stones, it should be that you make the patient lie on .i. his full length or .ii. the table completely straight, and place your foot on what opens from these joints, then press with your foot firmly until he recovers;
And when they are even, and there is nothing opening, place under the foot's sole a shoulder table for two shoulders, then press it firmly, and leave him three days, then reset him; and let him rest until he is healed.
regarding wounds and dislocations together
When injury occurs with dislocation and one wishes to restore it, many times it happens that the patient dies.
If you are not presumptuous in the treatment, if you do not know the art and have not practiced it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful but rather slow to act, do not be hasty.
And start with soothing things for abscesses, and let the patient's body rely on God, if you do not see any hope of improvement in health. And when you do see hope, immediately reset the limb at its place, so that the abscesses drain and heal.
And when limbs are at their place, administer calming remedies for abscesses and cuts, and treat the wound as it should be treated, using dried ointments;
And if accompanied by dislocation and fractures of small bones, set the bones, and do as we have instructed in cases of simple illnesses.
And guard against entering paths of fear according to what I have said, for this befits you as per your Creator, and by the wisdom with which you arm yourself and care for your body. Amen.
