You dear children, I have completed this book which is the culmination of medical knowledge collection and compilation, finishing it through its explanations and declarations. And in my vision, I thought of completing it with this manual tool, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
And because the work of hands is highly practiced in our region and spread everywhere, if the science has been lost or abandoned, there are no longer any remnants from it other than small descriptions found in books written by the ancients that were used with the hands. And because of this, errors and vanity have arisen, and closed minds occur, causing the loss of knowledge.
It seems to me that I should renew this treatise together with the order of its content according to the path of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and will come together in groups the forms of the metal cauterizing tools, and the other instruments of the operation with the adjustment of declaration and preparation of them, as it is necessary.
And because no skilled physicians can be found in our times, the art of medicine has been lost. It is necessary that one who interferes in this matter become proficient in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so long as they understand the position of the limbs, their shapes and connections and separations, have knowledge of bones and nerves and muscles, know the number of bones, the movement and location of mobile and stationary veins, and the origin of their exit.
And because of this, says Hippocrates that with a little effort you are much better off and with the use is slightly more so; similarly in the art of manual skill.
We tell you at the beginning of this book that if someone is unaware of the things already spoken about, they should avoid making errors and wasting others' time; just as I have seen many times with those who interfere in this science and abandon their knowledge and lack of experimentation.
And I have seen a foolish healer who cut open one of the lymph nodes or neck of a woman and severed her neck arteries; because so much blood came out that the woman died in her doctor's hands.
And I have seen another healer who treated a stone in an elderly man's bladder, and the stone was large; he took with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
And I have already been called to draw blood, and saw the arrangement of the body part and the size of the stone, and if he had let me cut him it would have led to his death.
And I saw one other instance where I was called to treat another individual, the Duke of our land who had his leg broken, and along with the breakage there was an injury; and these clergymen full of ignorance would bend the break over the injury in many ways due to their strength, and did not allow any relief for the injury, and left him like that for one month; and I commanded him not to bend it again; and he remained like this until his leg was completely swollen and his feet turned, resulting in loss.
I was called to come to him, and I hurried to come and bend the leg; and when I heard it bent so smoothly that he did not feel any pain.
But every way of corruption was now confirmed in the member or body, and could not be cured; and the process of corruption continued within the member until the entire member was lost.
And there is another mark that collapses an abscess, then inflames it due to the wickedness of its lordship.
For a gangrene, when it is full of melancholic humours, it should not be touched with iron if it has not been cut in such a way that all that is corrupted can be removed.
And because of this, dear children, you must know that the work of hands is divided into two parts: meaning places where there are risks in multiple situations. And I will show each one in this book where it has danger and risk.
Because it is necessary for you to keep this knowledge, so that the foolish may not speak ill of you.
If you take your weapons in consideration, and treat your illnesses gently but firmly, and employ the best approach so that by the grace of God you come to salvation and remain well; and leave unbearable diseases without complaint for healthful treatment; and remove your weapons from those who make you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can move from this world to another with glory.
Galen advises in some of his admonishments: "Do not seek treatment for a wrong illness, lest you be called foolish."
I have composed this treatise according to three chapters.
The first chapters are about fire cauteries and medical water cauteries, and the chapters are organized from head to stone; and about the forms of tools, and the metals for cautery, and all that is necessary in the work.
The second chapters are about cutting and piercing, and suction cups and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar matters; and the chapters are arranged and describe the forms of tools.
The third chapters deal with restoring dislocations and twists, and similar matters; and it is organized from head to stone, and describes the forms of tools.
Just as we remind ourselves of the work, it is fitting that I describe the quality of each remedy and its harm for each constitution.
I assert that the qualities of help and harm are the longest word and most subtle science and secrets. And many wise ones spoke about this, agreeing with it; they barely gave me their words, for I fear lengthiness.
I state that the fire cautery helps universally for all constitutions where there is matter, because it has two constitutions: this means hot constitution with substance and dry constitution with substance.
In the combination of hot and dry constitutions with matter, people proposed that the fire cautery is a great help; and others said the opposite: that the fire cautery only works for diseases caused by heat and dryness.
Because the nature of fire is so hot, it should never be used to treat diseases caused by heat or dryness; and those who say the opposite argue that the fire cautery greatly helps with hot and dry illnesses that manifest in one's body. For when you compare the body of the person and their moisture to the condition of fire, you find that the body is cold.
And I agree with this word. For I have found it true every time by experimentation.
And through all means, do not interfere with it except for the one who has experimented with it, and who knows by long use of medical knowledge, the art of cauterization, and the different complexities of human beings, and the dispositions and causes of their diseases, as well as the occurrences and span of time; we have no fear from other complexities, even when dealing with cold and moist illnesses. And all of them gathered together with the fire cautery.
And know, my children, that the assembly of a fire cautery has secrets in healing, and brings more benefit than a burning medical cautery.
For fire is simple, and it only affects the limb that is being treated, not harming any other limbs if properly done.
Burning medicines spread from one limb to another causing disease instead of healing; and by chance, they harm the patient.
The fire for its high quality and the goodness of its substance does not do this one, if there is no excess.
And this I have found by experience and through the length of my service and study in the art, based on truth of things; for which reason I excuse the length of speech, because it does not please me to reveal the secret that is revealed by fire, and the quality of work, how it relieves diseases from bodies, as the philosopher says when demonstrating this. Receive it into your thoughts.
And know, child, that they agreed on what times the cauterizations should be made, and set fire to them.
And I say that cauterization is suitable at all times, for the injuries occurring are often mitigated by the aid of the cautery; and indeed, if the cauterizations are for necessary pains that cannot wait until the larger mischief does not affect the member.
And never think like a fool, dear boy, as those who use cautery do; for sickness healed by cautery does not return. And they say it this way, but it is not quite so, because cautery is medicine that alters the complexion and dries out the fluids causing pain, being worth more than ordinary medicine due to its speed of action and virtue of its work and authority.
And it is possible that the sickness comes at any time according to the complexion of the sick person and their condition of illness and its virtue; and in them, excesses are gathered by the intake of foods and similar things if cautery isn't administered in the place where there's a little excess and moisture, like hot cauteries for pain, and similar things, so this kind of pain doesn't return; but this happens seldom.
And few people understand why cautery is called the last of medicines; it's indeed to see. But they don't believe that cautery matches after medicine, but their understanding is false. Cautery is the last of medicines because when our methods for treatments fail in any sickness and they do not work, then we administer our cautery, and it works. Therefore it's clear that cauterization is part of medicine, not according to the thoughts of ignorant people though.
The old ones said that gold cauterization instruments are more effective than those made of iron and they said this because of the quality of gold and its high substance; and they stated that burn marks from a cauterizing tool don't cause decay, but some people think otherwise as I have experimented with it and found evidence that supports their view in certain individuals; and gold cauterization tools are better than those made of iron, just as they said.
Yet still, when you heat gold instruments, you may not notice that they are heated by the color of the gold, and it is soon cooled down. If they are heated too much; if you put them to fire; thus, there's enough prevention.
And that is why we use iron cauterization tools that we have adapted to our work.
And you have ordered this chapter on the animal's head up to the nose, because its visibility is easier to find.
For the olive cautery
The olive cautery is effective against moisture and cold in the brain, and there are two ways to do it due to an illness called 'soda', and due to many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, ears, and for a multitude of dreams and toothaches, throat pain, and especially all diseases caused by cold such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
The shape of this cautery is such that the patient's body is cleansed by dissolving medicine, transforming the head. Three or four times or five times, according to how the properties and the heat and the habit of the ailment can bear it; and then follow up on the head with treatment for the ailment.
And then have them sit cross-legged between your hands, and place their hands under the sides of their nose; after placing the base of your palm on the base of their nostril between their two eyes; and when your middle fingers reach that spot, if it bleeds from the inside, heat up the cautery called "olivare" which is in this form:
And place it under the line of ink, and move your hand down gradually while holding steady in twists; then lift your hand alone, and check if you see bone at a small solitary spot; if you don't see it, keep applying heat until you do see the bone as I have told you; after that take one pinch of ash, soak wet cotton lightly and place it under the line, let him be for three days; afterwards put on a moistened butter cloth; and leave it until the scab falls off; then treat the wound with ointment called "tetrafarmaçon", until it heals.
And if they said to the old ones that when a wound remains open for longer, more pus is produced; and thus they were advised accordingly.
And they say none of these that we must let the cautery burn until part of the bone is burned, and then reset the one that has been burnt by the bone, and treat it.
And they say that the cautery must be left burning there, and press so hard that it removes as much bone wide as a little horn that women place in their bellies for when the fluids are expelled; and should we leave the wound open for a long time afterwards; then we must treat and stitch it.
And these two ways of using the cautery do not seem to me entirely good for everything; except in some people where there is a way of fear, and I believe that I should leave it like this. For the joints weaken by continuous discharge of nature, as we show with other limbs; even when the joints are weak due to nature themselves, and my first impression of using cautery is more healthy for me, and from these methods I take together a form of healing.
From old age pain of the head
When throughout the head comes chronic pain that lasts for a long time, one should use the patient's remedies of herbs and pills which are called "cochines", and treatments for the head and ears and bandages; and if one applies the cautery as we have previously mentioned to them, it proves effective.
Take caution that the head of the patient is not too cold in nature; therefore, apply the cautery just under the one we have mentioned above.
After applying the cautery to each horn of the head up to the bone as we have said previously, do one more cautery on the side called "vassel", and insert one in that area where suction cups are used; and move your hand so you don't touch the bone: patients feel much greater pain in this type of cautery than in others, and I will discuss it further elsewhere. And it should be noted that the cauteries applied to the horns should be more precise than those applied to the middle part of the head, which is its form:
The fire cautery commands the patient to let his hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow. When suddenly in part of the head comes an acute pain, and the illness spreads until the eye, and the shoulder blade is purged by purgative medicines, and other treatments that I have mentioned in the division of diseases have been done, and none of this helps: then make cauterizations according to two ways, namely with ague medicine and fire.
The medicine-cauteries using ague medicine are as follows: you take a spoonful of ale and apply the peel and re-coatment over both shoulder blades, then place the temple in such a way that you can spread the spoonful of ale beneath the skin; when it has been spread, tie it firmly in this manner for 12 hours; then untie it and remove the garlic poultice, and leave the wound like this for two or three days. Then apply a poultice in butter until pus is discharged.
After the oil cure as long as it is pure; and if you see that some of those burning medicines I have written about or in the tenth book of medicines that burn, you should perform.
The iron cautery is performed like this. Heat the shape of the cautery as described:
And call it "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a bell or has .i. pinch at the back, and midway there's a small appearance; and put it on the painful spot, hold your hand and gently move the iron slightly, until half of the thickness of the skin is burned; lift your hand so that the artery doesn't burn, when it exits, and allows an abundance of blood to flow.
After that, place gauze soaked in salt water and keep it on the affected area for three days; then replace with cotton soaked in butter, and continue applying a healing oil as long as it remains pure. If you wish to cauterize this headache using the cautery called "cultellare", do so at its entire tip, but beware not to cover the artery in this headache which is not old.
Of the headache
When you treat migraines as we have explained in the divisions of diseases before, and it doesn't help, and you observe that the cauterizations mentioned previously concerning medicine and iron do not benefit here, then it is necessary that you heat up the cauterization which is called "cultellare" until it is white; and do this such that your thumb spans half a span in length from the root of your limb, and hold with one hand once, and apply pressure so that you don't cut into the artery and only reach up to bone; and beware not to let any saliva interfere when eating, and have the nose focus solely on preventing it from closing like a snore, and be wary of bleeding in the artery if it is cut, or if one has great fear and likewise for those who are unaware and inexperienced; and leave the work halfway done; but I will tell you how to stop bleeding when the artery is cut, and show you where this happens in this book.
And if you find that these cauterizations don't help with the illness and the patient is suffering, apply it in the middle of the head as we have said before, and treat the wound until it heals; and if you see that this is not enough, administer the fire instrument that we mentioned or at the chapter on extracting the artery, using a fire tool with two blades; and know that these will be better than others and more effective.
of the pain of the ears due to cold
When cold causes pain in the ear, and we have applied remedies that dissolve it as well as other treatments that we have mentioned in this division, and if the pain does not subside, then apply this cautery which is called "points", its use is as follows:
After applying the points all around the ear, or in the area of two, where the pain is located on both sides, and move away slightly from the root of the ear after marking its position. Place 10 points around each ear; after that, treat the area until it heals completely.
of the torment/pain in the mouth
The treatment that should be cured by a cautery is not about those that move with urine, as we have stated in the divisions of diseases; and no cautery should be done on what seems to come from heat and nerve scarring.
When you treat this semblance of torture that moves with urine and the discharges from head and gargling, what is not effective, then it must be that you apply a cautery for three times: one in the root of the ear, and another somewhat further into the temple, and the third at the adjustment between the two lips; and place the cautery on the healthy part where there is an opening, and make it cauterize the tip of the ear up to just below the headkerchief, and another similarly long in the temple like a thumb's length; and let the cautery be applied until half of the headkerchief is burned; and this is the shape of the cautery:
And there is the semblance of the sword injury which we placed before, but it is a bit more subtle; so it must be that the swords should be slightly thicker. After treating the wound as I said previously, until it becomes healthy.
When dealing with apoplexy which is ancient and you treat it as we have said, and if the patients do not benefit, and the sick person has fever, then make these three cauteries: two on the two horns of the head, and one on the head itself, and one under the chin, and the last one over the mouth of the stomach; and follow this treatment as we had previously instructed.
of liturgy
For this illness, you must give the patient large and powdered pills that purify the brain; after that, you should remove the head of the sick person completely, and place a sinapism plaster on the occipital region. And here is how to apply the cautery: do it as I have instructed.
If it is done properly, well and good; if not, do this: apply three fire cauteries below the neck until reaching the collarbone, leaving an interval of one finger's width between each cautery. Proceed with treatment as usual. If you see it adjusting, and the patient suffers, apply another cautery in the middle. Should it be necessary, two more above the two horns, and treat until it is done properly; use the cauterizations called 'olivare', as I've mentioned before.
from cold of the head It is necessary to cleanse the head of hairs and what we have mentioned previously. After cleaning the head with vinegar, then heat it over the fire for the patient. Apply cauterizations around the head and on each horn, and two at the neck spine; and if you need more, when the area is moist and the patient suffers from sickness, and the illness spreads, apply four cauterizations to the spinal bone of the back; and leave it until the deepest heat is completely burned away, then raise your hand; afterwards treat until it heals properly, and use the cauterizations called 'olivare' as we have mentioned before.
From the cautery
The epileptics should only use the cautery for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to first modify the brain with years and other treatments that we have mentioned in the section where the body parts suffer from medicine's effects.
And if it's a child who cannot bear the suffering, make them gargle and chew, modifying their brain frequently with good meats; after that place their head in mid air, and apply a .5 stick of fire according to what we said before, then another fire on each vessel, and on every horn; and if the body parts are sore and suffering, perform fires as I explained for those with paralysis and softening of limbs, on the spinal cord at the back and neck, and apply olive oilier fire in the way that I have said.
If the patient is young, apply a fine cautery according to this method:
When it is due to melancholy that the excesses or fluids are corrupted and thickened, then apply a partial cautery as we have described for the person who has paralysis.
And if it is due to melancholy that the excesses decline into melancholy and the body is wet with malaise, then let them drink something so that the brain might be purified, as described in the section before on purification.
After receiving the head of the patient; after making .i. thread of well made linen, like .i. circle, you put it around the head; and the patient lies on his back, and is held firmly from all sides; afterwards present the liniment, and spread butter of old goat's milk; and heat the fire properly, so that one may be able to endure even if they are burnt by it; after emptying the circle through the head, and let it cool down; and do this to each patient once a week with another method well, until they recover.
Or if you see the cauterization, do several burns all over the cauterizer. This way of cauterizing moistens the brain greatly; and then put wet cotton and butter and lard on it.
regarding the treatment of eyes When the eyes start moving according to the signs I have mentioned in division, then begin and continue to give something purifying to the patient for their head, protecting them from all moisture. Have them sweat or take baths several times on an empty stomach.
After commanding them to move their head again and having them apply a cautery on the head, then have them apply two cauterizations on each temple when the movement of the eyes is in both eyes together or if it's only in one. And for every application of the cautery, take care of all veins and arteries that are around the brain, applying the cautery long according to the width of the temples; and beware of blood spillage, and if you see too much blood coming out, then stop using such power as you have.
And I will teach you about extracting arteries and cutting in the cauterization method how to apply it; and in no instance should you do a cauterization or cautery between the two bones behind.
of the streams of tears
When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and present on the veins, or penetrate into the arteries that are outside the appearance of the head; and one sees that they are excesses of cold phlegm, then make them with the cautery that I have said at the beginning of this art concerning the descent to the eyes: .i. cautery over the head, and .ij. cauterizations on the .ij. temples, and .ij. cauterizations where the cheekbones are below the .ij. bones; and if there is need for more, cauterize carefully above the eyebrows with all .i. small cautery.
of the streams of tears from within the eyes
When you apply the remedies according to what we have discussed in the division and it doesn't help, then try giving three bad ointments to the patient; after that press on the head, and make a cautery or the middle of an olive oil cautery; and do two cauterizations with the 'clavilis' cautery on both eyebrows, a little above the hair. And beware not to touch the artery so you don't cut it. And this is the form of the cautery which is called "claw":
When the eyelid is made soft by disease and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery which is called "olive". Here is its form:
And if you see to do two cauterizations on the two eyelashes as long as they are; and don't rest your hand until only one-third of the paper is burnt, according to the method that I have said.
of the hair that touches the eye No time comes when the hair of the ears turns into wax, and it pinches the ear, and one performs cauterizations in two ways: namely by fire or with burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold them steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they have grown and are even, then place the patient in their healthy state; after that, draw on the paper of the eyes a figure as it is like a leaf of myrtle, and mark the beginning of the sign with the end of the hairs. Then apply moist cotton soaked in egg whites and garlic paste to the ear, then warm up the cautery according to this shape:
After cauterizing on the figure you have marked gradually and a little bit at a time, until the knees are burnt in that spot; and signs of health from the wound is that you see the paper retracting, and the hairs lifted to the tip of the ear; then lift your hand and leave it like this for three days, then apply moist cotton in butter until the scab comes off; after the ointment treatment until it becomes clean.
And if after this the hairs come, and the paper has been softened then begin the cautery on that same place as you did before; and when the hairs have fallen out, cauterize until the paper reaches its natural position, and is even, not touching any of the hairs.
The burning cauteries of medicine you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow until they are large and even, then shape the parchment as if it were a leaf of myrtle; take one part each of French soap and hot water and mix them thoroughly. Do this quickly so that it does not cool down, then spread it on the form resembling a leaf of myrtle, and place it on the paper of the eyes; if the disease persists in one oil only, you should open it for one oil, and if in both equally; put cotton moistened with egg white under the eye. The patient's head should be covered with your clean hand while applying medicine, press once every time the patient feels a bite from the medicine because it also feels like heat. When you have done this for some time, apply the medicine to your finger. And when the operation is over, raise the head of the limb, and if you see that the paper has been raised like it was raised by the heat or incision; and if it is like this, then it is well. If not, put more medicine on the limb where the medicine has not worked until your operations are even and your eyes are ready; then put damp cotton in butter until the burned skin is covered, after cure the head of the limb with the ointment called "dyafenis" and others, until it becomes healthy.
And if you need to protect your operation well so that the medicine does not leak out from underneath it. And if the paper becomes moistened, and the hair pricks at its root, then apply the medicine to that limb which is softened by the proper paper; as you did before; after this cure until it becomes healthy; and this is the form of a willow leaf.
And know that the ears of men are diverse in size and degree, and according to this, your instructions should vary; and do not prescribe for someone who has studied this art what is not appropriate for them.
On the treatment of fistula by cautery
When you treat a fistula as we have described in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments are not beneficial, then it is necessary for you to apply cautery according to this manner.
Instruct the patient to place their head in your healthy position; and guide the doctors to hold their head between your hands in such a way that it does not move or fall from its position; afterwards, apply moistened cotton on the inside of an egg or garlic juice on the eye; then heat up the cautery which is prepared: and place it above the head so that it forms like a feather pen; if you see it, let it be pointed between one part of the head to the other, and if you see it, let it resemble a tent; but always remember, whatever is placed above must serve for your work.
After pressing the fistula if it has been opened, and treat the putrefaction, then dry it; and if it is closed but still secretes pus, cut it out from the bowels; afterwards place a heated form on the cautery and hold your hand on top of the cautery at the part just below the ear near the eye, so that your hands do not cause mischief; and put the cautery in the oil grease, and let it become spoiled.
If you come to the beginning of the cautery until the bone, it would be well. If not, if you start the cautery again once more, and if necessary, do so, and leave it three days; afterwards put on wet cotton and balm, and apply the dry ointment cure as long as it is healing, and when forty days have passed without it being healed, then apply a corrosive aqua medicine until the bone is exposed; and follow this regimen according to what he lays out in his chapter.
And there is a method for cauterizing fistulas that none of the old ones mentioned. Understand about fistulas, and make it ready; afterwards place one fine wooden pick inside the incision as shown here: and it's in quantity of three-quarters of a rod; and hold your hand or wooden pick firmly, and do not move the patient at all, so that the wax does not leak out of its hole; and let some wet cotton be placed on the wax with the purpose of egg whites or water: the wax serves as a plug for the fistula, and through this miraculous healing process leads to recovery.
And if the fistula is cured by the cautery we have described, that's good. If not, it should be administered to the young man, and bring the fistula back into the body according to what fits properly in its own place.
of cuts in lips Many times, cuts occur in the lips that are called "whiskers", and also in children's lips.
When you treat these cuts using the method we've discussed in sections, and if the treatment doesn't work, then use this: apply a small surgical torch on the size of this form:
And place them immediately in those cavities until it grows as far as possible; afterwards, cleanse the area of wax while it remains healthy.
of the abscess on the throat
When an abscess affects the root of the throat or in the lymph node, or under the tongue, or at the roots of the teeth, after it turns into a gangrenous infection and becomes discolored, hardening and forming a fistula; then you treat it as we have instructed in divisions, but if it doesn't heal, you must prepare according to your medical knowledge for what is needed. It's necessary that you have one cautery instrument suitable for the size of the fistula; after incision or cutting out the fistula, keep your hand until the cauterizing iron reaches the bottom and as far inside as possible; then perform this method once or twice. After treating it according to what we have said in treatments, while it remains healthy; if it heals like this, it's good; but if not, you must expose the wound and remove the rotten bone, depending on what you find when consulting your medical text.
of the movement of the teeth
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines and that doesn't work, then put the head of the sick person in your healthy position; afterwards heat up the cautery which will come into play hereafter in this manner: you place a stick under the tooth; and place burning hot inside the cautery quickly, hold your hand until the diseased body feels heat reaching to the root of the tooth; after that lift your hand and continue with the cautery according to your desire; afterwards fill the diseased person's mouth with salty water, and let it sit for an hour and then remove it.
And in this manner the tooth which was moving is now fixed, and the softened gums are held back, and the moisture that caused damage becomes dried.
from the pain of teeth
When tooth pain comes from coldness, or there is coldness or frostbite, and medical treatments do not help, then it's necessary to use a cautery according to two methods: and the butter cautery and the fire cautery.
The butter cautery works as you take butter from a cow, and with it the tip of a iron or spider's tool; after taking cotton and wrapping it on the point of a tent, and moisten the butter until it forms, then place it on the painful tooth quickly and hold it until it cools down; and do this repeatedly until the remedy's effectiveness reaches the root of the tooth. And if you see moist wool and cotton in cold butter, place it on the aching tooth, and put hot iron on for as long as the fire reaches into the tooth pain.
The fire cauteries work as follows: you take one iron or spider's tool and make it large enough so that the flame doesn't reach towards the mouth of the patient. After heating the cautery, once its form is formed after this, place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools down; do this repeatedly, as the pain will be alleviated that day or the next. And it's necessary for the patient to fill their mouth with good butter during the use of this cautery, then remove the force afterwards; and this is the form of the cautery:
When the syphilis is of phlegm and cold moisture, and does not respond to digestion through medicines, then apply the cautery as described below, and create two openings for the fumes to escape from the other side; and place the cautery hot over the abscess once, or twice if needed, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, adjust the application of the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it in this state for three days; and apply damp cotton with butter until the pus is removed; afterwards, cleanse the area with ointments and bandages until it heals.
When the moisture invades through the bronchial channels and especially when it comes from a cold disposition, then it is necessary that the medicines of solvation first empty the body. After that, apply the cautery at the base of the throat, and take care not to go up to the throat but just a bit further. And burn only on the blood but slightly more. After that, make one other application of the cautery at the junction of the neck with the head of the spine, and use the cautery known as 'clavile', which we have described in front; and cleanse the area exactly as we said until it heals.
Of cautery by fire, command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow. When all and the disease of the womb are due to cold moisture, and the patients do not have fever or dryness, and it is an old disease, then make two cauteries on their force lines in their veins; and one other cautery in between the buttocks under the nipples; and let the cauteries that are called "clavile" be as described beforehand according to form.
And if you see fit, apply the cautery at the point that is called "pits" whose shape was described in the illness of the ears; and let there be points up to thirty or beyond them. Afterward cure the area according to what has been said beforehand, and do the cauteries every three days following this form:
And because of this they are performed with a lighter cautery, for you do it three times over each area.
of the dislocation of the shoulder When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. After that, bandage the wound on his back and sides; afterwards lift out the kidney which is inside the testicle with your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated internally, heat the cautery until it has two fingers' width as shown below:
And burn the knee until it reaches bone, and make all the marks of the burning together. These are four burns; for this purpose, you should use a cauterizing tool with three points, because the marks left by this type of cauterization consist of four burns; and they follow the delicacy of a tent, which is the shape of the burning tool with three points:
And fix it on this one nerve because there are seven burns in relation to this.
After placing the cautery, grind with string; afterwards, let the patient rest, and do not let any of the limbs be in prolonged tension until it is properly secured.
And if it is reset upwards, a small thing occurs then, so make a cautery on the thick part of the cautery knife, or with few cauterizations in striking. For the joint has been closed and the moisture has been removed from the body and healed the patient.
A cautery of rue oil
The old ones said that one should make rue oil cauteries from the roots of aristolochia, and this is how you do it: take a long root of aristolochia, the longest you can find, and make sure it's dry, also ensure it is as thick and long as your arms; and soak it in oil, then put it on fire, and cauterize once between the elbow and neck, and twice smaller ones somewhat downwards in the area under the beard; and four more cauteries between the fifth and sixth ribs, descending a bit behind; and one cauterization near the belly button, and another on the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and four more along both sides of the waist under the cauterization between the two shoulders; and do not squeeze your hand at all, just make it widely open as when smelling.
And it is said by some old ones that no man uses a fire cautery like this for one who has shaved their body parts and they heat it up and place it between the ribs until it reaches that abscess; and when the pain leaves, as we have mentioned in the chest abscess. But in this work there's fear or the patients die now, or a fistula comes which cannot be cured.
from the mouse
When you treat the disease 'la mice' in those whom we have spoken about with regards to our treatments and nothing benefits them, then they try three methods of cautery which are all good.
Of which there is a method such that you do .iij. cauterizations, or .iiij., in a line according to the length of the mouse, according to the figure of the cauterizer of the liver as we have said before; and do not hurry your hand over the entire cauterizer, and let it be so that the patient remains somewhat on their back;
And another way of cauterization is that you heat the cauterizer which has two handles, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the keur which is situated at the mouse, or where the cut on the patient comes from the left side, and let the lifting be according to the curvature, according to the length of the body, and the cauterizers should follow the width of the body.
After holding the two flaming handles for as long as the keurs are pierced from the other side, then remove the cauterizer, and in this way there will be four. And if you see fit, cauterize across all three handles with a flame. After the healing when it has removed the putridity over time, and this is useful compared to another type of treatment mentioned before.
Of cautery by fire, command the sick person to let the hairs grow long and even; if they pierce at their base, hold them steady so they do not move until they fully grow.
Cautery is not valid for ydropique [a disease], except perhaps when it's done in the way called 'asclytes'. If your cure doesn't work following the methods we have discussed, then you should apply four cauterizations around the anus, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the spleen, and another one on the back on the spine, and finally one spot below the tailbone; and ensure that the cauteries are well close to the bladder.
After allowing the cauterization to set for a long time to heal from infection, do not stop the treatment of the disease after the cauterization; and recovery would hasten, with both intentions combined together with God's help.
The shape of the cautery for the belly is the blade that we have demonstrated in front; and the one for the back is olive-shaped, as was shown before.
regarding the swelling of bones When the bones swell in a person who is hydropic and are full of yellow bile, it is necessary to cauterize on the back of the foot between the thumb and the ring finger; and lift your hand with the cautery without turning. And do not go too deep inward, otherwise it would remove the yellow bile, and apply the cautery in accordance with this shape:
After doing this on both legs, do two cauterizations on each leg at the tip of the heel; and make the cauterizations long, one in front of the knee joint and the other behind, halfway along the leg; and leave the cauterizations alone for a long time without treating them until the yellow bile comes out; after that treat all the other treatments we have mentioned.
Of the memory
For ailments of the stomach that come from cold and moisture, as long as the retaining and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestines are weakened, they cannot be cured by ordinary treatment methods; and you see the patient suffering greatly with strong green symptoms, so apply one large stomach cautery according to what has been discussed earlier or stomach cautery, with a circulating cautery; and four internal abdominal treatments around the mouth of subtle substances for each. Then apply one delicate hip cautery and four cauterizations on the thighs.
And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, apply a cautery to the wrist, and one cautery on each knee, and two small cauterizations on the stomach below the large ones, because the treatment benefits when there is good help.
Of treatments for hemorrhoids
When the emorroydes are either located at origin or in multiple places, and they are old, being large, cold, moist and rotten humors, and if treatment does not help, then apply cautery: three times on the spine of the back, the one that is fully outside under the layer of fat gradually in triangular patterns, and once on the buttock. Four times;
And if you think that the stomach is cold and food isn't cooking inside, and you see the abdomen swelling, then apply one large cautery to the stomach as was explained earlier, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen covering the whole area; and let the cautery stay for a long duration. Afterward treat the affected area until it is healed.
Regarding the disease called "thelul".
When you are working with the shoulder, heat the tool that seems to be a rasp until it is glowing hot, and then place all of its heated part on the shoulder being worked; let your hand remain as long as the cautery touches the beginning of the vein from which blood flows. Perform this action once or twice, and if there are many shoulders, cauterize each one as we have said; after applying ointments for benefit, do so while they are still in good condition; and if you use a large cautery on the shoulder blade, it will provide more help.
of improperly treated wound
When the patient cannot endure surgery or opening (operation), which we will describe in its proper place, should such a disease occur that cannot be cured except by cauterization.
When there is no leak, and it has aged with infection and rot caused by moisture corrosion, you should test the entire area thoroughly, and make sure you know how many times this whole process needs to be done. Warm up the cautery until it feels .i. raseur-like (meaning it's slightly warm but not hot), then place it in the fistula according to its depth of entry, and continue using the cautery as long as there is rotten flesh inside that gets burned out, one time or two times, or three times based on your needs; be careful not to burn nerves or major veins. If the fistula was going through the body cavity into the intestines, avoid these areas, and do this only in a place where it's safe, remembering there is no danger involved here. After treating the area until it's clean, if the flesh has healed over completely and tissues have remained for a long period of time, you can determine that the area has fully recovered; but if tissues haven't hardened, you know that the area is still infected and rotting bone exists inside, and thus follow this advice in your own understanding.
Of kidney disease When abdominal pain originates from the kidneys and large wind, it affects women differently, hence you should apply a cautery to both sides of the kidneys with a bistoury as we have previously mentioned; if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three cauterizations in line, and they will provide more help.
From the bladder When the bladder is thick and weak from heat and moisture such that patients retain urine, then the physician should perform a cautery on the lower part of the bladder, where the body hair begins, and one each on the right and left sides, and make sure each cauterization spans as long as it takes about an inch; and if necessary, also do a cauterization behind the back, or two if needed; and perform the cauterizations in a cross pattern according to the form described beforehand.
From the mare's milk When the mare's milk is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception, and its flowers are corrupted causing delayed periods; and when they do come, one can feel great pain: in such a case, it would be appropriate to perform three cauterizations inside the uterus, as we have described or like how we explained for bladder cautery, and two cauterizations behind the back; and make sure the cauterizations are done in a cross pattern, as we have said.
From the thigh
When the viscous fluids descend into the thigh cavity, and because of this reason it moves out of its place, and the signs are that the leg is longer than the other when measured together; and you find the joints at their starting points visible. It should be that you cauterize the disease on the thigh around .i. the appearance of a circle, and mark in front of the joint along the thigh as it curves, so that the thigh is within the circle; and if they are like those which have been cauterized for stomach issues.
And if these cauterizations do not seem present, make three large olive-like cauterizations, and let the cauterizations be as long as all the ribs; and treat until it is healed.
From thigh pain When pain comes in the buttock region, and this is due to coldness and moisture, and the patient is treated according to what we have discussed about divisions and treatment, but the cure does not work, and the disease is old: then it must be that you cleanse the patient of the thick fluids using stinking pills, or other similar good pills.
After applying the cautery treatment; and in terms of how to apply the cautery there are two methods: this refers to the combination of burning substances and a fire cautery. The fire cautery has several methods, among which one is as follows: you should apply three triangular cauterizations according to this shape on the buttock region, ensuring each one has a good depth and is large, with an interval of about two fingers' width between each one; and these are olive oil-based cauterizations. Never make a cauterization in the middle of the main part of the buttock because there are four according to this shape:
And if you see fit, apply the circle cautery method that we described earlier regarding the dislocation of the buttock; but make sure the circles encompass the entire buttock area and all parts of the wound are heated through.
And this is the way it's done in sciatica, when the pain stays at the hip and doesn't reach to the thigh or leg. And if it reaches up to the thigh and leg, you do two cauterizations where the pain says it stops, and one on top of the ankle for four inches, a little bit to the left side; and be the cauterization like a knife cut, and burn off the thick parts in the heel; and if the patient feels that the pain extends down to half a foot or nearly there, you cauterize where he feels the pain three points or four with the cauterizer called "points".
And if there's more work needed, then you proceed with more cauterizations; and if it is that the pain spans from the knee towards the thigh, then do a circular or knife-like cauterization, and be sure to well maintain your caution throughout all your cauterizations so as not to leave any part undone, burning nerves and large arteries until they are properly treated, and do not cause the patient more harm or contraction than necessary.
And I have seen many who performed cauterizations on the ankle up to half a foot deep, and left them until the leg was swollen all over, and even the feet were pierced and corrupted by all of their feet. After a stomach solution from which they died.
And if the pains are in two parts together, apply cautery to one and another according to this manner. // And the sage advised about applying the heat on the hip, from which is given this method: create a tool made of metal shaped like a large nail or slightly smaller than that, with some spacing between it and so that its length spans across two points with the total distance equal to approximately one inch; ensure there are supports evenly spaced along this tool and they resemble nodes or knots. Make sure the tool has two well-made prongs; here is how it should look:
And heat it until it is completely red and emits steam, then place it on the area of concern at the hip gland, and rotate around the healthy ribs; and apply one cautery treatment with repeated applications every day for three days; and then cover the affected area with butter, allowing the wound to be exposed as long as needed; after the ointment treatment until it has healed.
Albucasim says that we use very little of this cautery for his fear of the effects, and we find few who use it; yet this is a good type of cautery, which can be tolerated, and there where it takes effect.
The pain of the back
When pain comes to the back, whether by falling or impact, or due to too much evacuation, or because of cold matter spread out, none of these occurrences warrants cauterization, rather it is for someone who has come from an infusion of cold matter.
It is necessary after this that when the body has been cleared of putrid pills or other such occurrences, one should place on the back where the pain resides, three lines marked with a cross, and in each line, up to .v. cauterizations according to the power and quantity that the body can endure; and perform the cauterization as per the "point" cautery named; and if you see fit, do .iij. or .iiij. cauterizations at the intermediate "claw" cautery in accordance with this form:
This illness often befalls children and at the beginning of its manifestation, it shows itself in that they are pale when they stand up, and fear follows; and you find in the last spinal bone of the back and on us, an appearance that comes over other bones.
When you see this and observe it being treated, if you apply the fire cautery according to this form.
If you see this and observe it being treated, apply the heated metal to each section of the spine evenly. And if you notice, cauterize around the spine using a hot metal tool at two lines or three lines, with the points close together. After that, treat until it is sound as per what we have said, and be cautious not to use the cautery on blisters near nerves.
of joint pain
When joint pain is caused by moist substances spreading throughout the body's limbs, and when pain comes in feet which people call 'gout' properly, and when it is due to cold reasons and its cure needs medicines that cannot be treated, then it should be treated with cauteries in this manner: create the cautery at the joint of the foot, and let the olive oil cautery take this form:
And if there is need that you touch on the face of the foot, then make a cautery at every point of this one we call 'point'. And should pains come up to the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, then make a cautery on each knee. Three or four cauteries from each part, all across the olive oil cautery; and if you need more, do them more, but don't leave your hand out until the heat of the wound is burnt away.
And should the pains descend to the knees and back, then administer the cautery that we have said in our chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, then make points inside the flesh two lines deep; and should there still be any pain in the back, then apply points over each joint and on the hair of the hand; and should the pains come up to elbows or shoulders, then cauterize each part, and take good care with your patient and provide medicines. For if you give him good care and purge phlegm, he will be made healthy by God's aid.
Of the rupture in the sciatic region
When an opening comes in the stomach, and the intestines descend into the abdomen it is newly so; it must be that when you see them being cured, they do not eat until noon; and use things which let the wind out, so that their insides descend from their belly; after make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to shave his armpit until the intestines are repaired, then take them in your fingers, and observe around the opening above the bone, and take it by the root of the intestine. Then apply the cautery as described here:
Until it is white and gives off stinks. Then lift the intestines to their place; and let his servants shave his hand so that they do not return behind; and work well on the thighs for the patient, and put two knives under him, one on each thigh, and another at his buttocks which keeps the hands in check; then apply the cautery at the sign all with your hand, and hold both your hands firmly until you reach the bone, and if you don't reach it the first time, do it again once more until you come to the bone; and be subtle that the intestines should not escape when you do the cautery, so you do not burn them; and let this cautery not cause harm or other illnesses.
Know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is nothing. It is necessary that the child's cauterizations are subtle according to their measure, and for large people they should be as big according to their measure; after three days treat the site of the cautery with butter until the scab comes off; afterwards treat other ointments until it heals well, and have the patient lie on his back for forty days so that the wound is well stitched up; and let these remedies continue for a long time, so that the intestines do not escape when he wishes to go into chambers.
And after forty days, when he wishes to stand up, one should make him wear a well-made bandage and use it for forty more days; with good rest, he should work little and guard against drinking too much or eating too much, and against shouting too loud. And once he has followed this instruction, he will be completely healed. And I will speak about the treatment of tailoring in its chapter later on. Of the rupture of the abdomen
When ruptures occur in other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow anymore, apply a cautery to the belly according to its size, and heat it up until three quarters of its circumference; after this, treat it as we have instructed. And none of the old texts mentioned that one should use a triangular-shaped hot iron for cauterization at angles like this:
But the first sign is the opening of the wound and make a line across the width of the tear, and another below it, and move your hand with all the rod for the fire cautery. But the initial cauterizations are lighter and wetter.
from old pain in no limb When pain comes to any limb, due to falling or being hit, and this pain lasts long, and medicine does not cure it, then it should be cauterized using the fire cautery that is called 'points', and perform cauterizations according to the length of the member, its smallness, weakness, virtue, location of twists and its pain. If it responds well to the first cauterization, it's good; if not, try another cauterization above it, because these customarily move towards the limb that is nearest, so you should perform cauterizations until the body becomes healthy.
In mixture
The remedies are applied once with the cautery through large aid, and likewise the disease that comes from the putrefaction of blood and melancholy. If you see it being cauterized, take care that this disease is at its beginning, and if it's cured according to what we have said in the division, and doesn't spread or remain, then when you doubt whether the corruption might spread throughout the diseased area, then do this: for five times cauterization on the head: one time towards the base of the skull towards the start of hair, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the hair; and two times on the two horns, and one behind on the neck; and let your hand be such that the cautery reaches up to the bone, and until the scabs come out so that the vapors of the thick humors might escape; and cauterize gently below according to what is done above.
And if the mixture is everywhere scattered; and it becomes apparent that you must cauterize with these cauteries we have mentioned on the head, and one cauterization under the nose, and two cauterizations on the spine from the neck to the chest, and six on the spine from the back of the neck down, and one large one on the nape of the neck and another in front of it, and two on each shoulder blade; and two on the ribs, and two on the tendons of the legs, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and around the creases of the hands; and be careful not to burn any nerves that are behind the heel bone. And do not once make a cauterization on the bone near the ankle, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And know that the more often I use the cautery, the more assistance it provides and the benefits are noticeable; and know that patients do not feel pain from the cautery as healthy people would, because their bodies have already become thoroughly corrupted. And you should make the cauteries large and small according to the limbs and joints, following what you will find in instructions about instrument procedures. After healing, rub with flour several times along with honey and other treatments until it has fully healed.
of inflamed
When inflammation occurs in any limb and is treated with medicines and oils and bandages, and it does not heal, then you should perform cauteries on the limb according to its size; and make sure that a small part of each cautery enters into the tissue of the diseased area. Then treat with ointments until fully healed. And every time a cautery is performed at the hand, foot, and back, where the nerve ends and makes the limb immobile, and thus it will be removed; and always do not interfere unless you are knowledgeable about the limbs and the exits of the moving nerves in the body.
From galls
When the illness named "albaras" becomes old, and conventional medicine is ineffective, then apply a small cautery burn according to the amount of the plant in question. Do this until the gallbladder is removed and its color changed. After that, wash with flour and lentils mixed with rose oil and plantain leaves, along with blood from colostrum and chicken sand, each using one part of their quantity. Mix everything together, then wrap it with a cloth, and leave it on the affected area until fully healed.
The treatment for a pustule by cauterization
When a pustule begins to develop, and you notice it, stop its spread by applying a cautery burn that resembles a circle around the entire circumference of the pustule. And often they say that one should also apply a cauterization in the middle of the pustule; and I personally do not think this is good because I fear it might lead to ulceration and corruption, which has already happened several times for me; more straightforward would be to apply the cautery around, with a circular tool as we have described earlier among different types of cauterization tools.
of the swelling which cannot die
When some have a disease which is called "adubelati", and it delays death or due to its excess causing harm, or due to the old age of the sick person when they are too old (meaning very old), and they have little blood, or due to the tension; and you see it hasten towards death: then cauterize around a bit of small cauterizations by pricking; afterwards leave them like that. For it will hasten to die.
And if you see it being pierced through the entire cauterization, then heat the cauterizing instrument as described here:
And place your hand in the middle of this disease called "adubelati" as long as the cauterizations have pierced through its entire depth, and ensure that these cauterizations are such that the patient feels a sense of relief to such an extent that the process of decay is alleviated. After treating until it becomes completely sound.
The cure using fire through a iron
Another way to treat disease, which is called 'corrodens', it is nothing more than a bodily malaise that affects members in the same way that fire burns dry sticks. If you see this illness on someone who can tolerate a cautery treatment together with heat, then make iron cauteries small and large, according to what suits the place where the illness is; after cauterizing from all sides until you burn out all corruption, and leave nothing behind, making sure that every corrupted part is removed. And then let it be for three days, and apply iron filings with oil over the cauterized parts as long as the burnt areas heal, and all the corruption. After this, the treatment of ointments causing flesh to grow. And if you see after three days that healthy flesh does not emerge, it is good; and if this does not happen, start again on the cauterization where there remains corruption from the members. And this malaise is often cured with medicine in place of heat-cautery; but still, heat cautery helps much more, I have already spoken about the treatment of fever in division: take it whenever you need to.
Of ulcers that come on bones
Once in a while, a disease arises from within the foot that is named "clos" according to our understanding, and it's a large hard thing that pokes the foot. The cauteries for this disease are done through two methods. That being said, fire cautery and hot water cautery. Fire cautery involves heating up one metal cautery like a goose feather tip and making sure it's made of well-forged iron in such size that it can touch every part of the nail, ensuring there are fine margins; after that you heat the stick all along its length until it reaches the very tip; then let the process continue for about three days as pus starts to form; next create a poultice of ground wild garlic mixed with oil and leave this poultice on overnight; then the nail will be removed from its roots. Afterwards, cure the wound by spreading an ointment that causes inflammation until it heals fully.
And if they are turned inside the body, and this happens many times in feet and hands as well, it's necessary that you apply hot water cautery; and do it like this: take a reed or iron rod, or a goose feather tip, place them over the nail bed and around it, meaning on warts; then place the stick so that its heat penetrates fully into all parts of it, then put some hot water on it, hold your hand well while you turn it, making sure the edge of the stick reaches down to the nail roots, thus finding the deep path of the hot water until it reaches the root; and let the patient endure for a short time the burning from the hot water for an hour; then leave them as they are, and they will be completely uprooted. Repeat this several times until you've removed all those that have been in the body, then cure the sores that generate pus afterwards.
The treatment involves shaking it off.
When someone shakes from cold or nerves, or has a fever that lasts four days or another condition, it is necessary to apply four or four cauterizations on the spine of their back, one cautery between each vertebra; and one on the chest at the olive-shaped cautery; if this does not stop the shaking, then hasten the recovery from the cold illness.
The pus-filled lesions
Any time you notice a boil or pus-filled pustules that have come from large decaying matter, if it's necessary at the beginning when they appear to cauterize each tip of the pustule: a fine fire stick cautery where the point touches the flame, or a long root of aristolochia, or an oval-shaped cautery. And never let them be cauterized right from the start when they first appear, following this method; instead they'll stop growing forward, but their excess will be resolved and they become healed. But it should be done after blood has been evacuated.
When the artery is cut Many times great amounts of blood have flowed from the artery that has been cut at the wound when it comes to the one going beyond, or incision of an abscess, or the cautery on the limb, and similar things; and it is very troublesome a matter to stanch.
And yet, when this happens to none of them, should you quickly place your index finger on the wound of the vein and press very much until the pain subsides under your finger, and no more drops flow; then apply several small and large olive oil cauteries as long as they are all red. Then take .i., or large or small depending on the wound and to the place where the artery is located, and place the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and keep the cautery there until the pain stops completely.
And if it jumps out when you remove your finger from the vein, and once the cauteries are extinguished, take quickly another one of the cauterizing tools that are at the fire.
And do not stop performing this one after another until the skin is completely incised; and beware that you do not burn the nerve underneath it, nor let any other harm come upon the patient; and know that when hair falls from the artery, one cannot properly incise it even if the artery is large, unless done through one of the four methods we have mentioned: by cautery, or extraction when it hasn't been treated yet, or by strong stringing where a ligature is placed, or with medicines applied which have the power to incision blood; and it should be bound and held in place subsequently.
Who will administer the tying or binding with cloths tightly or by putting heat-bearing things thereon, or other similar actions, if it doesn't prove effective.
And if this happens to anyone and they have no means or medicine at hand, then they should place their index finger on the wound of the vein as we said, and stretch it well until the skin is incised over the wound and over the vein; and do not move the hand but moisten it with cold water often that remains very cold until the skin is frozen and swollen and incised; and perform ligatures in advance for those requiring cautery and medicines.
We have spoken in the first chapter about all diseases where it is necessary to use fire cautery or hot medicine. We discussed their uses, causes, instruments and forms of cautery; and concluded that chapter with applying them up to the foot, and I will proceed through this chapter using the same path since it seems easier to find what one wants here.
And when I begin this, it is important for you to understand that in this chapter there is more risk and fear than in the first section about using cautery, and for this reason, greater caution is required.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and treating wounds, and extracting arrows, and making cuts into stones, and similar matters; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I advise you not to embark in foolish endeavors. For many ways of people come into treatments. Some come from those who are deeply affected by their illness that they die slightly due to the panic they find at their sickness, and because of the severity of their disease; and from these one should have fear. And among these there are those who understand and say: "Wait, I'm aware." And the disease is deceitful. It's not advisable to agree with those who come to you in this manner, but rather place more restraint on your honor than on your greediness, do not act impulsively but wisely for those whom you are certain of, and have knowledge about; and use prediction and suggestion in treatments for your patients where health is transformed. This will help you gain good reputation, glory, and long-lasting memory.
Dear child, our lords give you good understanding and justice, and if you wish to aspire from the holy inspiration of their hand, Amen.
Or I have instructed this chapter according to its chapters, following what is before it in the section on cauteries, which I have outlined from the head down to the feet because you will find them more easily than those you need.
From the head full of water
Know that this illness comes very often to children at birth, and when the mother presses too hard on the head of the child; and it happens in no other case for reasons unknown.
And I have never seen this disease in anyone other than children, and among all those I've seen, their deaths came quickly; for this reason, it seems to me that I should abandon the treatment of cases like these with partial cures.
And I saw one child whose shoulder joints were filled with water, and his head grew each day to the point where he could not bear it anymore; and feared so much from moisture that he died, and this moisture is assembled around the bone above the siphon, between the heart and the bone; and the veins are arranged in such a way when moisture is between the heart and the bone, and abscesses are small, that you make an opening under the head a large crack; and so long as the moisture flows; and see this shape of the spathile:
If the moisture is more abundant, and the abscess is larger, make two openings in a manner like a cross, according to this shape:
And if the moisture is within the bone, and the signs you see show that the edges of the head have opened from every part, and water spurts out when you press it inward with your hand, and this does not stop: then you should make three openings in the middle of the head like this:
And after the incision, remove all moisture. After holding the cuts open with strips and powders, then apply wine and oil, and leave like that until the fifth day; then reset it, treat the wound through dressing and ointments, and let the head be held equally, thereafter allow the patient to eat dry meat from a small amount of moist for as long as the limb is comfortable and healed.
And another way of incision is that you look at where the opening of the abscess is large, and assemble with water; because it does not always appear in front; nor always behind; nor always on the right side; nor always on the left.
Cut then where the abscess opens, and fill with water, and make a cut according to what you can do; and watch that you do not cut the artery; and look for a flow of blood, so that the patient dies due to the loss of blood and evacuation of moisture.
Of cautery by fire, command to the unwell that they let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When there occurs a disease which is called "catarrh" to the eyes or at the bottom (of the body), and the disease is old, and the treatment with medicine doesn't help, then the last resort of treatment could be cautery using what one would cauterize their two major arteries.
So then, if you cover your eyes, the patient should let their head be placed after their neck; afterwards rub a rough cloth on it until the arteries are visible, and then pull out the diseased part of the body by all means with one cloth. Then look where the veins lie, and see how far apart the eyes are from each other, and when they're properly repositioned; then mark the eyes with a cross, and cauterize both of them with an acutely heated piece of metal for about half an hour until the skin turns black up to the bone, and this should be done around the width of their head.
And if you see it, stop the bleeding from beneath the artery and above the cut, by making a cut also like one inch through.
And when the vein is cut, let the blood flow out continuously from up top.
And if the artery does not open upon touching, it is necessary that you measure the length of the space to about three inches, then pierce until you reach the bone; and what needs to be removed from the blood is about seven parts per centum, and by chance a little more or less depending on what the patient can endure, and the replenishment of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains on the bone slightly yellowish, and if the incision above our abscess does not show, then press down the wound and bandage it, and apply ointment until it is healed.
Of the removal
When old age comes, and acute cough, because of the moisture from tears and heat in the temples and lower back that is beyond endurance and similar things. Medicine is treated with ways of medicinal cures and all this does not help him, so we extract the arteries in the temples and cauterize them, as we have reported.
And the method of extracting them is such that one feels beneath their temple hair, and hears about the artery that opens in the temple, for it opens well by its pulsation, and is only responsive in some who are too cold; and if it responds, then strain his neck with some cloth strips, then rub the area with a rough cloth, and heat him up with hot water until the artery becomes clearly evident. Then take the spatula as shown below:
Then lightly scrape the skin until you reach the artery, then pull it up high with forceps, and remove many threads that are from each part; and if the artery is fine, if you twist it at the tip of the nail, then cut across that part according to the number of two bones. For if she isn't cut, neither will all be torn completely.
And drain the blood from the .vj. c, until the third day; and if the artery is large, then it should be tied in two loops of a strong double thread of silk, so that infection does not occur before the healing of the wound, nor repeatedly bleed; then cut off the excess between the two threads at that moment, and then, if you see, then apply the cautery gently until the bone with the bones being cut; and this is the surgical procedure, should the patient not have fever and be of warm complexion.
For the cautery helps to finish off infections: for this reason it is a greater help against infections. When it comes to extracting arteries, one must fill the area with old cotton and place well-made tent cloths over it; when you sever them, apply dry medicinal substances that promote tissue growth, as well as tent cloths until it heals. And if you don't have a proper clamp for the artery, act just as you would during extraction, hurry to use a cautery tool, or utilize the area with vitriol and grip your hand tightly so that the clot stays in place; and if you lack this present tool, apply ice on the clot until it freezes, then immerse the affected area in cold water until the clot no longer moves, ensuring proper restraint. The one who is faster and lighter during artery extraction should cauterize the blood vessel from that cautery trenching for half an inch, but make sure the trenching is well spaced to retain heat for a longer duration. For when the instruments are too tight, they retain less heat. And there should be .i. inch of space between the two knives, and when you have heated them to touch both ends, place the hot iron until it reaches the bone, then cauterize the vessel in two places; and keep them spaced apart for these shoulder joints because there is no soldering on this cautery tool throughout; and this is the shape of the cautery:
of tears
When tears of the eyes are descending through the veins that are above the testicle of the head of the arm, and it does not benefit from any treatment with medicine that one might do, and you see the face of the patient turning red, and feel or see a pulsation as if of a heartbeat; and where they are tender and moist so that the hairs on paper fall off, and the papers become heated, and burned by the heat of the tears, it is necessary to have this treatment.
And they called the old one "the treatment for contusion", and you should do this: bring the hair to the front of the patient who has this disease, then make three cuts on the front, evenly according to the length of the forehead; let one of these cuts extend as if two-thirds down the entire forehead from above, until it reaches the bottom edge, and the other ones are made at both sides of the ribs under the papers. And be careful not to cut any arteries that are under the ribs; keep your hand away from the continuation of the two mandibles, and each wound should have three doings across them;
from the cut that is near the temple up to the second cut; and burn all the flesh that is between the two gaps evenly until it sticks to the bone, then make another cut from the middle cut up to the other gap, and then extract this ague brazier.
if you ignite in the first gap the tool called 'cultellaire', and it is very sharp on one side, but blunt on the other, it has this shape: And place the cutting side of the tool towards the soft flesh at the bone, and the blunt edge towards the bone, and ignite until it reaches to the middle cut. And remove all the vessels that descend from the head to the veins up to where the incision is continuous up to the one that opens in the bone, and then make another cut halfway into the middle cut up to the other gap; and then extract the blood evenly, and express the head for the blood taken; then place a cloth of old cotton in each gap, and put wet cloths with wine and oil and garlic, and ensure no pus enters; and on the third day release the stitches, and apply large bandages soaked in vinegar, then perform the ointment cure with basil oil and olive oil, and other treatments for wounds until it heals.
of the eyes
When there is an acute catarrh accustomed, and you see the eyes swollen and small, and weakening of sight, and burnt paper; and hair falls out, and one feels a feverish chill, and the patient sneezes. Therefore, know from these events that those substances and this mucus come only from many veins, and the remedy used, if it is such.
And you should command the patient to lie down on their back, then make a large incision through the forehead and another wide. Start by making an incision from the left temple to the right temple along the hairline; cut until you reach the bone. Keep your hand away from the temples' nerves which move during eating. When the bone is exposed, drain all blood using a sponge, then clean inside the two incisions with old cotton and linen cloths. Apply wrung cloths soaked in wine and oil above, taking care not to remove any scabs. Once it's removed, you should rub the bone until the new flesh begins to grow, then treat it with exfoliating substances that promote growth.
In this manner: take two parts of the flower of wheat and four parts of colofoin, make them into a paste; and apply it to these wounds to stimulate flesh throughout.
Regarding ear piercing.
Everything that is inserted into the ears is one of the four things: or seeds, or beast, or mine stones or similar things such as iron; or seeds, such as beans, peas; or flowing matter such as water and oil and similar things.
When he inserts a piece of metal or another kind of thing into the ear that doesn't fit or grow in the ear, place the ear under the sun. If you can see the metal piece, then apply a drop of violet oil or saffron oil; and after this, treat with extraction; make him sneeze with conditi, and stuff his nostrils when the sneezing comes, put pieces of cloth or wool into the ear; and place the ear above. Many times this cure works; and if it doesn't work, then apply extraction using fine needles, which is described here:
If it leaps like needles, that's good; if not, prepare for the extraction using a small, sharp instrument with slight curvature; and if it doesn't leap through these, make an araneus needle and pinch the tip of the needle or part of the ear well, then soak whatever is inside the wax of the needle so that the wick cannot enter with the needle; then press the wax firmly for use because many times it comes in like we said; and if it doesn't come in this manner, take glue from it and pinch its ends, and place in some an instrument suitable for such work, and put a bit of cotton inside; then press the glue onto the stone or anything else, and pull. And if it doesn't leap through all these things that we have said, then hurry to cut the ear so an abscess bulges out and spasms; and the way of cutting is such that you first sharpen the edge of the patient's auricular lobe, and extract blood according to its size, then let the lobe lie between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision at the base of the ear near the fat or what hangs down; and make the cut as round as a moon until you reach the stone, then break the bone according to your strength, and suck it quickly into your mouth; and treat until it is healthy. And if it's grains that are inside and it swells, prepare for extraction; and if it cannot come out, prepare this small spatula tool according to this shape:
And prepare for the incision of that grain. But do not perform this when you think that the grains are moist due to the moisture in the ear, until you have done many pieces; then extract with fine pincers and a suction pump, as we have said, so that the extractions happen smoothly.
In water then, where the patient sneezes in their ear, make sure they use a small amount of condiments first and fully expand the ear with old cotton. And be lying right next to that ear where the water is located. If it jumps out through this, that's good. If not, take several pieces according to the length of your fingers and softly, heat them slightly on fire; then place one or two of these heated pieces into their ear, and blow out with your other foot from another part, and do the same thing with another piece on the piece where the water is in the ear. And continue doing this from piece to piece until all the water comes out completely, and thus it jumps out completely; and if you see, take one small stick, place one of these ends into their ear, and apply fire to the other end as long as the more tender part burns; then redo with others sticks until all the water is out, just like what we've said about stones.
In the extraction of small creatures like a flea and such, treat them as we have said in division. But if it is of large size that one can feel it, perform the extraction with pincers; this is something more lightweight to remove from the ear.
In the extraction of maggots from the ears, when you treat them in accordance with what we have explained about divisions and distillations therapy, if the treatment does not help, then you must look at the ear under sunlight: if there are no maggots, then apply fine needles into it; if nothing is visible, then take the reed that matches this form:
And let it be narrower below and wider above. And apply the finest part of the cotton in the ear according to the amount of pain from the patient's illness, then form all along the cane; do this repeatedly until all the maggots come out. And if they do not want to come out, then apply the cotton inwards as I have said in about the stone; and if they do not emerge like we have said, then administer distillations according to what the old ones have proved in extracting maggots, and you will find this type of treatment under distillation; and distill your oils and medicines into the ear with all this instrument, as it is shaped here, as you see:
And it should be made of silver or lead, being narrow below and wide above for distillation. And to press within the distillation use a properly made arnail instrument for this. If you see a razor and bandage around the tip insertion cotton; then pour your oil or juice, and what you see of your medicines in the cane, and the cane be inside the ear. Then press inside the razor all the cotton, and press your hand moderately until the oil is distilled or exhausted from the ear; and feel the patient internally, and let it distillations .i. pox heated by fire as one does when distilling into the ear; and guard against being too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
From ear piercing
No child is born without any perforation in the ears; and this same thing happens at home through ear piercing wounds, or of a fetus being born inside the ear, and these piercings happen once within the ear, if one cannot see them; and never does it have .i. hole for the perforation to be seen, and one sees it very well.
That which comes within the ear, if one cannot see it, is due to gunk being sanitized in various positions, and you must understand that putting the ear by the fire helps; look inside: if you can see the obvious inflammation, if the work has fully created this pus-like substance described here:
And let it be cut and dug out from front to back all evenly, so that it does not burn the ear; if the inflammation is due to pus or part of the ear, hold your sharp tools gently until that pus-filled part is completely removed.
And if the excrescence is deep in the ear, take one sharp and light rasor, then heat a small part of it on fire. Place this near the ear. If you feel the excrescence that causes pain in the ear when touched lightly by the skin, pierce it slightly, making sure not to damage the nerves of the ear; then place a wick inside the ear according to its width, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Continue this action every day until the wound is healed, or take a wick and moisten it with rose water, and apply powdered vitriol. And if you see swelling in the ear, then remove the wick and replace it with another dampened one made from rose oil and beeswax, until the swelling disappears; then continue treating it until it is healthy again.
And if bleeding occurs, immerse a cloth and dip it in cold water, then place it on the ear, and apply other treatments that stop bleeding which are known from distillation processes.
From the page's contents
When dealing with hair that grows in when wet and then dry, it is necessary to use tweezers and forceps on it. Take a piece from its roots; then place sulfur tincture upon the affected area.
And if you don't remove them, cauterize them with a fine cone cautery and the cauterizer after the incision will be beneficial; they should repair themselves many times over, as nothing remains from their roots. And when they are cauterized with fire, those root parts get burned and do not return.
Of the gravel
Many times in the papers do you find some things that seem hard and dense by their form and hardness, for this is called "granuloma" disease, and it's a collection of thick moisture on top and underneath the paper; the procedures are as follows: take care if the granuloma moves from one side to another, and it's a simple matter to know about this; then make cuts broadly, after that lightly cauterize each part, then pinch the granuloma and extract. If you cannot extract without piercing some of the paper, or causing any harm to the patient; if the tear is large, and there's an opening, cure until it heals completely; and if it's small, don't apply too much force, for ointments restore and renew flesh quickly.
And if the granuloma is descending within the ear towards the upper part, invert the paper and place the granuloma under the scissors, then extract and press from both sides; and if the paper is pulled away by the cut, it causes no harm; and when the granuloma has been extracted, remove the salty water, cure the wound until the flesh is renewed, so that the patient is healed.
of the fat of the granulomas
Exinach is a kind of fat that can be found in the sheets of paper above, and this happens more with children than adults, and it causes great distress to their eyes. It comes to them at dawn and they cannot look at sunlight because tears rush into their eyes; therefore, they sleep on their sides always, and lie down on their papers so that they are moist under their eyelids, which then gets filled with exinach and changes the appearance of both their eyes and outer area from it. And when you press your hand onto this area and feel the exinach between your fingers.
And the way of doing this surgery is that the patient places their head on your healthy area. Then take one linen cloth and set up a tent in the shape of a circle according to the amount contained by exinach from each part, then place it; press with both hands from one side and the other so that all the exinach gathers inside the circle; then dig in the middle of the moist area with a sharp tool making a cut not wider than the wound when you are done opening a vein; make sure to cover the moist area completely till you see the exinach. From this slit, the exinach comes out in various positions according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Then remove it all in one piece of cloth between your fingers at the front, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is dispersed; make sure not to stick in the slit, that you don't get inside the moist area up to the eye, that you don't hurt it.
And if the incision does not open at the beginning of the wound, so enlarge a little bit gently the wound until it opens; then stretch as we have said, then moisten with cloths and water, and place on the limb, and bind with bandages.
And if there are people who grind flour and place it to corrupt the moisture that has remained. Then treat him until he is sound. And if an abscess appears on the limb, then the treatment with healing plasters continues until he is sound.
The phrase "des poilz des papieres" translates directly to "the hairs of papers". This might refer to paper fibers or could be metaphorical depending on context. Without more information, this is the literal translation.
When hair grows in different places than naturally does and it becomes grey, these affect the eyes causing diseases like constant watering from them and paper-like swelling of the eyelids and puffy eyes, due to being a cause of eye damage; then treatment should be conducted according to four methods: or by fire cautery as an ensemble, or through blood-letting medicine as described in the chapter about cautery, and this is done either through incision and stitches or with bandages, as I will say.
You must place the eye socket in its natural position, then turn the paper of the eye onto your left hand; if it flips over correctly, that's good; if not, sew through one thread from point .i. on top; and do this either beyond the edge of the paper or where hair grows underneath these hairs, pull through a single thread all across the paper and then fold it back with a razor; then cut out part beneath the paper, beneath these hairs, extending to the corner up to the small one; then remove a thread, place a tiny cotton tent and linen on the paper, then draw an emblem onto the paper as round as a bay leaf, but ensure that the emblem matches the height you see when lifting the folded paper.
And if there's need for a large amount of paper according to how the paper has been softened; then stitch up the entire area above the two lines you've marked, starting from the corner to the small one; and make sure that you have one of the cuts next to the natural hairs in their growth stage as big as a root, then place the needle in one of the corners of this circle, then burn all around it; then stitch together both lips with a thread using two fine wool threads everywhere, and cleanse out any blood, then let air dry the excess threads on both eyebrows for some things stick there if done properly; and if you don't see that happening, pay no mind to it, then leave the stitches alone until days .iij. or .iiij.; then treat the wound without stitching with desiccating and constraining substances because the paper heals from the immediate contact of the wound and its assembly process, but the stitches become moist (as they used to say), and this is work without fear.
And if you have another way: and then you mark the paper with a figure that is as like the leaf of myrtle, just as we recounted it, in one inch squares according to the form which is here:
Then take what stands above the smaller forces evenly according to the shape which is here:
And if you do not have the strength to hold the forceps, and if the object is not equal, then take one needle with two threads attached, and place it within the shape; and hold another thread under the large loop, and the second thread under the small one, and join both threads evenly between your fingers; then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin above what you have indicated, just as we described, then stitch together the two edges of the wound by suture, and treat it until it heals. And if pus comes to your cut, then soothe it with tallow and similar soothing ointments;
And at no point does the paper hair turn: so it is necessary that you use what we have said about incision; but in one and the other stitch, they are more artificially done.
The treatment of veins follows this form: and it is necessary that you turn the paper and cut within according to what I have said, and then make two stitches by art, and two small threads as long as the paper width is; and divide each of these two parts into two halves; then assemble both in a delicate manner at the top point of the paper covering the eye, and tighten the two stitch parts in this direction; and leave like this for several days, and the skin that has been tightened will dry out and harden and heal until it exits naturally.
If it takes longer, and the treatment continues until the patient is well; and when the wound has healed, and if the paper is lifted, and no more hair will grow; this is the form of the two stitches that you should make according to this figure, and with this length and width:
The surgical operations are like this: you take a fine needle and tie it with two strands of silk thread which is fine and strong. Then join the ends together finely, making sure they're long enough for one palm to measure between them. Next, place another strand of the fine silk thread across in your hand, tying its ends around the needle's shaft; then insert this end into the injured person's wound until it pierces through natural hair thickness and then quickly moves back out beyond the hairline on paper. When you have pulled all hairs to that point, remove your hand letting them come out completely from the paper with their original hair length.
And if the needle is treated and no hair comes out with it, you should pull the needle from all the silk thread that was ordered in your hand, until the needle reaches its end point which is just beyond where it pierced the skin. Then you check to see this visually through the eye; then remove the needle and the thread, and rest the eye for two days or three days, until the hair grows back to its original place and a new flesh begins to form. And if the hairs are small, accompany them with one long hair from a living animal, letting it grow along with the one you left or trim it, once it's grown out fully before cutting.
Regarding eye infections
When this illness, called 'aleacrati' or rot in the eye, comes about, there are two ways it can happen: one naturally and the other unnaturally. It appears suddenly from a wound, surgery, or cautery treatment, and also through similar sorts of incidents.
And the way of the treatment for this is that you cut through that seam and open the eyelid, then place linen strips inside it, sealing it up until it heals. You must not use in its treatment any things that dry out or restrict. For if you do this, the disease becomes worse than the first one; but work with softening substances like fennel; and soak water or herbal decoctions made from linseed, and melted butter on no part of the eyes, then cover it with a linen strip, and treat it accordingly.
And the treasures of your treatment are to be cautious that it does not heal in the shape it was before; and these works which we have spoken about do not exclude remedies for this illness, that it should not return in the form it was before.
Of the matter that comes to the eye
This disease which truly is called 'axacrati', and is natural and accidental. The accidents come from wounds, fissures, cauterizations, and similar things; and the way of working in this case is that you insert a needle into it, with two threads attached to it, and you place it inside the flesh, and make it pierce through the left lacrimal sac so as to reach behind, so that the threads travel along .i. inch of the flesh; then the flesh gets stuck over all the way up to the tip of the needle, and the knife cuts out a wide piece of .i. spatula.
And if the shape of the paper comes back as it should according to what is expected, then it's good; if not, take one more piece and place it in the fissure, and rotate the paper, and make two more cuts inside the paper. And have both corners of these two cuts at each of the angles that you made the incision, and form angles such that when they are assembled together, the shape looks like a letter 'n' in Gothic script; then remove that flesh according to how many of its sides there are, starting from where the paper was placed. Then adjust those two removed parts, and sew with thread as if it were wool. Then follow the cure for what we have said about softening medicines and stimulants until it is healed.
And if the disease comes from a wound or stitches or cautery, it is required that you make a full cut along the hair's line of the paper, and according to what was mentioned before; then cut between the two sheets of a tent, as I have said; and must perform the work according to the shape of the illness, for she varies much in form, and the wise surgeons prepare themselves with all sorts of tools to show how they can bring back the figure to its natural form; and even the patients themselves, according to what should be done in operation and instruments used in various configurations.
right along the paper
When this seam occurs in the hands so that the paper above is joined with the white of the oil, and cannot move or do its natural works, then it is necessary that you pierce the edge of a razor under the paper, and lift it up; and extend it with forceps until you reach the delicate subtile point which should neither be too sharp nor too deep, so as not to allow the point to cause injury to the eye or to burn it; and make your incision, in which you slightly scrape together that which is joined, so that the paper heals according to its natural shape; and all of it is healed, and no longer causes any pain in the oil; then drain with water, and cleanse it gently, so that the paper heals as it should heal naturally; and all of it is cleansed, and do not leave anything sharp or unpleasant in the eye; then place between the paper and the eye a linen tent, and on top of the eye apply moist wool soaked in egg mixture; and after this, use a colander and other spongy things until it is fully healed.
From the edge of the eye
Know that the edge of the eye is in two ways: it is nerveous and resembles a hard piece of wood, and another which isn't nerveous, but is like a white moisture frozen solid. If you touch this with iron and treat it by rubbing with pincers, you can't do it; both these appearances start near the large tear ducts, and grow slowly slowly until they cover all the vision and all the light and movement of the eye.
And the way of cutting is such that the patient places their head in a healthy position, then opens their eyelids; and removes the paper with your hand, then puts the edge of the eye to pincers for small folding, and holds it above; then take a needle, and place one horse hair, or cow hair, or ox hair, and strong thread on it; and double the needle point slightly and pierces through the edge of the eye, and sews thoroughly all the way through the edge, sewing the edge with the thread and holding it above, and burns along every hair of the edge to where the pupil and silk are at the root of hair until just before the tear duct, then cuts off any remaining in the root near the tear duct from all delicate matter, and leaves the natural tear gland or tear duct, so that there is no flow of bodily fluids through the incision as usual; and only once is the edge extended to one inch, and along the thread, just as we have described; then burns off all the delicate matter around this area, forming thus:
And see to it that the cautery does not touch the fatty tissue and damage it, nor should you puncture the skin. And after incision, pour a little oil on the wound, and make a collar of mercurial paste, and leave it until tomorrow; then clean according to what is needed until he becomes well again.
And if the nail is not sensitive and you cannot push in the needle, and if the nails do not enter, this condition of an insensitive nail is treated with medicine many times; it grows as I described in the division section. And if you see it thickened, the eye responds to illness, take the cautery lightly in a sharp point according to this shape:
Cut the nail gently from above. If you see that it does not diminish and presses the reason there, then distill from your mouth into the eye a collar made of mercurial paste and a red collar with oil, and heal the eye until the other day; then resume another operation in the same way, until all is removed.
If there is nothing against your vision, like pus-filled blisters, then you should proceed, and first treat the pus-filled blister until it's cleansed, then restart the procedure as described previously, until it's cleansed.
And if the appearance of the flesh around the eye irritates your vision through significant harm, then suspend its use, and extract a portion but not all at once, ensuring no leakage from tears; afterwards, apply a red collar to the eye made of litharge.
of the flesh that grows around the pupil
Some people may not produce any blood once, and it covers the pupil, is contained on the eyelids and appears outwardly, resembling a bast pillar rose; and in this way, one does what it takes for the patient's health to be restored, then frees those eyes, and thus all that flesh until you find uncinated suitable for this purpose, and maintains with force; then extract the first layer of flesh, proceed by trimming it all down to the razor until reaching the end, and ensure not to injure the eye during this operation; and make the incision near the lacrimal sac as we have said in the section about nail incisions and small forces around it that one removes the eyeball, just like after this chapter demonstrates.
And when the incision has been completed and all of the flesh has been removed, one uses whale oil or distills red saucers from it with corrosive medicines, and places cotton dipped in egg on top of the oil to prevent an abscess. If nothing persists, if there is no fever, and you are concerned about a hot abscess, then leave the oil and treat the hot abscess with calming remedies; then return to your work until everything heals, and thus perform many incisions by this means, making all wounds heal through this method.
However, it is necessary that you treat each weak oil route naturally; and the accidental path, in iron work; and do not thrust your hand into any of these operations until you see that this member suffers from that operation.
of veins and eyes
When the veins become red and cover over the eye, and tolerate their own organ to view and weaken the eye for several days. Therefore, when you first see this condition in someone's eye, examine it carefully without delay, and know there is no other illness except that sebel (a term specific to medieval medicine used here). Then treat it thus: instruct the patient to place his head in alignment with your healthy sight, then suspend those veins throughout the entire circumference according to their intelligence, and have them align the circles subtly in pairs according to this form:
And let there be two inches by degree on one side according to this shape:
Then continue to align those veins subtly, and allow the blood to flow after some time, until you see the removal of those veins from the eye; and ensure that you do not pierce the eye at the points of the lancet blades, and perform this operation in midday before the sun, and be very meticulous in your work so as not to harm even those veins. And when you have done this, use a collar of green and red distilled water to help eliminate what remains of sebel.
And if you cannot undertake all this at once, prepare a poultice with substances that soothe the pain in the eyes, and leave it on for some days until the pain is relieved and there is assurance of an abscess rupture, then resume according to this method as described previously until recovery; and this is the form of remedies:
of the duct of the eye
The treatment for what is called "arissati" duct: when you treat it with a cautery and with hot water medicine as I have described previously, and if it doesn't heal, then there's something within the place where you cut into the abscess, at the point of death, and extract all the moisture that is there, until the bone becomes exposed.
And when the bone is discovered, and you will see the corruption and the blackness, if you take it with all the tool which this has been made from; and call it "hard head", and be made of iron for one hard head, and be sharpened like a file as it is in the present form:
And place the corrupted part of the bone on your hand, then turn it between your fingers, and press your hand a bit as long as you know that this corruption has stopped; and do this once, then return the bone to its state of medicinal drying.
When the bones are fused, and the heart begins to form, and the body of the bone is fused, and remains like this for 40 days, and does not regenerate and is not an abscess, and no bad events come about, you know it is healed; if not, there is only another way which involves bringing the fistula back to its original place according to this shape: then uncover the bone again with iron and with medicinal waters, and when uncovered take one iron tool in this shape, and make the head of the iron into three angles, and let the shaft become thin like this.
Then place the metal over the bone in front of the earlobe, and move your hand away from the eye socket. One finger-widths distance from it, then turn completely around until you pierce the bone and feel through this that air enters if he holds his hand on his nose; and then restore the limb with dry medicines as I taught you before. When the child is born and hardens the body parts, then bring material to the nose; if something lighter reaches the patient.
From the exit of the eye
When the eyes are open completely in every direction, and there is no disturbance within the nose or narrowing of the airway, it is necessary that you bind the patient's head; then heal them, then apply suction cups or a cup without iron to suck without injuring, then place over the eye. A paste made from juniper, aloe, incense and sarcocolle, and then compress the eye, and plaster it with strips and cloths; and how you should use the cloths is that you take soft cloths and double each one in four, and then place them one on top of another according to the amount needed by the eyes; then compress from above with a tough strip made durable, and start using suction cups again without injuring; then remove the suction cups and leave the eye compressed day and night, and if the bandages loosen, it is necessary that you compress as much as possible; then remove the bandage after day and night, and if you see the eye healing, it's good; if not; then continue with plastering and cloths and the bandage and suction cups until they are healed.
At the rupture of the ovarian membrane
When tears occur in the scleral membrane, then opens and brings out pieces of paper like a resin grain, and it is observable; therefore if you see this cataract, the eyes are such that you stick an needle at the root of the part below until halfway up, then stick another needle with double thread at the part under the lid; and make it pierce, and leave the first needle according to its position; then cover with the double thread and tie a portion of the membrane inward, and tie it well, then remove the needle and place on the eye wet wool in plenty of egg mixture; and let it be until the thread dries along with the membrane, then treat the eye with soothing substances until the wound is healed; and each part of the circular dressing with the membrane is restrained until she is healed.
And when the eyes have a great appearance, then puncture them through the delicate lid that comes under the eye, and dry the moistened albumen and sink the eyes down, and enter them right away; then remove them until they are healed.
Of the oil of the eye
This disease called 'alcunnati' is only caused by oil that gathers in the eye, resembling descending water, and it's not real water; and the way its appearance happens is you make the patient sit upright and straight at their bed. Then take hold of their head with both hands, then move them as much as you see the oil come up above your eyes; then place it, don't let it drop down, and clear away the light, and observe the patient's condition like before; and if it doesn't drop off by itself, know that it is water, and if the exit of the oil does not happen as expected, follow our instructions. Then place the patient between your hands, then take the fine spatula and perform along the corneal surface with continuous movement across the conjunctiva, the cornea and the rim, until the oil exits; and when it has exited, apply hot water mixed with honey in the eye, or boiled water and fenugreek, followed by further treatment until it heals.
Of the waters of the eye
We have the semblance of waters in division and what needs to be pierced; if according to health it is done. It is necessary for you to place the patient between your crossed hands, away from sunlight, and bind the healthy eye tightly with force; then put the paper of the eye on your left hand if the eyes are on the left side or your right hand if they're on the right side; then take the tool called "almagda" in your right hand, if the eyes are on the left side, or in your left hand, if they're on the right side; then put the tip of the tool under the crown by half the thickness of a hair along the curvature of the eye to its lower eyelid area, then push the tool called "almagda" vigorously and rotate your hand until it pierces through the corner of the eye, and feels that almagda reaches into the hollow; and it is necessary for the length of almagda's path to be at the same measure as the space from the pupil up till the end of darkness; this is the crown of the eye; if you see the bone in the paper through the clarity of the corneal surface, then place the tool until its tip or where the water is, then express out through another channel. If the water descends now, you will see the patient looking at it and the tool in their eye.
After a short rest, and if the water rises through the second channel, use force with the tool, and when it is inserted and does not rise again, gently remove almagda while rotating your hand back and forth; then add a little of the gem water to the eye, and take out the eye. Then place under the eye an ointment or wet wool in oil roset and plenty of egg white, bind with the healthy eye. Now, those like us, let's apply with plenty of eggs.
And if almagda cannot enter the eye because of its hardness, as there are some people whose eyes are too hard, it is necessary for you to take the tool called "alberit," which has this form:
And then puncture only the conjunctive, do not go too far in, but make it a .i. fine hole, then add some borage oil, as we have said; and after completing the work prepare another sleeping aid for the patient, on which he sleeps on his back for .j. hours; and be free of all movements, eat light meats, and do not move his head towards either side, tie him according to his disposition until the third day; then release in that dark room and test his sight, let him see some things, and afterwards reapply the bandage until the seventh day; it is not proper for you to do this during or after the current treatment period, but you should perform this step because the inflammation rises very quickly.
The discharges are removed, you should release the eye before the seventh day, and use a treatment to relieve the discharge. And when it is relieved, then release the eye and put one eyelid on for seven days to cover his face, and remain in that dark room. And then leave the house gradually, and adapt to his circumstances; know that no disciples should intervene in such cases.
One came to us who was from Syria and he told us that there they were using some borage oil for healing, where they extract the water but nevertheless I have never seen anyone like this in our land nor have I read about it in old books; perhaps it is a new thing.
And these are the signs of the shapes of the amada, for those who do not know them can see them; and they are properly described as being arid.
And indeed the head of such from this same subtlety, and the rear end in three angular pains.
from the flesh around the nose
None of these are born or are nears, they consist of various joined flesh parts; and among them some seem like scorpions with beaks of birds. And if there is such a case where the flesh is filled with dark color, and if it has good-colored flesh. Therefore, for this kind of flesh which is good-colored and not filled, you should have the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; work on their nostrils, pour vinegar onto those parts of flesh, and push them out; then hold what you can bear at the delicate sharp edge on one side until you know that that piece of flesh is entirely bone.
And if there is no thing that we cannot cope with, if the opening is done with all one instrument delicately and lightly, ensuring nothing remains; and if it does not ascend or have pus at its bottom, then you should cleanse it accordingly. And if there are abscesses, cut them out straight away; and for bad abscesses, act quickly and use a cautery until the pus is drained out completely and all the sinews have been treated. Then drain or bleed freely or with water or wine afterwards.
And if the nose operation is necessary, and moisture reaches up to the palate, know that it has infected; and if moisture does not pierce as it should, know that there's new flesh inside the bone above, which doesn't come down to cut: thus you must insert one piece of linen thread slightly thick into his mouth and tie it with your hand, making sure each knot is spaced about an inch or less. And put the patient's nose to this linen rope through their nostril, pulling gently until it comes out through the nostril within the mouth; and do this many times for children in schools, and it's a simple task for those who wish to perform it; then hold the head that comes out of the nostril with one hand, and the other head that comes out of the mouth with the other hand, knowing them one after another as you guide them with our hands. Do this until you know that the knot has rotten all the flesh, then remove the thread, clean the blood, oil the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back into the nose exactly as before; do this for three days or more, until the medicine rots whatever is left of the flesh; and after that place a cumin stick for several days until it heals, and if there's need for dried medicines, use them; and this is the form of instrument to purify the head, in which one distills oils and medicines with the nose:
And use it made of silver or tin, resembling an open lamp, like a rod, and guide it in the same way; and if you see fit, make it into a closed rod, and fill the instrument to purify the head; and keep one hand on the head when heating the oil or any other liquid.
of the flesh around the nose
Many times a disease is born around the nose at the root of the nose, which is called "telul", it grows and becomes large until you can see it; and because this must be handled in the beginning, and the bone should be prepared completely, then place it under your control with the cautery or the burning medicine; and if you delay preparing it until it's large, beware if it feels hard, if it changes color, if there is a poor sense: don't touch it with iron for it is an infected abscess, because when you remove it once, it brings great harm to the patient; and if the abscess was due to heat exposure, not from changing color, and you see that all can be removed, then empty the patient and perform surgery with fear, and treat the area with desiccating and restricting substances.
When the nose is cut and stitched
Know that when the joints of this chapter come into solution, it benefits little, in some people. So you must ensure this does not happen to any, if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then adjust the two lips towards one stitch, afterwards treat until they are healed; and should the lips be completely dried from one side and the other, it is necessary that you sear all parts of their skin until they heal, then join the two lips together by one stitch, and press them, dusting with dragon's blood powder and incense. And place the powders on a piece of plaster or another bonding plaster, let this sit until it discharges itself, then treat with ointment until they are healed.
The method of sewing is such that you join the paste: or by needles, as we have said in the stitch for the abdomen; or with thread, as I have informed you.
from abscesses of the lips
In the hands of someone within the abscess, there are stones like grains sometimes, smaller and larger; therefore it must be that you remove the lips, cut into each pit, take them with forceps and extract in each part; then after the vitriol incision, apply pressure to the wound until bleeding stops; and then clean the wound from dry things until it is clean.
from the flesh of the gums
Many times, a hard flesh forms on the gums, which the old called "albulus"; it must be held with forceps and cut to its root, allowing for bleeding or blood flow. Then place under the heat of vitriol broiet powder, or other powders that restrict and dry out; and if this flesh returns after cutting, and does so many times, then cut it a second time and cauterize it: if it doesn't return after being cauterized; these are the forms used for cutting.
Of cauteries with fire command the sick person to let the hairs grow long and evenly; if they pierce at their root, hold the eyes firmly so they don't move until they fully grow.
Many times teeth assemblies are gathered at the main part of the teeth, between the mouth and gums; you'll find ugly and harsh layers here. And many times blackened and citrine teeth along with worms exist until the infection reaches the gum line, and the teeth become stinky too. Therefore, it's necessary to place the sick person under your hands, have their head on a holy surface, and hold out any teeth or layers that are visible till nothing remains; then you should take care of blackness and greenness, yellowing, and other colorations until they disappear. And if one removes what is at first sight obvious, it's good; otherwise, start again after the second day and the third, until you have everything removed. And remember that teeth require different types of instruments to be extracted depending on how the work is done, as the tool used for extraction differs from those placed between teeth; these forms along with others should be ready with you.
It's necessary that when you treat the tooth for its pain, you delay the extraction as much as possible because one should not do this in haste. As it is a very delicate matter, there should be no reason to rush during the process. Therefore when the patient is forced to extract teeth, you must be certain about which tooth is causing trouble. Often during pain, the patient fears it might be a holy tooth, and so they want to remove a good tooth; yet until the bad tooth is removed, some of the pain remains, as we have already desired for these soldiers; and when you are well certain about which tooth is causing trouble, then you should scorch around that tooth up to one spatium very strongly in order to protect the gum from all sides. Then move your hands or with your fine forceps at first try and try, until it is properly extracted, then firmly secure those forceps; and have the shoulder of the patient under holy water between your knees, and hold it well so that it does not move.
After extracting the tooth straight without breaking it, and if it doesn't jump out, take none of these instruments and push it in from every part lightly, then move it as you did first. And if the tooth is pierced and fractured, then it's necessary to fill it with cloths where they were lost; and if you extract it slightly with your fine forceps, so that it doesn't break while being extracted; and it must be very carefully opened around the gum in order to remove the tooth.
And you must carefully ensure that you do not break it and leave part of the tooth behind, which will cause greater pain due to the malice of the root than at first. And be careful not to act like ignorant soldiers who, through their haste and rashness, break everything once and do not follow our advice; but instead they bring about the disease by cutting into the roots that remain or breaking the tooth itself, as we have often advised. When the tooth has been removed, wash off your hand with wine or vinegar and water; and if bleeding occurs (which often happens), then fill your hand with vitriol paste; and if this does not work, cauterize it.
The forms of the instruments you first use should have long points and thick handles, ensuring they don't double when you pull the tooth; these are their forms:
And may have large limbs that do not bend while being used, and be made of strong iron well-crafted, with teeth for gripping.
from the roots of the teeth When the root remains during extraction, it is necessary to place wet cotton in the mouth with butter for one or two days until the gums are softened. Then remove the forceps which are called 'algefri', making the shoulder appear as a surgeon's beak; and they should be made inside like a file, this is their form:
And if the roots do not want to come out completely with these pliers, it is necessary that you uncover the entire flesh up to the root, and place the instrument known as "althali," which means palmache, as it is formed thus:
And let it be hollow and thick so that it does not break at all, and if the root jumps out through this, that's good; if not, use all the tools you have, as their shapes follow after these descriptions:
And if help is taken from this tool which has two points, as it is formed thus:
and other tools that are in front according to the size of teeth, and this tool which seems like large pliers, as it is formed thus:
And let there be this instrument so it may not break, and know that few of the instruments of dentistry are; also other instruments which are not counted among them. And as such, skilled masters find their own instrument by themselves, according to what their works and diseases reveal to them, for there are some illnesses for which old teachers did not teach any instrument due to the variety within them and if any part breaks from the tooth or of another bone, or it rots, they look for the instruments that suit them, which I have mentioned, and help through gestures, as is this form: And let them be large and well designed to hold the bone, so that it doesn't escape, but can be held and removed; and then restore him with medicines suitable for this situation. If there is decay in the bone, and if it's small, when using this instrument take care of all these aspects:
When the teeth do not appear naturally and their form is ugly, especially in young girls where teeth are born after the first ones and cannot be pulled or filed: in such cases you must know that it's due to the teeth being born in a crooked position. Therefore, extraction is necessary; and if they are alongside another tooth, take this tool described here with this shape, similar to one small hook each, made of sharp iron:
And the tooth is ground slowly with my hands day by day due to the hardness of its root, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can be filed, then I file it in a single piece like this:
and it's also like the file used for making needles; and I grind the tooth slowly with my hands day by day gently, so that it doesn't move until it chips; then in the end level off everything completely with no sharp edges left, and if its edge is too sharp and hurts the tongue, then you must grind down the roughness until it's even, so as not to hurt the tongue or ruin speech.
when the tooth rots
When the front teeth are dislodged due to blow or impact, and if the patient cannot press on them as they chew without vomiting, indicating a problem; you must have cured it with medicines that restrict this, but it doesn't work. In such cases, it is necessary to restrain them using gold thread; for silver threads turn green and decay over time, whereas gold does not change in color or degrade ever. The size of the thread should be moderate – neither too thick nor too thin – according to the space between the teeth. If you see that the teeth have aligned correctly again after insertion, take a thread and a needle twice as wide as one healthy tooth slot in between two healthy teeth slots. When there are more than one dislodged tooth, place it so that its tip reaches to the healthy tooth on the other side; then continue covering up until you reach where you had covered before. Gently pull your hand while applying pressure, ensuring no movement of the dislodged teeth. Securely tie it at the root of the tooth so they cannot escape. Then cut the threads with tweezers and join them together again, placing them between the healthy teeth slots, making sure not to irritate the tongue; then leave it there as tight as possible without causing discomfort or pain. If they slip away or the threads break, secure them with another thread; if it stays in place and serves its purpose throughout its usage period, this is the proper alignment of your teeth and their correct joining of two healthy tooth slots and two dislodged tooth slots as you can observe:
And when the teeth are set back in their place, they should be reinserted gradually, as we have mentioned; do not interfere with anything that is not cautious and can tolerate it, and never shape them like an osseous tooth of a calf. Place them in the spot where the defect exists, and secure them as we have said, and let them stay and serve for as long as they can.
covering the wound of the tongue
No time is spent discussing ailments that come from the tongue or nature itself, which are born this way; or by accident due to wound healing. And the procedures involve working on the mouth with disease, having your head in a healthy position, and lifting the tongue; then cut the nervous ligament from the large area, until the tongue is removed from its place, and if there is hardness or swelling, particularly due to sudden wound healing, you should pull the hook and cut that ligament; and ensure that the incision isn't made too deep as it could reach the artery; and when finished, lift the head from a pinkish or reddish water, then apply ice underneath the tongue; and each night cleanse your tongue to prevent sogginess. And if bleeding occurs again, place sulfur powder inside the wound; and if there is no relief, cauterize with the slow burning cautery, which works well for this situation; then proceed with other treatments until healed
And if you notice anything that appears to be bloodied, black or hard, and your patient doesn't feel it, don't touch it as it could be gangrene; and should it start to turn into pus, and there is moisture, then use a hook to drain it and make a small incision from both sides, removing it from top and bottom; and if the pus remains in your body operation, place sulfur powder until it's healed, then continue with your operations as long as you have strength. Then lift the head with cool water and salt, and proceed with other treatments until complete healing occurs.
From throat abscesses
No time comes within the throat cavities which are called 'godath', and they are properly known as the two almond-shaped ones. And when you treat them, as we have discussed in division, and if they're not sound, always take care: If these are pus-filled small bumps of little sense and a reddish color, do not touch them with iron at all. And if they're red and their root is large, don't touch them with iron either; it's because of the bleeding tendency; but leave them until they are injured, then you will remove them, or they would split by themselves. And if they're of pale color and have a subtle root, get your tool ready to cover them, but first make sure these pus-filled areas are calm and settled. Then place the patient under the sun's rays, keep their limbs in their natural state, and let the body mouth open and the servant squeeze the tongue all around with his hands on the whole instrument; it's this form; and be made of silver or finely casted metal like knives:
Can't you press the tongue on all this instrument? And you see pus. Take the incision and put it in an almond, then pull it up more than you can; and don't remove any thing with, then shape it with your hands as it should be, which resembles some strength; and always both parts of head are corbed, and one part another, and are very sharp, and made of iron or fine tin:
And if you don't have this instrument at hand, then shape it with pliers, which should resemble the form described above:
And be cutting on one side and the other part of the name; and when you have done with one of the almonds, do the other in the same manner, and after making the cut gargle the patient with hot and cold water, or with water that is cool and mild. If bleeding occurs during this, then gargle the patient with hot water, or with cooked pieces of pomegranates, or leaves of myrtle, and similar things, until the wound is healed; then finish the treatment when it becomes healthy again. And do not let anything else grow in the throat other than the two almonds if you proceed thusly regarding them.
And I treated a woman with an abscess that was inside her throat, one small in size; and had almost completely sealed off all the throat, so much so that the woman could not breathe through the obstructed passage or eat or drink anything, dying after about one day or two. The abscess was so high that it had forced the insertion of two pins through both nostrils. I acted promptly then, inserting a small incision in one side and pulling out a large portion of mucus; afterwards, filled another nostril with water. Then opened her mouth and pressed her tongue; afterwards inserted a pin in these abscesses, removed some of it, only letting out a little blood; thus opened the passage to the throat of the woman, started now drinking cold water then wine, did not cease cutting that abscess over an extended period of time; and the abscess would reappear immediately, filling up with liquid as I had emptied before until it became very large; then treated her and cauterized inside the throat: thus remained without growing again; and was left in those parts, only let God do anything with her after me.
from the eye
When the head of the shoulder is descending towards the elbow and it swells and grows long, this situation is called "perpendicular". And if it is swollen and round in size, then it is referred to as an "elbow". When it has been treated following our instructions from the previous division but shows no improvement, and you notice that the wound or abscess area calms down due to small movements - similar to what we have experienced - then you should first reset any dislocation.
And place our head with a hair or where we apply the medicine, like the movements of a spoon, and place the instrument with all of the medicine on the elbow; let the patient remain still on his side so that saliva and fluid from his mouth can be drawn by the medicine internally, without it descending into the throat or causing distress. Then hold your hand on top of the medicine and press it onto the elbow for about half an hour until you see it absorbed and the medication's effects are calmed; if necessary, take cotton and wrap it around any tool, soak it in the medicine, stick the tool with all the cotton into a wick from above, until the cotton dries on the elbow. Repeat this often until the cautery of the medicine is perfect, then let it dry, and clean after four or five days. If you need to restart the medicine cautery procedure, do so, and after that, use a cotton plug soaked in butter inside the elbow area, cleanse everything around the medicine; rinse with cold water and gargle until fully healed.
This treatment is safer than incision, nor than the cautery; if it's treated with fumigation according to this method, take calamus and myrrh and oregano and rue and chamomile and borage and similar herbs, and assemble all of them or any of these in one pot, and put it there, and bring it to a boil; and the pot must be well sealed with strong clay, and in the middle of the pot place one tool stick according to this manner: And may be made of silver or iron, and make sure that one of the shoulder bones is in the mouth near the sore until the vapor rises up to the lungs through the nose, until the lung becomes necrotic; after this, repeat often, until the lung dries out, and remember not to do this at the beginning of the coming of pus blood, as many things occur; and don't do this tool when pus blood is receding. And if that tool isn't present, take a stick and put a bit of egg shell inside your nose, so that the mouth near the sore doesn't get too hot; for the egg shell doesn't let the vapor weigh down the mouth, and it's a good treatment together with health.
Many times there's an opening in the bone or spine of a fish, with nothing else happening; so it would be suitable for you to extract what you can see and press your tongue at noonday on all the instrument, so that you can see movement happen; and that which doesn't open up inside the throat, then you should make the patient vomit as soon as possible so that the meat is cooked in the stomach; by chance if it escapes through vomiting; or if the fish has swallowed a piece of sponge, or a bit of navel, or a root of lettuce, or one piece of dry bread; and tie a thread to the sponge, then swallow it again; and when she comes back up to the top, if it smells good, and then proceed with extraction; and if it doesn't come out from what we have said, then take one tool of thong according to this shape:
And let the instruments be directed towards the throat so that they can enter more lightly into the mouth, and have the head elevated up high; and guard not to touch the epiglottis, that nothing goes beyond it, nor push any bone inside; and move in such a way that the patient pushes the instrument, because if there is movement or if something becomes slippery; if she pushes the swallow, or pulls forcefully with all the instrument evenly, until she has the strength.
of the substance of the throat
No treatment has been made of the substance of the throat as I have explained in the division through medicine therapy. If this does not bring improvement, then look into the throat towards the patient's condition when you press their tongue with the instrument that I told you about. And if you see the substance, treat it with one small uncinate or fine tweezers suitable for this task. And if this doesn't help, take a wet hair and insert it into the affected area of the throat until it becomes hot after half an hour, then do this frequently. Also dye the patient's condition with water all day. Take a full glass of cold water and work their mouth, pour it in without making them swallow, and move it often with your hand; and as soon as the substance feels the water, they will vomit.
And if she does not urinate as we have said, subfumigate the patient with aloe, using the instrument mentioned in the treatment of the eyelid; do this multiple times because it will relieve without cutting. And the method for fumigation is to take one pot containing charcoal, and place its cover pierced in the middle, and at the edge of that pot is where you should put the head of the instrument. Then release your fumigation, have the patient hold the tip of the stick near their mouth, and seal the mouth so that no smoke escapes but goes up to the nostrils; and now the discharge will occur, if she does not urinate, repeat this fumigation multiple times; and make sure the patient is thirsty, eat salty foods among others, do not drink water at all; then it's necessary for her to relieve herself under this procedure.
And the shape of the instrument to treat the discharge is like having hinged curved scissors for it to enter into the throat; and it has the appearance of a surgeon's hook, and it also has a roughness like that of a file, so whatever she takes, she cannot leave; and here is its form:
The chapter on abscesses
No mention of abscess formation are there according to the memory coming after this from one and another in this book, they differ in perforation and surgery; it is done in two ways where one mirrors its own appearance and concerns moisture. And the second way occurs through the veins within the body. for the abscesses at the head are different than those at the foundation, and the abscesses from lean flesh are different than those that come at joints, each has their judgement in practice.
And when it comes to abscesses, one should not pierce them until the swelling subsides according to its maturation; and for those that need piercing once they have formed, and do not subside according to their maturation, such as abscesses at joints. For when abscesses form from joints, if left intact until they are rotten internally, by chance, the ligament and nerve of the joint will rot due to this reason causing it to result in contraction within that limb. Or if the abscess is inside the main limb itself, if you delay perforation until it is rotten, it will harm the main limb; or if it's inside the foundation, piercing it should be done immediately after its rotting; and one should not pierce a forming abscess without complete maturation digestion, except for that which is in the foundation, where it might rot completely from the inside, remain buried within, and cause a fistula; and cannot heal fully over an extensive period.
It is necessary for you to know the time of abscess perforation that corresponds with maturation, and this is when the pain subsides, and the departure of fever, and reduction of pain and redness, and with the movement and hardening of the head of the abscess, and other signs; it is recommended that you have the perforation placed in the location below the abscess or at the point where it opens up, and also in line with the body length. The piercing should be made longitudinally along the body, whether the abscess is near hands or feet, joints and nerves, arteries, or any other place without a fold.
In those that bend, according to the member in question. And when abscesses are within the fatty tissue, it should be known that you must let the punctures remain until digestion is fully accomplished, as we have said before. For if you pierce them prematurely, they will become elongated inside the body, filled with pus; and may harden the skin and the underlying flesh. And when there are no abscesses pierced through the width of the body, according to what each member requires. It is necessary that you handle small abscesses, small cuts; and in large abscesses, large cuts, and many fissures according to the size of the abscess; and if such abscesses require cauterizing with a rod, and covering them; once it has reached about the size of one hand's width, and is flattened out, then it must be handled as one would handle boils: And for those that are divided into three angles, and for those that require treatment like the leaf of myrtle, like abscesses from angles; and for those that undergo a round cut, and other cuts and similar treatments.
Those without a head, such as superficial abscesses, it should be that you pierce them completely. And when the abscess is large, and has grown with plenty of pus, you should pierce; but do not extract all of the pus in one go, instead take out only part of it. Then let the abscess cool until another day, then leave no treatment for now; perform this repeatedly from small to large sizes, till the pus is completely out. Similarly, if the patient has weak constitution, or women bearing children, or small infants, or elderly and decrepit individuals. For their bodies may violently react with the release of pus, causing the abscess to die without you noticing. Thus, proceed with this treatment carefully. When you have pierced your abscess, should there be a wound, observe if it's from the abscess; and see whether the wound is small; if it's a clear cut, use linen or old cotton for dressing; and if it's a large abscess and there are many cushions, then each cushion needs to be supported so they touch one another. And should you have removed a part of the skin in your abscess, having stitched inside, then fill with old cotton or linenshreds without moisture, and bind till three days; then cleanse, and apply ointment until it heals.
And if bleeding occurs in your body part, cool water and ease should be applied along with a moist handkerchief, and place it on the wound repeatedly. And if the bleeding persists, then you should take control and treat properly, using the powders I have mentioned in this book, and if it is about ivor (ivory) or your limbs are very nervous, then apply wet cloths and linen soaked in wine and oil to the affected area. And if it is skin, and the wound is fatty, then applying moistened cloths with water, oil, or cold wine and oil until the third day works well, as we have said; and then release the abscess and clean it, treating properly till it heals.
And this one should be known universally in treatments of abscesses: now I have told you how one must proceed before the treatments of abscesses, and here is the chapter.
of the stomach
When small abscesses occur in the head, they are handled similarly to how we deal with them on fabrics, like the gallbladder of a sheep. There are many similarities here. Some have fat and contain moisture just like chicken; others have a hard and stony texture under the scalpel and there's no doubt that it is an artery opposing this treatment. And in cutting, what follows is the size of your instrument, called "entromissoire", which appears as follows: something it contains. If it contains moisture, you make the incision long enough from above. And when the moisture has drained, you peel off the skin that contains that moisture without leaving anything behind; for it will return immediately if nothing is left undone. Then immerse cotton in Egyptian ointment if available; if not, use water and vinegar, apply to the wound, let sit until tomorrow; and this process goes on throughout the night. And then restart the cotton in the same manner as before, the second day, and the third, until you know clearly that it does not remain overnight; then treat the wound with ointment until it heals properly. And if the abscess contains fat for a good amount of time, cut according to this shape longitudinally; drain all its secretions, peel off from all sides, apply your entire treatment directly onto the cloth where it is located; and if the artery reacts against you, do as I told you after that. Similarly, handle pierce abscesses when they are stony, cut with the scalpel and treat accordingly as I instructed.
And when dealing with incisions on the abscesses or moist areas, they are lighter because there is less blood. And if there's no moisture in any of these abscesses or at their base, and two such abscesses that I observed at the head of an old woman; and found the abscess just like a soft stone, rough and white, and could not be broken; and if one had pierced none of them, one would also have treated them as well as with a stone. In other cases coming out or at their bases, it was that those which come from the heads of children and roots of ears, the opening should always be as long as possible depending on its location, for the bowels to discharge; and treat them as they should be treated.
regarding the pock marks
Many times abscesses occur at the neck and under the armpits, as well as in the groin, and never elsewhere or on the chest. And they are round, being bound together. Each scrophula is properly within its own compartment, like a nut and an abscess at the head, as we have said; and there are many appearances of these scrophulas. Some contain moisture, and others are malign ones that do not want to obey treatment. In such cases where you see good disposition in the surgeon's hand, and it resembles the color of blood, and silent from all sides and is neither close to the throat nor near an artery or a passage, and is neither deep; then it should be that you capture it from above, and scrape each part, and if necessary make the two edges of the scrophula against the collarbone, as we have said about abscesses at the head. And treat it little by little, and be sure not to cut the nerve or vein, and do not let the moisture pool nor trench too far, so that you do not cut what you should not.
And if you cut the vein or artery, and it doesn't allow you to open, place vitriol paste or any powders that clot blood in the wound, and restrain the wound; leave it until the abscess is relieved, and the wound has softened, then begins to heal. And when the blood has clotted, return to your work until you finish; then determine according to your skill whether there are no small scabs remaining, if they remove and clean them away. And if there's a large opening in the root of the ulcer, it is not suitable for cutting into that scab at its root but tie it with a thick double thread, leave it to fall off on its own without harm; then cover the wound with old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, then start treatment.
And if you cut the entire ulcer, it is necessary that you bring together the two edges of the wound and sew them now, then there should be no excess left due to the size of the ulcer. It is necessary that you attend to cutting into its root, drain out fluid, and sew as we have said earlier. Those ulcers caused by excess, puncture where it appears open; do so in the same way as described before, hanging down, then apply bandages with ointment and similar things until they decay; and when the wound is well cleaned, treat it with ointment until it is healed, until it becomes healthy.
"De squinance" translates to "on squinting" or "concerning squint". This term could be referring to medical treatments or observations related to eye disorders where one eye may be turned inward (intorsion) or outward (extorsion). The specifics would depend on the broader context of the text that this phrase is found in.
The old ones told and spoke of the surgery to cut the throat; but I never saw anyone perform this in our land, it's written down from their words.
For those who have strabismus, it is necessary that the incision of the throat known as 'the epiglottis' be made; and one should not attempt this by oneself, because all the veins and the lung are connected to those who have an abscess either in their mouth or in the throat or between two cheeks. When the disease is within the channel of the lung, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis in order to prevent the loss that comes from strangulation.
Therefore, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, it must be cut through three or four small incisions across, between the two circles, so that by the size of the incision there is no damage to the cartilage.
And these places can be suitable for the division of the epiglottis where there is no flesh, and the vessels are long outwards.
And if the surgeons are fearful, it is necessary that they extend the skin of the throat to the whole inch, then cut through the kneck until they reach the neck; and avoid blood vessels, if you see anything, and then sew up the incision as we have said;
And it is demonstrated by the section of the windpipe which jumps out through the broken part of the neck, and because of the loss of voice;
And leave the wound open for a while.
And when the time has passed in which one doubts strangulation, gather the two edges of the wound neatly, and all along the skin up to the cartilage; then administer medicines that create flesh until it is clean.
Albacus suggests that one should not perform this until the throat is completely blocked, and the patient is judged dead, and the deficiency has been made. So cut off the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe properly, and they breathe through the wound instead, and in this way, you keep them from dying.
And because of this, the old man instructed to keep the wound open until the danger from the illness passes, and that danger has passed in three or four days. And then they instructed to stitch up the wound and treat it until it had healed.
and I will tell you what I saw. I saw a maiden take one knife, and stab it in her throat, and cut some of the channels near the heart;
and I was called to treat her, and found her already dead.
I discovered the wound, and found the blood that was issuing from it, and it was well that she did not have a cut vein or artery but rather the wind flowed through the wound.
I acted quickly, and thus cleaned the wound, and treated it until it was healed;
and for the young lady there wasn't even the loss of her voice, and she returned afterwards to her usual condition;
I swear that in the surgery of the epiglottis there was no need for it.
from the large throat
Thick abscesses are called "throat hernia", and they are large abscesses in the color of a raisin, and are very common among women;
and follows in two ways: naturally, and accidents; or natural has no cause.
And the accidents follow in two ways, of which one is like being full within us, and the other way is like an abscess that comes from us through the artery; And there is fear, and it does not require making incisions elsewhere than in the one that is small, and the proof and search are done at every insertion: if you find it just like a small nut, and cannot be in any vein, then cut it, as we cut nails, and apply the treatment to every part of its casing, if there is even a little bit; and thoroughly search for it, and treat it as appropriate until it is completely healed.
from nails
Many ways are there for us to do, so I will tell all the similarities.
And it is fitting that I mention all the differences that exist between us and dislocation.
I state that dislocation is characterized by fever and heat persisting until the emissions have passed, and then completed decomposition; therefore, the fever and heat should subside.
With dislocation, there is no heat, fever or pain, and contains one gallbladder, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the body, and begins also like a boil, and becomes large;
And they are based on two appearances, or greasiness, or moisture, and little change in color as I have described in the division.
It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of a new injury, that you first test and inquire about all the instruments which are called 'intermediary', according to whether their shape appears or after chapter which follows.
And the way of inquiring about abscesses is that you pinch or press the wettest part that you find inside the abscess, and turn your thumbs little by little, until you know that the instruments have reached the core, then do so according to the size of the abscess;
Then extract the intermediary instrument, and be careful not to rupture it.
If moisture comes to the cut, whatever its color may be, if he makes it as I have said about other abscesses;
And if after the incision no moisture comes out, knowing that it is fatty, if you make it as such about other abscesses; then cut it diagonally, and take hold of it with pincers, and lightly scrape each side of it. Carefully remove the garment where it lies under it, so that you can extract it in good health with the aid.
And if you cannot extract it in one piece, then remove it bit by bit so that nothing remains.
For if there is nothing left, he returns to it repeatedly;
And if it stays a bit longer, and the hair doesn't bother you, apply some corrosive powder to the wound and hold the wound in place. Then put on things that soothe an abscess, heat up, and treat it with other remedies until it is clean.
And if the wound is large, hold the two edges of the wound together, and treat those who are having difficulty breathing due to it.
And if the vein is too large or otherwise opposed and you hasten it, hold the site of the cut with vinegar powder, and let it rest for two days or three days, as long as the wound heals, then resume copper treatment that has been in use for a new wound.
Here are the forms of the surgical instruments used for intervention, and they come in three ways: large, medium, and small; and there are four squares which are called "albaret", and one called "breb", and there are of three sizes: large, medium, and small, to encircle the abscesses of fistulas.
And they are also like the needles from which one removes the thorns, and they are made of citrine quartz, or iron, or silver, and yellow ones are worth more than black opals for enclosing the bends of fistulas;
And there are three ways: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the opening in the lesion.
The shapes of the hooks are like some resemblance, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and if the hooks have two bends in three ways also.
And if the hooks have two bends, they are also in three ways; and if the hooks have two bends, single-hooked ones, and they are in three ways; and all of these are necessary in their place.
The head of this one that they make to be cutting, and there are some who don't cut force but from one side, of which we burn the skin, because in such cases one doesn't cut the vein or nerve.
And these introducers are put in gloves, so that the patient does not feel it during the opening of the abscesses.
And there are three ways: large, small, and medium, as you see;
And none are used with much force except in the face, such as legs, arms, nipples, and around the mouth, etc.;
And no other small instrument is made, resembling pieces of bone hooks, according to this form, upon which the blood is stopped:
And it should never be placed at the site of a healthy artery or veins, and under no circumstances follow this large form:
None of them causes the breasts to swell in some men until they seem like female breasts;
And they remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wants to cure them should do it according to this form of this line B, until 14 g: then scrape the fat, and apply medicine to fill the wound, then join the two edges of the wound for sewing, and continue the treatment until it heals;
and if the nipple is pushed downwards due to its size so it happens in women, if they cut it into two halves above, by two similar slits; because of which one holds onto the other at the end of each other, so that the longer line contains the smaller according to this form, until this line b up to line g; Then scrape the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and follow what we have instructed about stitches and powders, and whatever is needed for treatment until it has healed.
And if it has not healed, or if the incision is not fully made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to bleeding, it is necessary for you to fill the wound with moist cotton in a corrosive ointment; And leave it until he starts eating again and remove the fat as well, then treat him until he has healed completely.
removal of abscesses from the armpits
Wounds that come from abscesses are manners of hard scrophules where there are nodes, and if there are any containing moisture.
Those that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from the line b. until the line .g.: And when all the pus in the abscess is drained, you should fill the wound with old cotton and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton and apply ointment until it heals.
And if the abscesses resemble scrophules, cut them as we have said in cuts on scrophules, and if the wound is full of pus, apply a cautery as we have said previously.
Of the rupture of the artery
When the artery is ruptured and the skin above it is sewn up, it often results in many abscesses, and similarly happens with the inflamed vein and abscess.
And if one knows this when it's due to an artery, then the abscesses are long in length. And when you feel it with your fingers, if you feel resistance; and when it's due to the vein, there's an obvious swelling.
And it's madness to remove this abscess, and indeed when it is on the breasts and armpits and around the neck and in other parts of their bodies, and they are very large. So one must avoid iron treatment, and the one on the head should also be avoided, and in the case where it is inflamed by a vein, do this above the skin for its length.
So one must avoid iron treatment, and the one on the head should also be avoided, and in the case where it is inflamed by a vein, do this above the skin for its length. Then work around the inch marks, and beautifully separate the artery from the tissues until it is uncovered;
Then cut through on one side with a needle, and make it pierce until the other rib, and hold the artery down with a double thread for two inches as I have instructed you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples;
Then do not let the arm be between the two ends of an introducer until the fluid has come out which was there, and then release the abscess;
Then administer the treatment that is required by need, as long as the thread lets you. Then treat with the accompanying ointment as long as it remains sound.
And if the abscess is due to the size of the vein, it's necessary that you color with your hand whatever part of the abscess you can reach until all the pus. Then take the needle out from the place where you hold it in your hand, and make it pierce, and let there be one double thread, so that you pull it from the other side. then tie the pus, just as I have told you, or with two threads each from one of the ends to either shoulder with a thread;
and if you doubt that the threads will hold, then take another needle with all two threads on every pus, at the incision of the first needle, and tighten the threads in four turns;
then cut the pus as much as the excess comes out, then cut the excess neatly and leave what is tied.
Then place on one drake, a mixture of butter and oil, then administer treatments and applications until the wounds heal.
The removals of nerves
Similarly, when an abscess forms in the artery and vein, abscesses also form on nerves when they are cut, or due to excessive labor, and similar conditions.
And this happens more often with supports and stakes, and everywhere that joints exist, and it is one type of abscess, and its color resembles the color of flesh, and can be in various positions without pain;
And when they are tightened, the patient feels pain, and is not fully satisfied by the body, but only in their mind.
And move well in all directions, neither advancing nor retreating, neither upwards nor downwards, and one who is in joints should not cover with iron: by chance it would result in constriction;
And the one that is on the head or forehead, makes the skin atrophy. If the abscesses are small, then use your tweezers and clip them from their root;
And if it is large, suspend it at the navel, and cut off the skin, then remove the bone, and join the wound together with stitches, and continue treatment until healed.
And for the larger blisters, hang them. No instances occur in abdomens and nowhere else, it is a disease named "fungus" by its appearance, and it has subtle roots, and the head being large; there are some small and others that are very large.
And I saw one person who had two abdomens that looked more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference between them; they were white and had small roots, and they were somewhat split open, and they were eaten up by moisture.
I collected and found them in one [container] as sixteen ounces weighing, and in the other as five ounces did I find it. And from the incision when you observe whether the patient's body is moist, and the color of the wound is white and moist with subtle root;
If you cut the fat tissue widely, and place the fire cautery in your presence. For the surgeon often sees too much blood during cuts, and if it escapes without you noticing, then quickly use the cautery;
And if you see that the wound is pale and fearful from the incision due to the iron, take one piece of well-made hemp thread, and tie it around the artery as we said, and let it be for two days;
And then you hold it, and don't stop exerting pressure on the thread of wool until you reach the bone, and every piece feels no effort; and if the roots are thick, so that you fear to reach the same point for the stomach, but you can manage well remove half,
And then cauterize so that it doesn't reoccur; and then treat the wound, and make sure you don't burn through the flesh which has a faint sensation and is pale in appearance.
For this is an abscess that's been incised, and I will come to the treatment of gangrene after this.
When the boil burns
When the appearance comes from a wound cautery or a cut in syphilitic disease, it is on the belly and in some areas of the beard, as happens in other cuts, or blood flow that stops due to veins or arteries according to what is described, or through windiness;
And if it's due to the cut from syphilis and through the exit of the beard, its color resembles the color of pus, and it is a light matter without pain, opening in various directions. And if it's due to the exit of the intestine, then it is more varied, and when one presses it with their fingers it returns, and then comes back again, and by chance it might swell, and grows much at the entrance of the bath and through strong labor.
And if it is due to moisture, it's a simple matter, and opens well when you press it with your hand, not constraining it; and if it's due to blood, it opens through these signs big and hard abscesses, being placed according to quantity;
And if it's due to windiness, it's soothing at the thumb, and veins so when you look at their appearance they resemble blood from the artery, or vein, or windiness. It is necessary to let the wound heal itself. For there is doubt and fear as I have explained in the chapter on abscesses, for both arteries and veins.
And if its appearance resembles the intestine or liver, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to sweat their urine and have them lie straight out, then cut all around the lump; then instruct them to grow strong between your hands, then go inside the body where you have marked on all the organs, then half of the abscess is above at all the large hook;
Then half of the abscess is spread out on the ligament, and you must grip your forceps with your index finger, and watch the intestine; If you find it caught in the ligament, then release it, and push the intestine out from behind the belly.
And if you find the boil, take hold of it with your thumb, and remove the excess.
And if it opposes you, or a vein, if you go too deeply inward, then return to your work and take two needles, and hold four filaments, and place the two needles in the area you have made an incision, as you make the puncture;
Then apply pressure for four fingers above the needles, and if you see pus, remove the needles, and let the wound heal itself until it scabs over, and discard the dead flesh. When the boil becomes tender and scabbed over, then treat it as appropriate, and cut through the pus pocket in the manner we have described.
When the boil becomes tender and scabbed over, then treat it as appropriate, and cut through the pus pocket in the manner we have described. And drain out the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the wound according to what is needed, and stitch up the wound.
and gangrene
We have discussed the symptoms of gangrene and how to treat it with medicine, as well as how to avoid iron treatment. Now we will say that gangrene starts in the armpit, requiring great caution during treatment. It is said by the old ones that if gangrene appears in a place where you can scrape it off like gangrene found under breasts, on cooking areas, and other such places, it must be completely removed when it begins; but for large and old gangrene, you should not touch it because I have never seen anyone heal from it, nor has anyone healed from it before my time.
And the operations, when they are in place where they can be removed as we have said, is that you purge once the black lump; then let the surgeon know if there has been a manifest swelling, and then prepare the wound. i.e., clean it up so that the operation can take place; then wash off all your onions or gangrene, and all around them without leaving anything behind; and let the bleeding go on freely, and wipe your hand well against any surface, and if the bleeding goes against the cut of the artery or vein when you cauterize, do it until the wound is healed; then proceed with other treatment until it is healed.
Regarding dropsy We have discussed the signs of dropsy in division and how this assembly of water is made, and the symptoms for each sign, and treatment given through medicines, and that done by iron: these are solely clear; it should not involve iron in these two signs: it means, pleurisy and yposarcia, because it's a mortal thing; thus when using medicines on this dropsy-like symptom called 'eclites', and if the medicine treatment doesn't help, you must observe whether the patient is weak or has another disease besides dropsy, such as stomach pain and other similar conditions; in that case, don't touch with iron because there's uncertainty; and if you see the patient's condition very greenish, and they have only dropsy without any other illness, and they're neither too young nor too old, then it would be appropriate to operate: Lift the patient's leg to your hands and have the attendants press the belly at the lowest part of the buttocks, then take the sharp lancet in this shape: And make two cuts of approximately half an inch with a pointed edge, yet do not cut too deeply so that it could reach up to the intestine when inserted, and you should not burn;
Then look to see if dropsy has infiltrated towards the intestines: it is necessary that you cut three inches over near the elbow; and if dropsy has occurred due to illness of the liver, then make your incision on the left side of the belly area three inches. And if this is due to kidneys' issue, then do so on the right side, and it must not be that the patient lies upon the cut because the excesses should not flow towards the weaker part.
Then pierce all the skin with the tool and push it through, then lift your hand so that the pus-filled space between the skin and flesh is exposed as much as when scorched to the size of a fingernail or slightly more; then pierce the flesh until the pus rises halfway up, this marks the water line, then pull out the tool used for this task which looks like: And it resembles a thin silver cane, and is made of iron or brass being lightweight, and in its section there are .i. small points. On one side, .iij. points; and on another side, and .i. point; and the shoulder joint cut so that it's like a feather, this is the shape of the incision described by the author cutting the feather:
At the highest part is the gallbladder, so that when the instrument reaches the water, it starts to empty out from above the instrument; drain then half or a third of it, because if you drain more than necessary at this time, by chance the patient might die due to the release of his spirit's energy from the weapon, or he loses too much blood, or comes close to death;
but drain according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the signs of the virtue within the patient indicate, and his pulse; then pull out the instrument and retain the water, which is now held back by the power that stops the pus on the flesh, as I've explained. Then pierce like this again with the instrument; then try using it another day if you see the patient suffering from this, and drain a small amount of water.
Do this every day, and refrain from eating until it no longer remains but just a little water. And if you doubt about the illness, and leave much water in your body, should the wound or sand swell up, and through sweat or bath and under sunlight, and let yourself get tanned; and drink water as well; and treat with drying medicines until it becomes sane, and cauterize on the stomach and liver after the extraction of the water, just like I said before.
Regarding the operation to correct a curved penis No child is born without any deformities in the penis, or if there are deformities they might be small or not properly positioned. If immediate correction seems necessary and involves piercing up to one spatumile (a unit of measurement) very finely according to this shape: then place a small, thin plug of lead on it, secure it and leave it for three or four days. When the person wishes to urinate, remove the lead plug; allow urine to flow, then put it back in place; and by chance no problem occurs because the urine that comes out does not let the closure stay closed. Those who lack the foreskin, if they have a medicine made of the tip of plonc (a tree), as we've said earlier, and it grows larger. Those who don't have their foreskin in their location are blind, because no one is born with their foreskin at the head of the penis, thus they cannot urinate before lifting their penis upwards; and they cannot impregnate either due to the substance not being able to reach the maris (a part of the female anatomy), which is a severe ailment.
And the method of opening is such that the patient lies on their back with their penis and scrotum at least as large as a feather's width, ensuring there is a foreskin in the middle just as it should be; and guard against any bleeding that occurs frequently during this procedure, if it does happen, stop the blood by the one who stops the bleeding, and treat the wound until it heals completely.
The pimples of the penis Many times, this stone comes in the testicle, and there is an appearance of a bad mark; and among them, some are malignant and others are not. It is necessary that you weigh them on a one-twelfth scale, and remove them thoroughly, then place on cotton with an Egyptian ointment; then cure it with finical ointment until it becomes clean. And if the stone is malignant, it can be colored and discharging; it should be treated with a cautery. Once you have removed it, if the stone is inside the testicle and has part within the skin and part outside, it is necessary that you remove the internal stone first; then cure what remains outwards. For when you cure them together, it may not ensure the integrity of the testicles causing infection, blackness and corruption in the testicles or at the point where you cut; therefore, you must remove all that is black and corrupted. Then apply a plaster made from honey and flour with pomegranate peel and cloves to it, then cure it further until it becomes clean.
And if bleeding occurs, treat with the lunar cautery according to this form: The cauterizers should be positioned together in two places: that is, at blood discharge and corruption; and if the head of the penis has become corrupted and been removed, it is necessary that you insert a dandelion stalk into the penis and let the patient urinate while doing so. And when the hair becomes dry at the tip of the penis where uncircumcised people have their foreskin, or in cases of infection or abscess, then it should be burned with a one-edged instrument until all the ties are severed, and the head of the penis is freed from everywhere;
And if this is the sort of thing to discuss, it's necessary that you sear at one point, half an inch near the head of the penis and on the belly; then cut nicely between two fingers' width apart, and I place inside one thin linen band in cold water, so that it doesn't touch directly.
of circumcision
Circumcision is not an interruption like other injuries; however, when we perform this work of our own will and on infants, it must be that we do the best job, and cause the least harm for their health.
I say that old people did not advise circumcision for their children, as they did not practice it in their law, and we only have this knowledge through our acquired experience.
For I wanted the largest part of the masters and surgeons who performed circumcision within one day, and with force, and at every single operation; if it was correct because there are two layers, and by chance if we cut this above and leave that below.
Or the surgeon receives criticism for it, and the pain is doubled, and at the dissection which occurs at one day, the point of the member isn't secure; and in the dissection of the nail by chance the tool escapes and goes inside the body work, and many times they grow like this when unnecessary dissection was done and I wanted to address that.
From the dissection done forcefully at every part of the thread I found out that it was good to experiment, for the force cuts as well above as below accurately.
For when you press your hand, it cuts equally in one strike; but let the string be well cut under the skin; and follow the manner of the first operation so that you make the child think, if he hears, that you are only tying the string around the penis alone, then after making him relax in all the ways you can. Then place him between your hands straight, and apply force with your hands or beneath your feet so the child doesn't see nor any of the instruments; then move your hand up to the penis and blow or whisper, and pull it up until the head of the penis is inside; then clean well from the accumulated dirt, then tie his left side with a double string, then tie it under two other links; and hold him by both sides with the second link at the pouch and index finger, and slip between the two links, then lift the keur quickly and pull the head of the penis.
Then place him between your hands straight, and apply force with your hands or beneath your feet so the child doesn't see nor any of the instruments; then move your hand up to the penis and blow or whisper, and pull it up until the head of the penis is inside; then clean well from the accumulated dirt, then tie his left side with a double string, then tie it under two other links; and hold him by both sides with the second link at the pouch and index finger, and slip between the two links, then lift the keur quickly and pull the head of the penis. Then allow the blood to flow a little by little, for it's his mucus; and put powder on and over the powder one spoonful of glue made from half an egg cooked with rose water, mixed with good fresh oil, and leave it overnight, and treat him further until he is healed.
The form of forces at creation is thus: let the two shoulders be joined and cutting into each other, and let the shoulders be as large as the elbows evenly.
The error of creation is when the kidneys inside do not align with the incision; hence it is necessary to extend them to your nail, so that they create an abscess; and shape evenly, and if you cannot hold them by your nail, take them with tweezers, then shape.
And if they penetrate for three days, and the one near the penis is swollen, let him stay until the abscess fully develops and then apply a gentle scraping; shape it as you can move, and keep away from the penis area, for this will not harm it.
Then cure the rest of the black wound with powder as we have described in treating powders, and if you cut too far into the kidney and it goes above, it will cause no harm; so cure it accordingly as we have said until it heals.
Regarding the retention of urine
Retention of urine is due to a stone in the bladder, or frozen blood, or a kidney stone, or an unborn baby, or similar things that we have mentioned under the classification.
And if the urine is released and you see the retention due to a stone in the bladder or at the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary for the patient to be on their knees. And their feet should be placed under their back, and their abdomen extended from the part above the back, and restrain the patient until they are comfortable as much as they can. And then the neck of the bladder is forced to express the stone above, thus causing urine release;
And if it does not come out as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then it is necessary to administer extraction with all the instrument which is called "syringe", of which here is its form: and let it be made of fine silver wire, just like a bird's feather; and make its shaft long about half a palm and slightly curved. It should be fine at the tip.
And the method of releasing urine is that you take two strands of thread, and tie one end to a piece of wool or cotton at the head, and insert the head of the thread into the syringe; and cut off any excess wool down to the head of the thread in the syringe, then coat the syringe with oil or butter and yolk from an egg, and have the patient sit up. Then push the bladder and penis upwards using moist oil and olive oil as lubrication.
Then gently insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches the root of the penis. Next, hold the penis up towards the anus. Then place the syringe before and inside the bladder until it touches the bladder, feeling the flow coming down to the empty thing, which is not done according to this order because whatever you do is turned out wrong; then pull the thread all the way through the wool piece by piece, and the urine follows the thread. Then remove the thread carefully, correcting the flow of urine.
And repeat the use of the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and relieve the patient.
Of diseases of the bladder
When burns or blood come into the bladder, or corruption is assembled there, and you see distilled waters and medicines, do so with all the instrument that is called "clepsydra", and it has this form:
It is closed, and it has three parts: two on one side, and one on the other, just as you see; and the liquids through which the medicine comes are such that it numbs well in the member without addition, if it can be treated with moisture, and to be ejected when necessary;
And when you see the medicines flowing into the bladder, place your thumb in the moisture, and pull on the puller which is there; if you can draw out the moisture with the thumb, then pull it out strongly from the puller; if you can let the moisture go inside and come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it;
And this is the form of the subtle bladder stone which one treats with catheterization of the bladder: if it is so:
And it is of silver or of lead, and the head is placed higher; and from here to one inch below your kidneys; then take a lamb's bladder and place it in water heated for catheterization, then tie it between the two kidneys with a thick double thread, and heat one piece of this water on fire; then insert the bladder stone into the urethra, then press your hand against the bladder until all the water has reached the body, so that the patient feels that the hot water has reached the bladder;
And if you don't have the bladder, take a piece of parchment and make a circle, and pierce it roundly all around. Then insert a strong thread into these holes, then join the circle as one would assemble a pair of tongs, and place inside what you see from water and heat and hot water, and tie it in the tool; do this just like you did with the bladder, pressing your hand until the heat reaches the bladder.
from the stone
We have spoken of the methods for stone division and extraction together with remedies; and we mentioned the difference between the kidney stones that float and all the signs, and on which stone one should operate by size; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell you clearly and briefly.
I say that the stone in the bladder occurs more often among children, and this is a sign that the urinary tract infection behaves like an inflammation in its subtlety; one should open the urethra, and massage the patient's penis several times, and then try to insert something; and many of these infections involve the foundation; and it's easier for small children to recover until they are four years old, it causes more distress in older individuals, and it is at a middle age for those between youth and old age; and the treatment is easier for those with large stones than for those with smaller ones.
And when we come to treatment, it is necessary to first cleanse the body through urination, in order to remove all the feces from the intestines. For it can block many times trying to find the stone.
Then take hold of the patient with their arms, and lift them up and move them backwards, so that the stone descends into the bladder's bottom, leaving no part above; then have them sit between your hands arranged, and their hands be placed in front of their thighs, so that the bladder is fully tilted downwards; then press on them gently from there.
If you feel the stone in space, hurry now to cut it from the stone. And if it doesn't release upon touching entirely, moisten your index finger of your left hand with the oil of your right hand's palm, if the patient is young or in the womb; and let your middle finger do so, if the patient is a full-grown adult; then press into its base, feel the stone, and when you sense it on your finger, pull it up to the bladder's neck; then apply pressure from there, and cut where you see that needs cutting.
And instruct the assistant to press the bladder with their hand, and command them to extend the testicles up with their right hand, and hold the skin that is between the testicles on the part where cutting takes place with their left hand; then let him push out the semen, of which this is its shape:
And do this between the ones who are between the ribs and the foundation, not in the middle but at the edge of the left side bone; and be straight on the stone, and place your arms either at the support or foundation, and make sure it's sized to cut through such that it is broad outside and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large.
By chance if the press should be which is or foundation, she must jump with ease in work; and know that there are parts of stone where there are angles and margins: if it's pierced to exit; and if at a part it is below, resembling a nut, and round, where its issue is light.
Therefore, where it has angles and margins, make the size larger; and if she doesn't jump, you should tighten with the tools that are like a file at their tip, to strain the stone so it doesn't escape; or you can thrust below it. For one of these fine curved instruments at its tip; and if you cannot devise this way, then widen by an inch less than twice the thickness, and if she lacks decor, you strain her with vitriol;
And if there are more than one stone, start with the largest at the neck of the bladder. Then proceed upwards and remove it forcefully, followed by smaller ones if there are any remaining. And if they're very large, it may be necessary to make a bigger incision and cause more injury. For two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or urine starts to leak out from where the operation was done instead of being able to heal; but still, try your best with the forceps, whether by pulling or by breaking them off with pliers, as long as you remove it piece by piece.
And when you have completed your work, fill the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, then bind it up, and place one wet bandage on top of it in oil and wine, or in oil and cold water and rose water, to soothe the inflamed area. Then, lay the patient down on their back under the head, and do not untie the bandage until three days.
And when you untie it, be sure to raise the head and torso very well with oil and water, then wash with ointment of laudanum and ointment of basil until it is healed.
And if abscesses or infections come into the wound and corrosion, and blood clotting in the bladder, and so it is kept there causing urine to be retained, as this can occur like a sudden stop while urinating: therefore you must clean out the wound, and remove that blood; for if it stays, it will corrode the bladder and damage it.
Then cleanse the wound with water and salt and oil, and assist in all manners that you can see fit, until it heals; and when you cure any burns or injuries, bind his two thighs together, and apply medicine to him.
And if the stone is small and it is located near the penis and stuck inside, preventing urine from passing; when you treat it as I've described, cut it several times and consider this cutting part of your treatment process. I have already proven this method effectively.
Take one piece of iron according to this shape, and let there be three pegged points in it.
Then take one thread and tie it around the shaft under the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then insert the iron piece into the shaft gently, until it reaches the stone; and turn the iron in your hand at the stone gradually, until you can pierce the stone from the other side; if urine comes soon, then press your hand on what is remaining of the stone that is inside the shaft. If it breaks soon, and there flows urine with it, and makes the patient well;
And if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, tie one thread around the stone and another on top of it, then insert the shaft in between the two threads right at the stone, then apply force, remove the thread, and cleanse the frozen blood present in the wound; and treat it until it heals.
From the stone of women
It occurs that there is stone in women, and if it happens once, then the cure is difficult, and is forbidden for three reasons: one is perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that no one can find a woman who knows how to protect herself from looking, even when she is pure.
And the third way is that perhaps one cannot find a woman who knows this art of surgery; and the fourth way is that the stone in women is more prominent than the stone in men, for which it should be performed a deeper incision, and there is great fear involved.
And if the need rises to this, it is necessary that you seek out a skilled midwife, and find her place there. If you do not find one, instead take an experienced pure-minded person; and present them with knowledge about women's life, or a woman who knows some part of the art, and instruct her to perform what you command concerning the examination of the stone.
And observe very well if the woman is a virgin: then she needs to thrust her penis or foundation and seek the stone; and if she finds it, then make her move over her penis, and instructs that she should thrust her penis or into the sore, and directs her to press with her left hand on the bladder in formation.
And if she finds it, then she must move it gradually from entry to bladder until under it, as she reaches the root of the thigh; then apply pressure to the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the conformation, where it is likely to be, and feels the stone in that part; and do not move her penis over the stone or under it, and cut it down first with a small incision.
Then insert the tool into the incision, if you feel the stone increase the wound until the stone can be released, and know that there are many types of stones: this means small and large, rough and smooth, long and round, and those with openings. Know their characteristics to understand their exit.
And if it doesn't heal, put vitriol on it and hold it for an hour until the wound is healed. Then return to your work while the stone remains intact, and have the tools I've instructed you about in removing stones at hand to assist you with your task;
And if it doesn't heal, and the artery has been cut, put the powder on the wound and bind it with bandages, don't try again, leave the stone untouched and don't remove it, so as not to accidentally kill the patient; then treat the wound.
And when the heat of the blood has calmed and the wounds are healed, return to your work while the stone remains intact.
Of fatty hernia
Of aqueous blisters is nothing else than the assembly of moisture or white pus, which is present in the skin of the kidneys, that contains the egg; and it's called 'pus', and never properly within the fabric of the egg if one thinks there might be another egg. And this is the skin under the kidney containing the white pus we've mentioned; and this does not have a hole.
And the formation of these blisters is due to weakness that affects the kidneys, and spreads this substance.
And it never comes from hitting the kidneys, and this moisture has many colors: or it becomes yellow like jaundice, or without redness, or black, or aqueous white, and this happens more often.
And these are the signs to recognize this assembly, for if it is or white pus as we have said, then there are abscesses present, that is, long so like the shape of an egg, and does not open through the veins, because it has moisture throughout.
And if there is moisture in the fabric itself, then there are abscesses with part of an egg, and because of this one thinks that it's another egg;
And if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white pus, you'll perceive it well; thus when you know the color of the moisture, try to immerse all the area in water, from which its shape was described previously. According to this following text which comes after the introduction, judge based on what is inside.
According to this following text which comes after the introduction, judge based on what is inside. And when we cure it with a iron, the patient should be treated as per our ability and according to their health. Then give them rest on their back, on something slightly elevated, and place a layer of cloth under them;
Then sit on their left side, and instruct the minister to sit on the right, and extend the rod towards one of the two ribs near the belly button;
Then take the spatula and place it among him along its length up to below his fingers, and ensure that the cut is straight through the skin near the belly button until white flesh is exposed, and gently burn it with care according to your ability.
Then pierce the gall-bladder full with water up to one and a half inches wide, and extract all of the water. Then place your fingers inside, and position the gall-bladder above. Do not touch the kidneys but only the gall-bladder. Carefully remove every piece or part that you can from his side, so if it is not done correctly, it will return the water.
And if the egg jumps to your work, when you have completed the work with the gall-bladder, reset it in its place; then join together the two kidneys with stitches on one seam, then treat it as other wounds until it heals.
And if you find the egg corrupted by another illness, it is necessary to fasten the ligaments that are hanging down, in doubt of blood discharge; then remove the testicle up to the hanging part, and extract the egg, then treat it as we have said.
And if the fever is united into two parts together, you should know that these are two branches; if you cut off another part in the same way as you did the first equally, then drain out the blood, and put greased wool into the wound in oil rose.
and place another layer of greased wool in wine and oil, and put it on the two sides, and cover it with doubled cloths, and bind it up along the entire bandage which follows this shape:
Then take two cloths, and place them with ripped wool according to this appearance, assembled by sewing in the gusset of the breeches, and one of the shoulders is placed at the foundation up to the back, and the other on the part near the arm; and each second head is over the two corners, and it should be completely assembled with the constriction in the loop of the breeches;
And never is this treatment of the fire cautery in the place of iron size, and it is that you take one small surgical instrument, and cut the skin of the hair, and heat it as we have said, so that the white fluid contained in the water is revealed;
if you take the cautery according to this shape, and pierce that white fluid like needles, and burn with this small cautery tool:
And carve in all ways that you can until you have removed everything; and be careful not to let the fire touch the egg; and know that this work is safer; and guard against bleeding out, and make sure your cuts are clean;
And if nothing opposes you or discharges pus or bleeding or something else, cure whatever is opposing you according to what was said previously.
And if the wounds are fearful and cannot endure this operation due to its horror, then perform a puncture, as I said, and know that when you are well convinced by the meanings we have said that watery matter is there,
And have the patient sit on a raised seat; then puncture through the abscess in the middle part above all the pus-filled area, and make the opening long along the channel; and let the incisions be wide so that all the watery contents escape.
Then place cotton on the wound, and bind it, allowing for the discharge of water to occur, then treat until the wound heals;
And if the white cloth does not allow water to come out of the mouth of the wound, it is necessary that you insert a feather or an instrument used to treat the watery drops from which the shape is as follows; and spread one inch around the wound, and know that the water returns, and is collected after seven months or more, and when it is collected like before, then the illness will pass during its days.
Of the pus of the pustules
Know that in this branch there is more than one kind of fear, for which I believe it would be better to let as it is.
And I will tell you about how to handle abscesses and their characteristics.
So then I say that most abscesses come from wounds or cuts, and similarly with breasts; this is due to the nature of such things.
This is known because of an excess of sourness and fever, which spreads through the breasts or due to impact;
And the color of the abscess matches that of the wound; and there is no pain, it's an abscess with pus;
And by chance there may be pus filled with stones and with a reddish color, and it never comes from a blood vessel, or causes swelling of the vein.
When it's due to a blood vessel, if you know by the location of pus collection, when you press it with your fingers; And it's not right for you to touch it.
That which is caused by swelling of the vein can be identified by its position when you press with your fingers, and how it appears to the touch.
and can certainly make the size for this sort of thing, and on other chapters; and you must grasp the knuckle of the fingers, then place the egg above, and make a cut through the white, and remove the membrane from all sides of the egg.
If the egg is already bound with these things, then you must remove the egg and the finger joint;
And if it is through the bone or in that which is inside the vessels, then you must remove all that skin, and cut out the joint roundly.
And if the beginning of the body is or behind the head, it is necessary that you hold it all together and remove the egg, just as we have said.
And when your operations are finished, apply the wound with wet wool in oil and wine, then proceed with other treatments until it is healed.
from the pus of the ears
This is pus enclosed in an envelopment resembling half a ring, with the softening of the ears, And if it grinds when moving the patient painfully;
and the treatment of this disease is indeed very effective like the one described before,
yet we shall tell you about his work, according to what the old ones did.
It is necessary that you make the patient sit on an elevated chair, then lift him up to the height of your waist with your hands, Of all the members close to the penis, and the glands that guide them, and those that are stretched out in formation;
Then cut across the flat, wide surface of the veins, as long as they are exposed,
And then burn from each side, just as we explained in the extraction of arteries which are found at the temples;
Then I pierce with a needle or thread, having two threads doubled, and I attach it to the first bone where the nail came out, and I attach it straight away to the other end. Then cut straight down through the middle, according to the length of the body, and drain out the corrupted fluids.
Then treat the wound in the same way as before or if someone sweats excessively that nourishes one of the kidneys;
for this causes no harm, and if all veins are involved then it is necessary to treat the kidneys for all the veins; so that the kidney does not lose its nourishment due to cutting of the veins and they dry out and cannot be helped.
Of the rupture of the spleen The occurrences of this branch happen through the section that comes from the spleen or stomach, or by stretching on the abdomen in the part of the intestines. Because the organs descend into this rupture towards one of the kidneys;
And this rupture is from the spleen or stomach extension, and there are two ways of causing it: by impact, jump, loud noise, heavy lifting, or through similar actions.
And when it's due to stomach extension, symptoms appear gradually and over time, steadily, not suddenly. And the abscesses are even until near the front, because the pus presses the intestine.
And the signs are when it's about cutting through the muscle, where there comes a sudden pain at the beginning, and the abscesses show various appearances close to the skin, because of the exit of the intestine and the body behind the muscle.
And sometimes the loops descend with the intestine and get stuck, causing great suffering to the patient when pressed, even if it's just a pinch.
And in these fevers where there is fear, one should avoid them.
And the method of this operation is that you instruct the patient to guide or lead the needle into the intestine with their hand inside the wound, if it can be inserted. then sew over his neck. between your hands, and lift the buttocks;
then stretch out the back part, and scrape all the skin around the anus along its length; then insert within the waistband inches according to how you need to open the wound, and make it such that they can easily come out;
Then scrape off the testicles which are on the skin of the scrotum, until all white testicle is exposed from every side;
then place your thumb on the testicular cord at its base, in the one between the white testicle which is under the skin of the egg, and between the second testicle,
and remove the one behind the egg, and between the second testicle; then move with your right hand inside the scrotum bag, and place the white testicle on top of your left hand, lift the egg towards the belly of all the testicles; and instruct the assistant to extend the egg upwards, and release the one that is behind the ligament;
And if you look at your hands if there's any part of the intestine wrapped or white and firm, and if you find no thing, then stop the breathing in the abdomen;
Then take one needle or it has an 'i' thick thread made of 'x' threads, and stick it in the posterior part of the syphilitic, which is after the skin of the anus; after cutting, then remove the heads that appear from the threads, until there are 'iiij' threads. Then join them one on top of the other in a way of a cross, and bind the syphilis, as we have said which is under the skin of the anus, with a strong thread of 'ij' parts. Then wrap the ends of the threads, and bind them firmly with 'ij' parts, so that none of the pins that pierce them can enter into it, preventing any pus from spreading. And make the tie close to the first long tie of two spans from that one, and after these two ties leave some space which is on the left side of the knot area just before the main vein, about the span of one.
And after all else according to the roundness that it carries; then cut in the area which is near the skin of the veins, as long as you can without cutting too deep and damaging them, just like we have explained before.
Then apply wet wool in oil, and put it on the wounds, and use the bandage that we have mentioned. And once you have sealed with the white wax that we said, after the incision, due to concern about blood leakage.
For this happens many times, and let the bandage stay on until it discharges from him; and if he is slow to discharge, so be it with hot water, and apply as we have said until it discharges.
Then treat the wound with another remedy, until it heals perfectly.
of fatty hernia
In this branch I never see anyone who dares to perform the iron treatment.
And the old ones said that it is done like a branch that is gathered together when twisted, in such a way that you tie the veins after cutting slightly above them;
then follow our methods, and treat the abscess of him who works, as long as the veins flow; and treat it in the way we have said, as long as he is well.
Never come to a rupture in the abdomen, as we have said, and open the insides; and do not let any of the intestines slip out at the sides, and if it does slip out, that's little, and repair every hour;
and always, if it stays too long at this point, suspect the wound or syphilis, as long as the intestines are slipping out;
And this occurs through the extension of the sycophant which is in the glands, as we have said, because it has been extended, then softened and swollen the limbs and opened;
And the treatment is by cautery, as we have mentioned before; and it is cured in this manner with a hot iron:
And let the patient lie on their back between your hands, then press the limb from the swollen part outward in proportion to the size of one and a half hands;
And then extract the sycophant that is under the skin where it follows, then take the root and put it in the visible part of the sycophant.
And he presses on the front of the belly, then cuts the two apparent wounds on the side of the head of the rib, and cuts both of them.
Then extract the head of the rib, and do not cut or spread the wound in the flesh nor stretch the egg or any other thing, just as I have informed you about treating the colic in the intestines.
Then treat it through wound care procedures. And when you cut the child, if the womb discharges and heals the wound, until it is healed.
The uterus is constrained, and does not show any sign in labor, and the cauterizations are effective in this area, and closer to salvation.
from the softening of the skin of the heels
Many times the skin of the heels becomes soft in some people, due to the softening of the bones within, and it is something to be seen; when one wants to treat it, he must make the patient walk on his heels, and then pull out the soft skin over the natural skin; afterwards, join the two halves at one stitch, and if you can see, sew a row of stitches on top of this for 3 rows or firmly sew 4 times; then cut in between the seams, and treat it like other wounds until it heals, and remove the stitches when finished.
of chastity
Know that chastities are punished in our law, and because of this I would prefer not to speak about it in this book; and they are necessary only for two reasons: the first is for one to know how to respond when asked about them and their cure, and the second reason is that we often need chastity on certain occasions, such as with sheep and goats and cows and other animals. I thus say that chastities are done in two ways: either through attraction or through incision.
Of those who are hermaphrodites
Hermaphrodites can exist in two ways: one where between the two openings they are open like a woman's anatomy, or sometimes urinate. And another way is for women, having something above the penis similar to a man's genitalia and two openings. For their treatment and that of a man, you treat all the connected parts together, treating them as other wounds; in the second way, from men where urine jumps through the skin of the opening, there is no cure needed.
Of the eczema
Tentigene is a spot attached to the natural part, such that it's too ugly to see; and some women have it as large as a hand, and this needs treatment. It is necessary for you to color the excess of tentigene on your fingers or nails, and treat it gently; and don't do it too deeply so as not to allow bleeding, then proceed with another cure until it heals; and there's another spot that appears at the mouth of the marris and impalement, and sometimes it bursts out, resembling a cow in appearance, which is why they called it the old 'cow disease'. It must be treated similarly to what we have said about tentigene and its cure until it is healed.
Concerning the erratic
Regarding the erratic,
Regarding hemorrhoids
Wound openings are incisions of veins, which occur without proper treatment, and when these wounds become old they turn to ulcers; and we have talked about such things in the division of ulcers, as well as signs, and I will talk about those that relate to healing. I say that ulcers and these ulcers, when they are heated by maris, and they do not appear by smell, if it is not through iron cure. Those that are at the mouth of maris, one can feel them, are those you can cure. Therefore, then you must put the woman into a cold house, then place the ulcer on the tongs, and cover her with roots, then powder with medicine that restrains blood, such as acaice and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then bind her feet to the surface for an hour, then place her in cold water; and if bleeding persists, make her sit in a decoction of sumac, peel of pomegranate rinds, gall and similar things, and then take barley flour, mix it with honey and alisil, and make a plaster on her back. And if it heals, that's good. If not, if she is made to bleed with suction cups on the back and nipples without piercing; then take wool, and cook in the juice of plantain or in the juice of aglentier with old wine, and heat it on her body.  And when the abscess rests, then treat the area around the wound until it heals properly; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles one or two rough heads, so you should cover it as I said for ulcers; and then treat it until it heals properly.
The discharges of maris
Many ways of discharges occur in maris, such as ulcers, stone-related discharges, herpes, boils, fistulas, hemorrhoids and other types of diseases that we discussed in the division. Therefore, it is necessary for me to explain here in this treatise about the chaut ulcer which occurs in maris, which is not a type of discharge that heals quickly; if you see any symptoms like fever and swelling at the beginning, followed by heat, and when it turns red you might notice them. So don't rush into piercing immediately, but wait until the pain subsides; then have him lie on one side with two small stools under his hips, place the back against the wall, and join his feet in front of the leg; spread his legs wide apart, put his arms under his knees, tie him well with a rope; then guide the patient's head towards the right side, prepare the tool for working on the maris mouth, as described next comes this form; it is necessary that when you see this tool being used, that you make sure to position it properly to find the depth of the maris, so that what enters inside the tool does not go deeper than it should and does not harm the patient; if your tools are large, then cover the deep part of the maris with a cloth so that the tool doesn't hurt her. And place the cone of the tool above and cut the tool. And when the ulcer opens up and is handled with gentle hands, one must cover it with a damp clothe oil or a dry rosemary oil; put the dressing on top of the wound towards the center of maris, and place clean wet wool underneath over maris and the knife. Then treat her with ointment for two days until healed; and every time lift the maris and wound by a bucket of water and honey, then of water and cooked lily and aristologue roots; then revive her with ointment again. And if the wound heals back into maris, you should avoid treating it with iron but treat it as we said in the division.
Of childbirth
Craft is first among midwives to know the figure of natural childbirth, and these signs indicate when you see the woman about to deliver internally, and smell the odor: then the child begins to forcefully emerge; thus you should understand that this birth follows its natural figure, and comes out from its head, and the placenta with it; and when you notice these signs, gently pressing her abdomen is required so the child can come forth quickly; because when descending through its head, it brings the placenta along and expels all excess fluids properly; such a birth otherwise doesn't happen naturally. Indeed, it comes from time to time on its feet, and forcefully leaves the body or the shoulders, and hands, or from her abdomen, or back, being sometimes turned by chance around her neck, and by other harmful figures; so the midwife must be wise and subtle in these matters, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures on how we should assist.
When the child comes out through its head by natural passage, and the woman has intense labor pains, and her strength is weak, have her sit on a stool or be held by women; and from this position where she stands naturally, let fenugreek be cooked, and then place the midwife between her hands with a small sponge, as depicted here: And cut the second one, and remove up to his moisture which is within; and pull out the uterus of the woman until the child descends; and if it doesn't descend, then you must treat the woman with fennel seeds and sesame oil; then make her drink and sneeze with mustard, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: and now expel the child.
From the passage of the child over his feet When the child comes down over his feet, it is proper to lift them up high. And then turn it slowly, little by little, until they are equal;
Then take one from his arm and extend it slowly, little by little.
Can't he jump up to the knees, if he is commanded, and let him snort with consideration; If he could jump, may God will it.
And if he isn't better as we have said, if it twists little by little, until it is according to the natural figure. And so it becomes slightly easier.
And if it doesn't become better as we have said, take a muscilage of alum, and oil of saffron, and ground gum, and grind all together in a one-pound mortar; and apply this balm inside and outside the woman's body. Then have her lie in water up to her ribs;
And when she is moistened up to the waist, have her take one tablespoon of myrrh and place it under her, leaving it there for an hour; Then have her sit on a stool, then make her sneeze and restrict her mouth and nose, gently rub her belly, for the fetus jumps now. From the issue of the child on its knees When the infant comes in this form, if you place its hands gently and gradually;
from the exit of the child that comes from a wide hand It is necessary to engineer to bring back the hand: If one cannot bring it back, then lift the woman and walk her;
If she cannot walk, then make her sit up on a bed, and straighten out her legs;
then proceed with the massage that I have described;
and if she does not give birth, make her sit on a stool, then endeavor to guide the hand; and assist in giving birth according to natural form, and make her sneeze, and command her to push as much as the baby comes out.
From the birth of the child at its neck, and extends its hands, and its face turned towards its mother's back. It is necessary that the midwife wash her hand, then turns it slowly and slowly, and lifts it gently;
And when they are even, she places them in the natural position of elevation and oil, as we have said, then she commands that they move slowly and slowly;
And once you've done this, make her sit on a chair of one leg, and command her to kneel; and make her sneeze. In this same manner for all the second part
In this same manner for all the second part When it comes to dealing with the second part in this way, if you're working on your second finger and there's moisture present, let that moisture drain completely;
And if the pus spreads up its surface and around its neck, should you start treating from the elbow, ensure it doesn't get stuck, and prevent the pus from spreading;
Then operate on the child inside, until you have placed it as it should be and instruct the mother to refrain from any action at all times:
from the birth of twins Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes they are born three or four at a time; and this is not an unusual thing, it just happens. Two are extraordinary things, and do not live together, if we exclude them.
I know this, when they are multiplied, and they are opened by the surgeon who devises them, who is bound to the fire;
And they do not come out as naturally as in all cases below, as we have said.
And if they come out painfully, as the treatment that we have said, and it is a subtle wound, act immediately and lightly as it instructs. And do this so as to serve for health. from many children
from many children They are not married in the marris .i. or .ij. or .iij. or .iiij. or .v. or .vj. or .vij. ways, and they form themselves into child shape by the measurement of their glory. Or they might form up to .xv. times this way, all shaped like a child according to the glory's dimension.
And it is necessary that the boy knows everything such as this, for by chance something similar might happen to him; If done as it should.
of the dead child
When you treat a woman who has lost her dead child or miscarried, as I've explained in the section on treatment, if it doesn't come out and you are forced to act by force. It is necessary that you know whether the woman has good health, and if she has not experienced any misfortune or fear of death.
If it is necessary that the woman lie on her back, and have her shoulders inclined backwards, and her legs raised;
And the practitioner holds the leg at two parts, or she is bound to the bed so that she is not tilted during childbirth;
Then rub the mouth of the woman with moist olive oil and a mixture of tyme and fenugreek seeds and flaxseed. Then smear her hands with these oils and this mixtures. Then gently support the woman, then give her one spoon or as many as she can manage of the mixture that suits this purpose.
And take care that when the child appears, it descends onto its head; if it buries the nostrils in its eyes or on its neck or in its mouth or near its palate or under the beard or on the collarbone or close to the ribs,
and if it descends to the feet, then it gets stuck or is pulled and at its mid-back;
it is necessary that you pinch the nostril with your right hand and place the bend between his index finger of the left hand, and push it lightly with all his hands, and insert the nostril into none of these places that we have mentioned until it reaches an empty thing;
then place it against another scissor or at the third if necessary so that the removals are equal;
and then extend it evenly by moving on both sides, so that the movement occurs smoothly, and let the teeth of the scissors hold the movements, just as this is the form:
And if a part remains, so that you cover some of its ears with some of its feet, and hold them in that part, and pull the other part.
And if there's no remaining part, then place this rod or even higher up the body, and do this until it comes out completely.
And if one hand comes forward of the other, and cannot be pulled back by squeezing, and you should wrap it with a strip of cloth until it comes out completely;
then the cure is at the ankle or on the wrist, and similarly for the other hand, and with two feet.
And if the head of the child is large and it is caught in the exit, or if it has an excessively sharp angle assembled, So you should push the spinous spine between your fingers, and adjust the head while extracting the sharp one; or you may have it done with the instrument called 'almidach', whose form comes with the instruments or chapter that follows this one;
and in this way, let the child be born with a large natural head; and then dig out the bones with tongs,
and if the shoulder pops and is held by force until it breaks, as long as there's moisture or worse present;
and if it cannot come out, remove it piece by piece as you can;
and if it is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, it must be necessary to pierce it as long as there's moisture that flows out.
And if the child is on its feet, then it has light attraction, and the connection to the mouth of the womb is light.
And if it is three in the belly or on the breast, then you should extract it at one and a half days with a fold wrapped around the hand; and for the belly or the breast, as long as there is moisture where it is situated;
and if another bone is involved and the head remains, if you want to remove his hand if it's injured by a thorn, and cut it until it reaches the tip of the thorn. then cut it if it takes up to an ounce or two, and cut it forcefully.
and if the opening of the thorn is narrowed due to pus that has come in, it should not be probed with a tool, instead, it should be treated with wet and greasy substances; And the surgeon applies plaster, and also uses it in hot water for soothing and moistening purposes.
And if the child is under their ribs, and you can place it evenly, then follow what we have said regarding live birth treatment;
And if one cannot do so, then let the birthing be piece by piece, and don't leave anything of the remainder.
And when you have done this, follow what we have said about the cauterization that comes with bandages in a married state;
And if there comes blood from this, then it should be treated with hot water, restraining it, and provide other treatments.
And I saw a woman in whom an unborn child had been bitten by death, then consulted with another on that, and treated the other's bite. After much time, an abscess came in his stomach, and swelled so much that it burst, causing great pain.
I was summoned to the treatment, and I waited for a long time, and could not support the wound.
I placed it on a strong plaster, and out came a bone, and after some days another one. I was very surprised, because that part of the body doesn't have any bones.
I thought it was a bone from a dead child.
I wanted to clean the wound, and with my hands I sought for bones, until the woman felt better. And let the woman hold on long until then, and so it is a bit of blood from her.
And I have recalled this chapter only because when the masters find a strange thing, they should know how to give aid.
to bring back the wife to her place.
Following this comes the form of the applicator, to which the books refer; and in it are two parts for each of four limbs. In any case, the horns should be made more delicate than a retractor, and be made of ebony or boxwood;
and let the mouth of the tube be one inch in width, and the edge of the plates should also measure one inch, and its length should be a palm and a half long; and at the midpoint of the two handles, there should be two joints made of the same tube material which are securely attached to both sides, with their length being half a palm or slightly more than that;
and these two joints are mounted in the mouth of the tool for opening when one turns the two horns.
Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, may be made from a piece of ebony or boxwood, according to the likeness of forceps. and has four points, as you see, one palm long each, and two pieces of width;
And when you see the opening of the womb with all the instrument, make the woman lie on one bed, her legs hanging and her thighs spread out, Then insert the two forceps together into the womb, and hold the tip of the instrument between her buttocks; Then use your hand on all the tool, just like you have done with the pincers equally, according to the size that you see opening the mouth of the pliers, until the bone does what it wants.
All these instruments are mounted and multiplied in various forms; and when you have them set up, the work proceeds more quickly, and you can use them higher up for their respective sizes.
Don't lose hope in the tool if you haven't set it up, because its necessity is not excusable.
When the second stage of labor is retained during birth, it is necessary to instruct the midwife to hold her breath, and then make her exhale with contractions. And you should hold your hands on her mouth and nose; And if she jumps over it, it's well.
If not this, take one pot, and make one lid or cover, and put in them herbs that can open the mouth of a marrow, such as garlic, rue, anise, chamomile, bitter orange peel and centaurium.
All these herbs, or any of them, whether cooked or steeped in water on the fire; then place a reed or cover inside the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the marrow,
And for the scab, until the fumes come within the armpit; then let it be fanned outwards, as we have said. If the second tooth springs up quickly. And if it remains after this treatment and is not strong, instruct her to moisten her left hand with oil of sesame or in musk for the eyes, then use the stick in its natural way.
and when it wants the second tooth; and when she finds it, hold it and stretch it out gradually, so that the armpit does not feel any pain during extraction; But it is necessary to move it gently to the right and to the left, and then draw; if it will come and relieve itself.
And if their mouth of the murrain is inflamed, we have said that there's a treatment for sneezing and herb smoke;
And if she doesn't respond to all that we have said, then be careful not to force the treatment;
However, it is necessary for the one at the woman's mouth that you bind him to her thigh, then apply ointment from Tetrapharmakon and enemas.
if it passes and causes pain; but still, when it does come out, a bad smell will reach the stomach and head, and irritate the patient's stomach.
So, it is necessary then for such treatments: none of the old remedies have proved that fumigation with sowthorn and dried figs works.
The shape of the instrument used to fumigate a woman during retention of flowers and the second stage is as follows:
And it appears like a reed, and one sees its hollow form, and we place the head delicately in its natural position, and the shoulders wide above the fire.
And let there be fumigation over the coals, and the application until it is digested, and then start another one.
To pierce the foundation
Many infants are born who do not have their foundation pierced, but rather its site is prepared subtly with some skill. So it then becomes necessary in the operation that she puncture exactly where it is due, and does not pierce through any sharp tissues, and guards the incision so as to prevent contact with it.
Then put on wet wool in wine and oil, then apply the balm until it is cleansed.
And if you doubt that it will not reoccur, then put a thorn in or near the place and leave the person immobile for some days, and remove it when the child begins to walk around indoors.
And there should be no sudden setbacks from wounds or abscesses; if you encounter such setbacks, apply the same treatment as we have described for thorns.
from the fistula from its foundation Fistulas that come from under the foundation are nodal, and grow larger than those that come from underneath outwardly, or in the space of two parts,
If there is one fistula or more; and when that node is old, it works, and soon produces moisture that appears white or fine sand.
And these are always Persian fistulas; and they are known by the person experiencing an expulsion or windiness when the patient expels something, and sometimes an odor.
And if to fistulas that penetrate up to the bladder, and up to half of the penis; and extend up to the knee joint, and up to the root of the testicles.
And thus one knows if the fistula penetrates to the base, and not through it: And mark if you can feel your index finger or base against it, and insert a fine needle or spider's leg in the fistula when there is no twisting.
And if it has twists and turns, then you can insert a fine tent or a horse hair, as long as you feel the tent or hair on your index finger;
And if you do not feel it, and there is no discharge of pus or wind, nor any smell, as we have said: Know that she does not puncture completely; if you hasten to cure her.
And when the fistula is almost through to the bladder or where urine flows, if it jumps with urine, and cannot be united by medicine.
If it is perforated almost to the knuckle joint, then the vein goes up to the top; If there is no twisting or internal source of pain, then it seems that one needs to leave the condition as-is, and neither medication nor immediate application of ointment helps.
And for these Persian fistulas, there is no remedy except labor, and the vain meddling of those who interfere with them.
In those that are neither Persian nor ancient, there is hope for healing through iron, as I have experienced.
And it is that the patient lies on their back with the illness under your hands. And raise their legs up to their hips, and incline their hips towards their stomach; Then set up a spider's web tent, or if there is a twist, as long as you know where the tent comes from.
If the symptoms are felt deep inside, it's necessary that you place your index finger there.
You will then sense that the tent has been pierced; and if you detect something between your index finger it's faeces or fat, so you know it's in the stomach region. If there is no change, then one cannot determine its location accurately.
One can indeed heal many, but this happens rarely;
and the help one provides, if it involves using a fine cautery according to the width of the sinus, as was mentioned earlier; and place it hot inside the sinus until it comes out of the base; and perform this two or three times, as long as you can tell that these burned bits resemble a feather from a bird.
and then treat with moist bandages covered in butter until those burned bits are out, and then apply salve to the wound while it's still warm and seal it.
If it's done correctly, that's good. If this, otherwise can't be made right;
And if it's tried to be done in between, and doesn't pierce up to the foundation which is or forms the base, and inside your rod and the tent there's a thick covering of flesh or sheepskin, and you see the fistula at that spot where the covering is darker than usual. If it's filled from the beginning of the fistula and is held inside before the tent, then apply the cautery after, until it reaches the tip of the tent.
And release the tent, and it will come out; then cleanse those that are squeezed like a bird's feather, making sure there is nothing left behind.
And if it doesn't satisfy you, and there's a gap between you and the operation, then apply a fire cautery or an ointment with medicinal properties.
For the fire cauteries combine two things: these are to say, the healing of these combined plasters, and the bleeding of blood and the drying out of moisture;
Then the treatment of wet tents with butter or in ground things, until the body yields, and then exit those burned plasters in the body;
Then treat the wound with Sudan poultices made of hard flesh, and use dry medications.
For when it has been restored,
And if a fistula comes up just below the entire foundation, and is away from the body, then plug its tip or foundation, and inquire about it.
And if you feel the tent, and it's between two things or a layer or fibers, or it's close to piercing, but there is only one way of escape and hope, through the administration of any of the three methods:
or you cauterize it as we have explained, or you remove it until the base, or if you can apply a patch and a cure as initially stated;
And do not dig too deeply, ensuring you don't remove the structure that holds the foundation, allowing natural eliminations to occur through it voluntarily; then cleanse it, as we have said;
then cleanse it, as we have said; by chance if it is clean, or you remove that covering and cleanse it since it was removed from under the foundation, whether by trial or with another tool pointed; then cleanse that flesh which is in the wound as much as you can;
Then study to heal the wound, and continue the abscess in the lower part of the base: if it's easier for the patient, let it proceed.
And always drain abscesses in this way: and when you press the tent into the abscess, and it is where it touches the base beneath the skin above, take a needle through the head according to this shape: And I bend one thread into an 'S', and place the needle with all of the thread in the abscess until it reaches the head.
If it's deeply located near the base within, then extract that torn thread, like when you bend your elbow or foundation;
and pull the head of the thread, and join the two heads together, then hold one to the other, and let it set for one or two days;
and keep holding it repeatedly, until the threads join where they are between two bones, growing together;
then treat the wound until it is healed and clean.
If the fistula does not perforate, make it pierce in every way you can, provided it's not too deep.
For one should not make the incision too deep through the puncture stitch, and then treat it as we have said, while it remains clean.
The shape of the needle-spit from which the fistula is made is very small and, on the other hand, it incises; And on another side no, because of this you don't make what you shouldn't cut, as you see here:
Hemorrhages occur in two ways: when they are inside the tissue, like a piece of resin, and there can be small or large ones, causing blood to gather, And if there is one or more, they escape from inside and at the edge of the tissue; but those that escape have little moisture,
And it also occurs when there is a little yellow water or a little blood, and they have the color of brown;
And the treatment for those who have them within the foundation, so you instruct the patient to extend it through holes until the foundations give way, as long as the foundations release him and they see the fibers. if you can, or when using pincers, or when holding it by your finger nail, then remove it up to its roots.
and if the nail can't hold them due to moisture, then take them with two threads, or with cotton, or with a piece of leather; and remove them with your fingers, then pull them out, and powder it with any hot powders that would be used for a cauterization. When you apply the fire cautery as was described or instructed in the section about the cautery,
And if the foundation cannot emerge, then cauterize the patient where the cauterization burns and is harsh to clean what's inside or the foundation, so that it can emerge openly;
If the injuries are not penetrating, and if the patient has a strong hold on the foundation, then the treatment should be light. And you should pull them with your fingernails or tweezers, and pluck them out, then treat them as we have said, until it is cleansed, and they fear the incision by metal.
If it is necessary that you stitch the wound in this manner: take one thread twisted, and put it into a needle, then pull the thread through from above and make the needle pierce another side, and twist the two ends of the thread around the needle. And if it is broad; and tighten the thread, then tie the thread, and pull out the needle, and do this with all others, and leave one for the excess of blood to run;
Then place one moist cloth in olive oil or a wadding, and place it on the wound, and command the patient to rest.
And then let them until they grow sparse, and when they have fallen out, if you treat with ointment and other remedies, until they are healed.
do drying by sweat or foundation Many times it causes bowel dryness within the intestines, and due to natural constraints, and when the illness is old and medicine no longer works.
It is necessary that you place your thumb or finger on the tip of a splint or on your nail with the skin above it, not letting it remain moist. Then he cures as long as they are firm, just like it should be.
and if they cannot become firm, then start the shaving again more vigorously than before, until it heals somewhat, and be scorched. Then he cures as long as it is healed.
with trembling A formice is a small, false appearance on the body, and it moves throughout;
And never does it feel warm to the touch, and one feels it also like dead flesh shaking, and it spreads throughout the body, and more in the hands than elsewhere.
And the treatment involves taking a stick made from a goose feather or a strong vulture's feather, and placing this stick on the shaking sensation, until the purplish circles encompass the entire shaking. Then turn your hand over until you cover all the stick and envelop the entire shaking sensation, place it throughout your body, and eradicate the shaking from its roots.
And if you see this, do as follows with a spider's hair or iron according to this shape, and let it be slender underneath and sharp above:
Don't pierce it, but hold it between your fingers and squeeze it firmly. If you see this, apply the cautery to the tremble, as depicted in front or chapter of the cautery.
Of the shape of the bladder Never make a bladder of silver or tinplate, or iron melted down or lead; and never make these tools big or small, according to how they are ordered.
Those thus take on the task of healing children and those who are weak and painful, being little.
The form of the bladder is small at the top and large, or the belly is bound in this manner:
and there should be an opening where the belly is bound, as you see, and the shoulder is pierced within; and there are two holes on one side, and on the other side each is one.
and place the medicine in the belly or in a beast's bladder or parchment, and pierce it thoroughly with small holes.
And there should be between each part one inch of space, then put in these parts one thread strong of a spun thread for ten or twelve times, and tie the belly as if it were a goat; And when the medicine is inside, mix it with the tool in front of one strong thread, then clotify; and this is in the form of a circle:
And let the medicine neither be too hot nor too cold, and smear the part around the clot with oil or yolk of egg, or similar things, then gently place it.
Then the healer stretches out his two hands together until both are visible, then removes the clot, and lifts up the patient's legs onto the surface.
And if the medicine seeks to emerge, let it come out as much as possible; and if he sleeps an entire night, then greater help is provided.
And if you use it to treat illness characterized by the loosening of abdominal contents, and the medicine seeks to quickly emerge, then continue using it as long as it is effective.
And if there's internal bleeding or an abscess, then use the cathartic just as finely as a single child.
and it is the shape of the fine cathartic form where the skin is constricted by it:
from wounds
We have discussed the treatment of wounds in the division; now we will talk about hand treatments and medicine according to their completion.
I say that wounds are diverse depending on how they are made, and where on the body they occur, and why they have occurred.
The reasons wounds are made include the impact of stones, the size of swords and knives, or from spears, axes, hammers, or similar things.
These are done according to the parts of the body, such as a wound that occurs on the neck, or on the head, or the breast, or the belly, or the liver, and similar limbs;
and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and start with wounds of the simple head, because that memory will come in its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound occurs to the head, and if the bone is not broken, be careful whether it's from a stone or similar things, and the skin remains completely torn with a large wound, and you doubt slightly about an abscess: if it is done quickly by a surgeon of the cranial type when there's little blood from the wound, and it heals in contrast to the injured part;
And the patients become full of wine and heavy meats.
And if he doesn't want to regain his health, then reduce his food, and don't drink wine, nor eat meat.
And put it on the wound, if there are abscesses present, use soaked cotton in olive oil rose only, or in astringent wine;
And if there are no abscesses present, put it on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood, and not swollen by the air, a powder, which I will explain later;
And if it has been treated with an iron, place some remedies upon it until it is healed.
And if the wound is large like that of a tailor and similar, and the lips cannot be joined together by stitches, then join them with suturing, as I would say for wounds in the belly, from the suture.
If the wound is exposed bone, it's soft and only holds for a little while when touched; then treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin. And command the patient to consume large meats, such as cooked testicles and wheat, also like chickens, and similar items.
And if you find or skin disease, and it doesn't reach to the bone, then cut out the rotten part entirely, and pour in some medicine, then treat it;
And if there is an artery in the wound or vein, one without a clot, and it cannot be stopped by medicine, then tie the artery, and if you find it dislocated, then hold it with a thread; And if this doesn't help, then apply a cautery to it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and you should apply this powder which binds like this when the heat has affected it.
And the method for making the powder is as follows: take a portion of frankincense; dragon's blood two portions; cinnabar three portions, and finely powdered, and apply it to the wound, and press it firmly until it thoroughly dries and joins with all its blood;
And then properly set it, and leave it without disturbing it, if it doesn't swell; for the medicine isn't removed as long as it is healing.
And this must be done with a salve alone, not with incense or the blood of dragons, but when the medicine has healed the wound.
And if the medicine has healed the wound, then without delay, do not put this powder on it;
Instead, apply some cooked dressings or use oat flour mixed with water and honey, until it stops bleeding. Continue with other treatments while he/she is still alive.
And if bone breakage occurs along with the wound, and it's small, then use fine needles to correct it;
And I will tell you about the breaks in the head afterwards.
from the wound on the neck
This wound originates near the neck and is straightforward, if there's no distinction between it and beneath the chin, but if something within the neck or artery has been cut.
If it's the nerve, if there is no other means than to let the treatment proceed, and not put any restricting thing, because it harms the nerves and causes them to recede; And do not place anything cold on the wound, for the substance of nerves is cold, and their continuity is with the brain, which is the highest member.
but use a warm medicine instead, such as rose oil washed in soft water, and also wash the cloth used similarly in soft water, And other stones of the body according to this manner, and moist treatments.
And if the wound is large, bind it tightly with bandages, then treat until it heals properly.
And if the wounds are deep and filled with blood, penetrate them or deeper than that;
And if the artery is cut, and blood flows out, then you should uncover it, and repair it, and if necessary, cauterize;
And if it is cut out of the throat, or the windpipe, and the passage is kept, through which the meat goes, if you cut the windpipe above the throat bone, and do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape; and then set the protrusion in place, and leave it for several days, then treat with drying herbs until it is healed;
and if the wound has made an impression into the bone, then remove that too. And if there are bone fragments, if you can remove them all thoroughly, and those that you cannot have, if you leave them until the wound heals, And let it be drained and bound up.
And if the wound is fresh, use the powder I have mentioned. And if there are bones in the wound and it has an abscess, treat it as described in my chapter.
From the wound of a spear or knife
If it's from a spear or knife, and the wound is deep, then observe if there's an increase in wind around the wound: you would then know that the wound is mortal.
And if it's not deep, and the wound is still full of blood, then don't put any powder on it or bind it up straight away for fear that the blood will clot completely within. Let him rest in peace, and take care of the body; but I apply an attractive ointment, and fasten it twice a day;
and if you don't have an ointment, place old cotton in the wound to absorb moisture.
and make the patient rest on the wound for 3 days, or 4, or more if necessary. if there is no seizure, nor ill trembling of the heart, nor one-sided movements. And when you see the proper conditions, know that the wound is saved. Therefore, cure it with various treatments, as long as it remains sound;
and if it cannot heal and fester, then know that there is an abscess; treat it accordingly.
And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut, and it is simple or worse, or on the back, treat it according to the person who is in front of you.
If it's large, with stitches; and if it's small, with powder, and if it's impregnated in the bone, and if it has cut fragments, whether to heal the wound or remove foreign bodies if they are excised. And if they're not excised, let the wound fester, and facilitate the removals.
And for other wounds on other limbs, judge similarly as we have said.
From the rupture of the abdomen
The abdominal swellings are large, medium-sized, and small;
From a major wound, there may be an escape of the intestines, or parts of the intestines, through which foreign objects can enter;
And the stitches are more troublesome, and there is no time like a small wound compared to a large one,
Therefore, when returning the intestines inside, they are stitched more carefully, if they are not already being returned stitch by stitch; Because when they feel cold, their intestines swell up temporarily, then go back into points,
And it's because of this that internal wounds occur, for when we move the intestine to its place where others are two.
Know that the hernia in the belly occurs in four ways:
The two common stitches occur at the abdominal stitch,
and the other wounds' stitches are common to other injuries;
yet they are more precise with the abdominal stitch, and I will say each one individually and clarify them.
I state that when the wound is small, and nothing of the intestine has escaped, And fixing this thing is by one of two ways: or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen due to cold.
And when they are cold, warm them in this manner: Moisten one sponge or two-thirds of a cloth with just water, or you cook in water with a bit of vinegar and cypress and spears, and stir the intestines until their herbs are exposed;
and once this has been done, let it simmer, and cook until it is released for the purpose of reducing swelling.
And when you see the swelling depart, if moisten the intestines with water or steam, whether they be cooked or not. for by this means there is admission to little things;
and if it cannot enter, they make a little incision with the instrument by which one removes the embolisms;
the first treatment is to make the cut as wide as the wound. that we mustn't cut without significant need or reason;
and these are the tools to split it open:
if you cut from within at the bend and not outward, and see this shape:
And when the wound is enlarged and the intestines jump out, if you reset it according to its natural form in its proper place, do so if possible, for this is the way of movement.
When the wound is large and it's in the belly area, if necessary, heal the patient on their back. and place his legs higher than his head; and if she is at the belly region,
and also if there is a rupture in the abdomen at one of those two parts, If you understand this, let the removed part be higher than the other;
And thus, one should administer what I say in large and medium-sized wounds.
For small wounds, use what you are equipped for,
Then have among your hands one who ministers cuts, ready to heal every wound with his hand, And bring together the lips; and this is the common way of suturing,
and this is the common way of suturing, and you take one needle or more, according to the width of the wound's size, then leave at the beginning of the wound an inch and a half space, and I pierce with a needle where it has an inch of strong thread; And pierce both the leather heads with the lead balls of the siphon.
then sew it with a doubled thread around both parts of the needle. then gather together both of the wounded areas of the wound.
and then leave one to two inches, and insert another needle; then weave the thread in the same way you did with the first needle, and continue this according to your skill with the needles, Until all the wound is contained;
and that the needles are balanced, between fine and thick, because the fine needles cut all the flesh, and the too thick ones can't enter well: for this reason they should be of medium thickness;
And it is not right to bury the needles too deeply within the flesh and skin,
for they do not allow the wound to heal properly before the stitching;
and then remove the heads of the needles, so as not to irritate the patient during sleep. and I place tents or cloths over the ends of the needles for them to be held in place. And let them grow until the wound has healed;
And this method of sewing with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because it fits a needle in one place or two.
The second stitch method is common, and you should join together the two ends of leather and the two ends of sinew into one needle where there is a single strong thread in the middle; and when you have pierced these ends four together,
and when you have pierced these ends four together, then pull the needle through at the part where you started piercing, just like one sews a thread;
and leave space between each stitch as large as a small coin;
This sewing requires time,
and I sew a wound where there was once an opening or belly,
which had been made by a knife, and the wound was more than a palm's width, and it goes for the intestines well two palms of great size,
and there was a wound in the middle of the belly. I returned the intestine to him then after it had been out for twenty-one hours.
and the wound healed up to fifteen days, and I treated it, and he recovered, and was well.
And when they had decided he was dying, it was a wonder;
and I did not cure him with ointment, for I was in the middle of town where none could be found, nor any medicine; and I would change the cotton bandage on the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey water until it healed.
I will tell you the two proper methods of stitching:
Take the needle, and the lancet from the outer part up until it reaches inside.
When it has pierced straight through to the heart in a straight line, if it hit the spinal column or ribs where you have inserted the needle,
and make it pierce from the inner part to the outer side.
And when it comes to sewing this seam, do as the marten does with its fur, by sewing neatly. And you must allow once the stitch on one side, then take it from another, until the wound is fully healed.
The second method of stitching, as Galen correctly stated,
It is done in such a way that no one does it, by joining the two parts together naturally, and they apply one end of the needle to the other end like this:
Prick with a needle or pierce near the elbow, and make the puncture only on that side. and let both shoulders move freely; then turn the needle and make it pierce from below up to inside. in both shoulders as required;
Then pierce both at the lower part up to this within, in four other shoulder joints that are on the opposite side of the body;
and this is the way of sewing and it is the most common method.
Galien said so, and none of them testify to it,
one must stitch the abdomen with two needles, or where there is thread in each;
And one must push an awl from one side, and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew through wounds;
Know that when the rupture is inside the belly, The stitching of such a wound in the belly is more grievous than others.
The judgement of the wound is as follows, just like with other wounds:
And this is how, when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, just as the art has made it escape, if it's within the intestine, and the cost; then apply the healing powder on that area,
if it's within the intestine, and the cost; then apply the healing powder on that area, and if the art has made it escape, then apply any available ointment until the wound stops bleeding; And stretch out the thread, and may they sew up the needle, and mend the cloth; Then treat the wound as usual, until it is clean.
and if you don't have medicines, put an old cotton cloth there, right when it starts to ooze pus, And stir it twice a day until it is healed.
For you need no other medicine besides for many conditions when wounds are simple;
and if you doubt that the wound will cause a connection with the main parts of the body, then it is necessary for you to dip it in light oil that has been heated slightly, or in scalding oil, and put it inside the joints, and around the joints;
And if they feel pain or gangrene in the bowels, and it happens many times. If he uses black wine as enemas, and similarly if the gangrene reaches up to the intestine;
And pierces internally, know that when it's the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
The intestine called "juvenile" cannot be healed if it is injured, And it's because of the thickness of veins that they are, and by the subtlety of all the body, and their approach to the nature of nerves.
And if pus jumps from the wound, if it is reset behind just like an intestine, while it's still fresh;
and if it is old and turned sour or black, then you should tie the area that is black to prevent any bleeding. because there are veins and arteries in it;
Then attend to what's between the ligament, and hold both shoulders up from below the wound area until beyond it to ease the extraction when the ribs are close to exit, and heal the wound.
from the rupture of the bladder
When the intestines are intact, and the wound is small, If possible, one may restore it in some houses,
because I saw that one was pierced through or had a belly punctured by a spear;
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and became stenotic and developed into a fistula, causing loss of appetite and flatulence;
I performed the treatment according to my abilities, and didn't stop refining until it was properly done, and sealed his wounds.
And when I saw that they were sealed, I feared that the patient might suffer in their belly; and there was no harm, but it stayed in better condition, eating and drinking.
And the surgeons said that when there is a small injury in the intestine, it should be bound in this way: Take large thorns, then join the edges of the wound. And when the thorn has opened the mouth, place it on the two edges,
Then continue with another tremblement in this manner as before, until the wound is completely taken care of;
and here ends the description of the wound. If it lodges in the intestines, and causes no harm to the patient,
And one can tie up the intestine with a fine thread cut from an animal's intestine,
In a similar manner: Take the head of this thread-like piece of intestine that is most dried out, and then fasten it to the end of this thread with one thread of fine linen string. Then thread the needle with the string, sew the intestine, and set it again at the injury.
And this method of sowing the wound is only according to the path of hope and expectation;
And if the wound is large and broad, especially when it's in one of the intestines, if there is no embryo or nourishment, force must be used.
from a fistula or wherever it may be. Know that any wound or abscess, when it matures, is universally called a "fistula", And similarly when it is sealed and begins to heal.
And a fistula corresponds to the hard, whitish swelling that follows true inflammation, where no pain can be felt, and is also covered like a bird's feather;
And never clearly as a jump, and sometimes thick; And sometimes barely at all, and other times enough;
and I have spoken about the classification of wounds, that every uncured wound contains no flesh, this is only due to eight causes:
This means, knowing by the smallness of the blood or scar; or by its malevolence; or because there is tough flesh inside and on the lips that doesn't allow new flesh to grow; or because there is too much moisture; The earlobes are swollen, and the material is of bad quality; the medicine is not good in its treatment; or because corruption proceeds like a plague; or due to the property in the region that digestion is slow and health also lags behind, being driven by nature; There are passages or bones where:
and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and treatments with medicines in this section.
So it is necessary for me to inform you about the treatment of fistulas which is done by manual work.
Know that a fistula can occur in all limbs, both inside and outside; for there are fistulas coming to the large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or in the stomach, or in the intestines, or in the bladder, or in any of the ribs, or in the spinal column of the back, or in any joint of the hands or feet;
And all the fistulas that are done this way lead to unsanitary healing, and there is nothing except digging, and ignorance;
and if there is no fistula that lasts until I have described, and you must finish with the treatment, and you should know how to do it, if take a spider web or iron rod, if the fistula is straight, use that;
and if the fistula is curved, use a delicate silver thread to guide it, For the water flows twistily within them;
and if it formed a blind passage in your hands, you could not properly seek out its end by trial and error. if you tried to wash it out through one of the ends,
because moisture flows from one end to another, and the condition worsens;
Then use your skill to understand whether there is bone or nerve, and if hair exists by the mouth,
And ask the patient to clearly express any pain they feel when you press with your hand, and determine where it is felt;
And once you have truly identified the location, whether it's far from a joint, or near to a nerve, or an artery or vein, or in none of the places I've mentioned, if you follow as I have instructed,
or in none of the places I've mentioned, if you follow as I have instructed, And at the outer part are bones and the fluids corrupted that are within; and then the treatment until it is healed,
and if the fistula has been properly opened in the right place, you should cut as deeply as possible, then I wettest strips of material in quaking-water and put them into the fistula until they reach to its opening.
then I wettest strips of material in quaking-water and put them into the fistula until they reach to its opening. Until the medicine has corroded away the excess that remains at the bottom;
And then I place healing ointments that promote healthy growth, until it is healed;
and if it doesn't heal with this method, then apply heat cautery as we have described,
and if the bone is infected by the sinus, then treat it. If a vein or nerves are not obstructed or interfere with primary limbs, as we have said;
and if the bone is exposed, and there is corruption and blackness, then remove it until all traces of corruption are gone, then cleanse with things that purify flesh as long as it remains clean;
and if it has become dirty, wash it the same way as before, Know that you are not yet done until the end:
if it discovers and yearns as long as you are at the bottom: and remove all the corruption, then return to its place;
and if it is thus healed, that is well. If this is not the case, know that the corruption is too deep, that you cannot heal; if there is no other option than to leave it to natural processes;
and if there is even a small corrupted bone, and you can extract it with tongs, if you remove it with an instrument suitable for this task,
And if there are many bones, treat them all, do not leave any out;
and should moisture oppose this, and there is no mistake or fear, so work with moisture and heat, and free the bones.
And if you can't remove them within an hour, place on the wound something that promotes gangrene, And let them grow until the hair is long on top of the bone,
Then they will have their bones slightly more easily;
And if it is a large bone, such as in the leg or thigh, if only let rot until the blackness becomes entirely ossified. Then heal the wound;
and if there is a large part of the flesh that has decayed, and the bone is affected up to its surface. if it should be to expose and cover all the way until the decay stops, and then treat it as long as it is healed over.
and I will tell you about a case where a fistula occurred in one person's leg. If you seek example and assistance in your work.
He was of youth around thirty years old, who experienced a pain in his leg due to an illness that originated within the body,
Until the matter reached the leg, and he was affected by a large abscess, and there was no reason to open it;
but they opened it due to their madness as much as the abscess allowed. And they would eat very little matter, and became a fistula, and there came much pus that all groaned from body and moisture of the flesh;
And many infections they treated for two years, and there was no wise person in the art of manual treatment,
As long as I was called to it, and saw his leg and the remedies that were being used for its cure, And what was eaten away by the pus from large body parts; And they would turn red on the body of youthfulness, and had a yellow color.
I pitched a tent in one of these ditches, and then searched all the ditches,
and found that each was coming against the other from all parts of the leg.
So I hurriedly did so and dug into one of the ditches until I discovered a part of the bone. And I found it corrupted and rotted, and the corruption had reached to the bone inside;
I was the one who appeared to me from the rotted bone, and I thought there was no other corruption, because that which I took out;
and began to restore the wound with medicines for a long time, and could not heal it;
and then restarted, and exposed the bone just as before,
And I found the corruption continuing inside the bone, and the pus, and then I removed it, and I focused on soldering back together the joint;
but I could not do much more than fit inside one palm of the bone, and I made it move to all its muscles, then I restored it with medicine; and he recovered quickly and was joined.
and there was no need to start the operation again except for due to the weakness from the illness, which could not bear it. And because of the fear of death that I have from him. For often there was bleeding evacuation, but it became completely bloodless,
For often there was bleeding evacuation, but it became completely bloodless, And from the bone of its place, a hard flesh was born, and it was well arranged and had no harm or opposite effect at all in every way, neither inside nor outside.
extend it so that you draw the putrid flesh away from the surface, And uncover the flesh on the side of the body where you see a hair, for the hair doesn't wound the flesh; and place a coal or a board over the bone to heat up and remove the corrupted flesh; it should be done until one can see and feel the corruption, and again another time.
And if the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part of it, If you uncover the entire flesh; then place two embers over it,
and then let the corruption spread from one part to another with the iron, and keep the heat of the iron for as long as the corruption exists, just like we have explained;
and if the corruption is at the joint, then cut the corrupted joint, and let the iron touch the bone from the other side;
and if the corruption is in the connection of two joints, then cut just that part where you can reach with your tool;
And if the corruption is or pierced by hand, or pierces by foot, that thing becomes very strong. However, you must inquire about this corrosion, how it opened; and cleanse in all the ways that you can, but so that the vein or nerve do not oppose you.
and know that there are many incisal and toothed edges for cutting these bones, according to the arrangement of the bones and their appearance, and their size and their subtlety, and their greatness and their smallness, and their hardness; and for this, it must be equipped with each form of work its tool;
and know that the work will show you the instrument you will need, according to knowledge of this craft, and the testimony of the manners of the diseases; If you intend to use the tool you need according to what suits it.
by fire The shoulders dislocate either due to internal causes, or due to external factors;
and when you have treated that corrosion with the remedies and they do not benefit at all, If it's necessary to cover that limb up to its end where the corrosion comes, if it is the case that the patient escapes through this of death, or through this flaw, which is greater, from the defect of the limb;
if it is the case that the patient escapes through this of death, or through this flaw, which is greater, from the defect of the limb; and if you notice these signs, it means that the limb becomes black, as though it has been burned by fire. and after the blackness, then comes this corrosion of limb to limb, And spreading throughout the entire body; if you hurry with the copper,
and if it's due to the impact of certain venomous beasts, such as sea scorpions and snakes, and similar,
if it's in the head near the nose, if you treat it, and do not give it room to spread up to the hand.
And if it comes up to the hand, if you treat at the joint, so that the corrosion does not spread up to the arm;
And if it comes to the arm, cut where you can. And if it passes the cut, that's when people die, and there is no need for drastic measures beyond what his strength allows;
and do exactly as the corrosion suggests or dictates: if it affects the first joint, cut after the other joint;
and if it affects only part of the body, cut throughout that part. And if it ascends to the leg, then it stops at the knee joint;
And if it comes above the knee, there is no other issue than making the patient die;
And the way to handle or secure the limb is that you hold it both above and below, and extend one part of a person's muscles from under one band, and another part of the muscles from over the other band. And you cut the flesh which is between the two threads to one inch wide, until the bone is exposed;
Then make a fold of silk or linen on each side, so that the silk does not touch the healthy limb, and instruct the patient about other injuries and abscesses to be treated.
And if bleeding occurs during this procedure, quickly cauterize the wound immediately, When you apply certain restricting powders; then return to your medicine until its completion,
Then bind the dislocated limb with a suitable bandage,
And I will tell you what happened to one man at his house:
He had a blackness that seemed like the mark of fire,
And this burn came first to his thigh bone, spreading until it consumed all the bone.
And when the wound saw the burn, it tried to cover the bone, and became healthy;
And for many years after that, the burn came back to his arm bone, and it reached me,
And I place him on reactive substances after the purification of his body, and cannot stop the corrosion.
And it is that I pass my hand over him, and I do not wish it, for I hope to reflect the matter. And I also doubted whether if I cut off his hand, he would die, for his strength was weak; and he completely lost hope, and returned to his land, And if they reach to cover their hand, and then become healthy;
And I have only included this for when someone needs something else, if it is necessary.
No abscess ever comes to the inner flesh, and stays so long as to cause a large gathering of pus; And then it bursts and perforates, and the pus jumps out, like being in vessels, so they are also like vessels; And the skin above is as fine as a yard of cloth cut. and do not reach up to the bone or to the nerve, and such diseases are called "simple".
but if it extends so far that it reaches the bone from inside, it's called a "fistula";
And when you're handling the skin, ensure that you handle it all throughout its entirety, even more so when it's delicate like a piece of fabric. And does not dry out due to its decay.
And if you are trying to make the skin harden and decay isn't full, And if the skin is thick with fat, then its cleansing should be done thus:
Look to see if his breasts are large, and the gland which is there has a foul smell. Then administer an enema of Egyptian medicine as described here: Take saffron, oil, and litharge, equally, and cook them in one vessel on the fire, until the medicine is red and as thick as honey;
And then use this according to your need, and apply it whether hot or with honey, and catheterize the abdomen, and hold the rectum in place; leave the medicine to act for 2 hours, then remove by pressing down;
do this number of times, until the belly is relieved and the urine is restored.
And no time is fumigated with water of ashes, When this medicine is not present, and if you need ash from the vine's wood, and pour water over it,
Then let it drain, and use it as a suppository, until you know that the intestines are well moved;
And if the patient cannot bear this treatment, do not use Egyptian medicine or water of ashes, If you use a enema of water and honey or if there is a bit of mercury in it; Or you use an enema of honey and mixed wine, where the honey has properties to cleanse and wash. and the wine lets the body sweat;
And when you have done this, and you have ensured that the skin is well cleansed, if they apply a poultice made of what causes birth in him,
and you are to cover it with a plaster that's thin and elastic, and apply this using oil rubbed and wine; or you apply a poultice of various medicines and ointments, about which I have discussed their properties or the use of ointments;
and if it is too small for the heart to be in, and the cavity of the poultice cannot enter, If it is made wide with a little iron, and then places an Egyptian salve tent, "Or use basilico's salve as long as it gets widened;
"And if the wound is too wide, so that a nail or even a finger could enter,
And if the bend of your arm is above where it's supposed to be, then lift or move it lower than its normal position. For when your arm is in perfect alignment, do not allow it to strain muscles; and if you cannot cover the breast area as you see, so arrange it in such a way that your arm reaches as low as its natural position.
and if you cannot cover the chest sufficiently as you see, so prepare it in such a way: that the bow runs smoothly downwards, and do not leave any part of the bow behind; and take consolidating remedies to put inside the chest,
And there is a patch of linen of size one yard which covers the entire breast; then cut so that it reaches to the narrowest part of the breast, about twice the width of the first measurement; place lard on the wound with another patch of linen according to the size of the cut; and put it on the cut part of the breast to heal the wound, and do not remove the large linen for but once after many days;
And he who is by the edge of the heart, bone often to remove the bowel, Know this about what comes from the bowel, whether it's venom or food, enough or not enough, or digested, or undigested;
And take care if the patient feels pain or not, and whether there is an abscess or not,
And when your medicine has spread in this manner and you see the nature that jumps to the edge of the heart, If you know that the child is already born, approach with care;
and then release it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you release the wound, if another dressing is needed, and renew the ointment.
And if the child vomits undigested food after many days, you should know that the child has not been born. And if venomous bites occur long after exposure, do not lose hope for recovery of health,
for health approaches. For there are individuals who take late care in their wounds, and others do the opposite;
and if someone experiences undigested food jumping in his chest after many days, know that his organs are not functioning.
and if the organs delay to breathe and are distant, then prepare dry substances with moist remedies in terms of their effectiveness. As with transparent grease, because there is a large part of vitriol, and this is the last remedy;
Take the transparent grease, and apply it with rose oil, and rub it with old wine that has the same consistency.
Then cook it and use it; and do this very same thing for thickened honey, when transparent grease is not available,
Take myrrh, aloe, and incense, grind them together, then apply the paste onto linen cloth and place it inside the chest, and each time administer to an arithmetician for a long duration. and the roots of heavenly lilies which are also like flour with thyme;
and the roots of heavenly lilies which are also like flour with thyme; and whether you use simple remedies or compounds: grind them, make into powder, and place it on the honey I have mentioned, and apply it; And if the treatment lasts long, and is not treated by this method,
And if the treatment lasts long, and is not treated by this method, Therefore you will know that corruption has spread throughout, making an impression in the bone, or in hard parts of the body, or within joints; If the treatment of the pus-removal procedure, as we have said earlier.
Of the abscess under the nail.
Blisters are a pus-filled lump that forms under the skin of the hand's palm. or on the foot, or by chance forms in other spots;
and when it ages and one doesn't take care of it, if it turns into a hoof blister,. and runs down the nail as long as its root is within the skin, and by chance runs off all of it;
And comes the corrosion up to the bone, as long as it causes piercing pain, and the shoulder blades are wide apart, and the color is flushed.
When you treat it as we have instructed in the section on division, but the treatment does not improve. It is necessary that you remove all excess that has remained of the nail, Then cauterize the wound after that. The cautery is a great help if the bone is healthy, and the joint is sound;
and if the joint presses on the flesh and begins to pierce it, and irritates; then you should put a hot rod under the joint until the flesh starts to burn, and place the rod on top, and gently scrape away this delicate flesh, And place on the treatment bed remedies hot and corrosive to remove all;
And if the corrosion is in the bone, you must cut and dig deeply, for as much of the corroded bone there is, cannot be cured.
And if you see that the joint has rotted, cut it out in one piece as we have just described, Then he heals him as long as he is sound;
and if he is burned and blackened, and he feels great pain, then you must heal him first; then cut the nail from the gum using a sharp blade diagonally;
and make sure that the cut does not go up to the flesh underneath the nail, as the patient would feel too much pain;
And if this happens, put something above which soothes.
You must adjust what arises in the hands of some men by chance and are thick, and by chance it has a part where there are bones, and sometimes it has a nail,
And none of them are born at the root of the joint, or their birth is at some distance from our fingers. That which is born in any part of the hand does not move, And that which is born at the joint of the hand may move by chance;
The size of the one who is strong is light, in such a manner: Cut it at its root with a broad spatula.
The one that grows at the root of the joint is a cause for concern in treatment: hold it firmly with your thumb.
In those that grow at its root or at the back end, you should first remove the cartilage up to the bone. Then cut the bone with a suitable tool for this, and then treat it until it is clean.
The decisions that come together at the elbow arise from birth, or from an injury to a wound, or from the application of fire, or from similar actions.
If it is necessary that you repair this suture, so that it must be repaired according to its natural forms; Then place between two wet tents or cloths in oil with a rosette, so that they do not fuse. or you place between two pieces of fine wax, until their edges are fused as it should be.
When we perform soldering with her palm, if she applies the soldering paste as it should be done.
Of base or ignoble people.
Their veins are large, swollen and wrapped up with excessive melancholic fatness that comes from many parts of the body.
And it happens more in legs of those who walk on foot and work and carry things, than in others.
So you must give them once purging of bile, and then heal them from the basilica.
The iron cure follows two methods: one is to cut them [wounds], and extract or force out the black blood; And the other method is that you open the vein, and pull it all out with force.
The process of tailoring follows this method: first immerse the leg in hot water very strongly, until the large vein becomes thin. Then hold the leg at the pain point above the knee until it reaches the area below the knee; Then cut the vein into one or two lengths, or three, of a broad size,
Then lift and draw out the black blood to your hand, from one end to the other, until as much blood comes out as the medicinal properties of the wound can bear;
and then cover it up, and command that it be treated by rubbing with cooked meat stained this black color;
And restart evacuation and cleaning when the veins are full, and harm the patient.
The method for the removal of something from it is as follows: bend the leg towards the patient, if there is hair, Then immerse it in water, and raise the leg in hot water until it turns red, and the veins swell;
And if you don't have a bath, heat it over the fire, and then apply it along the vein from the long part of the thigh to the knee, or in the area below the ankle;
Then cut through the hide, and burn each vein from both sides, until you see it when you feel it;
and you see it red and black, and when it enters or looks like a white string in the skin as well;
then cut off the fire completely until it rises above the skin, and then cut it with the knife lightly,
then make cuts one and a half inches above three inches down; then burn the skin over the vein until you see it, Then lift up to the rack, just as you did before, and move towards another hook, just as you moved initially.
Then use a different size or more if needed, then lift it up and place it on the heel of your foot.
Then guide and lift until you reach the second size; then stretch one size at a time, until all strength is released, then place it.
And if you cannot guide and lift it, you can insert an awl through all .i. thick strong thread, And there she is and she guides it, and I thrust out from half a foot, and turn your hand on one side and the other, until it comes out; And make sure she doesn't stick, for if she sticks, one can neither guide nor lift her, causing harm to the patient;
And when you have guided her completely, place wet wool in vinegar and oil over the wound site; and treat it until it has healed.
And if her appearance is crooked and twisted together as a whole, and she isn't straight, just like we have said, It is necessary for you to sever it roughly, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have said earlier.
It is necessary for you to sever it roughly, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have said earlier. The shape of the iron used for the screw is curved, and does not cut, so that one doesn't pierce the vein;
And it has a large curve because if it were thin, it would pierce the vein, but so thick as we have said and shown here is its form:
From the civil vein
This vein is situated in legs, in hot areas where no herbs or trees can grow, and on earth that does not have moisture;
and sometimes appears elsewhere than in the legs, and this occurs from corruption that arises beneath the skin,
just as it comes within the body snakes and worms, situated between the skin and flesh.
And if you notice the beginning signs of this vein, if there is a very large inflammation in the leg, Then change its position, and let the veins begin to emerge, just like a root of a plant.
When the shoulder is opened, it should be that you wrap around inside with a piece of linen about three and a half to four inches wide, and tie it.
and hang the linen down to the leg, and every time there is anything that escapes, you wrap it around inside the linen, and tie it; and if it is too long, cut off a part of it, wrap the rest again, and don't cut its root until it has completely emerged. For if you handle it, it enters into the body, and pus and decay or disease occur where it is.
By which means, it must be treated gradually until completion, and nothing should remain incomplete or in haste;
And this vein, when treated for as long as the length of five palms, or ten times; And a hundred times this vein came to me from the length of ten palms. And when you handle it, if it yields one or two raisins or is empty, and you pierce until the bottom,
If everything goes well; and let all be discharged; and empty out the matter which is inside, and bring to it remedies against putrefaction for several days, then treat it just as abscesses are treated.
And never use cold hands on this vein, and similarly when the flesh opens at the connection where the bone is, or if it does so, and there comes much disturbance, and what we call 'jumping'; treat it then as we have said before.
Worms that emerge between the skin and flesh
This disease is called in our land "cow illness", because it often affects cows,
and is a small worm that hatches between skin and muscle, and travels throughout the body upwards and downwards, and one feels it well as from limb to limb, until it reaches the skin where it was heading, and then jumps out;
and is infested with putrefaction from bodily fluids, whether it comes in the form of worms, snakes, or roundworms and intestines;
And there is doubt about his intelligence, for when it travels through the body, and ascends to the head, and comes to the eye, by chance enters, and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.
When you see it being treated and healed, one can only wonder about what is going on when it occurs:
So then it must be that you bind the shoulder above and below with a strong bandage tightly,
Then lift it up and take hold of it firmly inside the flesh, and since he is moving forward within the body, you won't find him, if you apply a fire cautery there, as long as it grows;
and the worst injuries that it causes, if they move towards the eye, as we have said.
and if you see it coming or is close to the eye, hold the eyebrow firmly in place, then lift it up, and take firm hold of it.
And it is necessary to use the remedy of purification of body fluids with medicinal solutions for ailments caused by bodily humors,
and beware of meats that cause putrefaction.
Of the pain that comes from wind irritation. This illness is called "vakirir" in our land, and it's a kind of pain that affects some parts of the body. And indeed from limb to limb; and I show you what I told you.
I was summoned to treat a woman's illness, and she showed me her arms, and I saw a small swelling in the vein beneath the arms;
And just one or two days later, it rose up as high as a worm on her shoulder, Faster than anything else, like freshly cut silver when it's taken from the earth;
The pain leaves that side, and settles in the shoulder,
And then after a bit spread throughout the body, until it reached the other arm;
Then I noticed that it was twisting inside the body as well, just as I saw.
I marveled much at how it moved from member to member in such a way, for I had never seen this disease in this manner before. In every way, I wish to have what truly ought to move pain from oneself to another, but I did not wish it either, as I see it in the woman;
and I thought that was why women have hard breasts and exposed veins, and because of this, the constriction of wind becomes apparent;
And do not appear according to this reason among those who are delicate, and have moist bodies with responsive veins.
And when you see the treatment of this illness, and if the patients feel pain from it, if you find it opening as we have said, if the wound opens both above and below quickly, then continue to treat until the constraining wind force coming from that area leaves. and apply cautery to the wound; and if you do not see it at your eyes,
If you want to treat someone who is experiencing wind trouble, such as putrid pills, pills made from the opium poppy, and similar other remedies.
Of arrows
Arrows are diverse, depending on their appearance and the location of their impact on the body.
The diversity of these includes arrows that have large heads, small ones, feathered ones, and those that are soldered. And of those with two angles, and of those with tongues, and of those where there are fragments; And that which urinates in no member but does so according to two ways: or in the main body it defecates,
just as the brain, heart, liver, kidneys, lungs, intestines, bladder, and other such organs do. And when it urinates then in no part of these organs, and the signs of death that I will tell you later, become evident: If you must proceed with the extraction of this arrow, for death comes after it in various stages. And when you notice this bad omen and the arrow is not entirely out, if you must push it further, then treat the wound.
And when the sign of the brain occurs when the arrow has retreated and pierced through the bone, and there's a fluid that jumps out which is above the brain, Is when blindness and numbness and speech impediments occur with redness in the eyes, along with tongue inflammation and redness, and muscle twitching and confusion of mind, leading to vomiting. And perhaps it lacks strength from the nostrils, or from the ears; and perhaps it loses speech and voice. And there is white moisture in the wound that resembles pus, and in this also like burn of charcoal;
And if you notice this sign, take care, and pull the arrow if it is still there.
The sign of the arrow when it hits or pierces is that it is near the left breast, and also seems as if it were stuck in something hard, not empty; And by chance, if the situate also moves like hair, and in black blood, and comes coldness and cold sweat, and fainting: Thus understand that death approaches.
And the sign of the arrow that never lets out pus is when there's no foam bursting from the wound, and the throat swells up, and the patient's face changes color, and they sigh loudly with a cold chill.
And if the arrow exits through the buttocks cover, it's deep in the back; and there is great pain and sighing; and all the limbs from the shoulders are moving.
And if an arrow or stomach is hit, by chance if there's any undigested flesh from the wound.
And if an arrow or stomach is hit, and there's no meat passing through the intestines in the jump, then there's no hope for treatment, nor for extracting the arrow.
And if an arrow hits the bladder, and urine flows out during the jump, and patients feel intense pain: know that the wound is mortal.
The other limbs, such as the arms and neck, throat, shoulder, elbow, forearm, back, thigh, leg, and similar limbs, are safe depending on various dispositions. When the arrow is within your nerve or artery, and it isn't venomous, as I will tell you what happened to me, because that's how you should handle such a situation.
It happened in the first house where an arrow struck or pierced through the thigh up to the root of the nose: I tried it, and I removed it from the other side under the ear grease, causing no particular pain.
And I extracted an arrow that fell in the grease of the eye below the paper above. And the arrow had been returned, and one could not reach its tip towards the shaft, And the arrow was very long like an arch Turk's arrow, as thin as one light iron rod without ears; it was cleaned well and did not bring any harmful incidents.
And let an arrow pass from the throat to a Christian, and this arrow was Arab with ears:
I pulled it quickly through my cheeks, being skillful as I pulled it, and the Christian remained unharmed.
And take out an arrow at one blow, where it was embedded in the chest or belly, and I thought he would die;
and then after thirty days, if his condition did not change; I cut on the arrow, and fastened it to a lever, and pulled hard with it, without any mishap occurring.
And if you see an arrow fall or be driven into the back of someone, and the wound was sealed up;
And allows the arrow to remain within, not returning to its natural position, And finds no harm in any of these natural works.
And there was another man, who had an arrow wound in his face, and the wound was sewn up;
And this causes such suffering of great pain; and not many other similar things.
And he pulled out an arrow from the king's thigh, where it was embedded in his own buttocks, and was leaning slightly to the right side; and the arrow was fully inserted.
I was summoned for treatment after it had been three days since it occurred. I found the wound to be very tight.
I tried very carefully to find out but did not feel it at all; and there was only a burn and pain under his right ear. I thought it might be the tip of the arrow.
I put on a compress dressing under his arm for fear that his armpit would swell; And showed me the head of the arrow.
And showed me the head of the arrow. I placed the plaster on for several days, and quickly resolved the wound, and thus the patient suffered long suffering.
As long as he sensed the arrow within his nose; and he told me this. I applied corrosive antiseptic medicine to the wound for several days until it was opened.
And attempt it, and feel the tip of the arrow which was lodged at its place; Then adjusted it during the opening of the wound with this medical treatment, until the head of the arrow became visibly apparent;
and ensured that the ends were deeply inserted for four months,
then stretched out so that I could reach with my pliers, and did this on both sides of the wound, and it could not come out;
Therefore never stop refining and inventing ways to design tools, until I had the first one made for two days with well-made pincers, Following what its shape will come to at the end of this chapter, until I have tried it, and I shall heal the wound.
And they judge that cartilage near the nose cannot be restored: I would then heal it, and the wound was soldered together, and the patient was entirely well.
And I told you about the quality of extracting some arrows, so that you apply your treatment to what I do not say, for books cannot encompass everything;
but the wise masters compare well with just a little bit of knowledge, and on what is current and lacking, prove new work, and nine tools, for the removal of foreign objects that occur in this craft.
I say that arrows do not come out from their places in limbs unless by two ways: or by their entrance into the limb, or otherwise;
And the one that comes out by chance when it enters, this is the arrow entering the flesh, and it comes out once now.
And if it doesn't jump now, leave it until the horse's coat is clean under, and see its outcome;
And also if it's stuck in the bone, and cannot come out, leave her like that for some days, and remove her each day;
And then she jumps, and if it doesn't jump, pierce the skin with a small hole until the horse's flesh under is widened, and then pull her out.
And if the arrow has been pushed inside the body so deeply that we can't see it, then search for it thoroughly; and if you feel it, then guide it with any suitable instrument;
and if you cannot reach it due to the tightness of the wound, or because the arrow is deep within; And there are no bone, nerve or vein, if it cuts so that the wound is large; Pull out the arrow if you can, and if there are ears attached to the arrow for holding it.
Pull out the arrow if you can, and if there are ears attached to the arrow for holding it. remove the flesh that is stuck inside at two places where you can reach. and then break or bend the ears of the arrow as long as you can pull it out;
and then break or bend the ears of the arrow as long as you can pull it out; And handle carefully to ensure you don't break the arrowhead, but pull it out more firmly.
And if you can't achieve it in one go, until the arrow reaches your hand, let it get stuck there, then pull it out because the extraction is painful. And if the bleeding prevents you from proceeding as we have instructed for treatment in this chapter, then follow what we have told you about treatment.
and beware of incising near nerves and veins, and proceed as carefully as possible to extract the arrow without risk.
immediately or quickly, or firmly or gently; and position the patient according to their shape when the arrow hit them, because it's the greatest help that I can provide, and if you cannot do so, place them according to what the marks show to you.
The arrow that came from another side, or if there is anything visible or felt swollen under the skin where it was struck:
Cut then upwards, as long as the pliers can grasp, and then pull: if you jump now.
And if it is held within the bone, turn your hand around, until it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then guide it.
And if it cannot come out, leave it still, and then restart the extraction until it comes out forcefully;
and if it is attached to the arrow, if you push it all the way down;
and if it is in the cavity and you're supposed to administer force, do so with an instrument or tool, if the tip of the arrow enters through the skin of the tool; and then apply force,
and if it is stuck in the tool, use the pointed end of the tool to facilitate extraction.
And if the arrowhead is bent, it's necessary for you to bend all the flesh around or at the point of entry, if you can. then treat the wound as it should be treated.
And if the arrow is in or pierces or enters the abdomen or bladder or ribs and it is close by, and you can feel it beneath the skin, if one feels for it,
and protect against cutting into the vein and nerve, then extract it, then suture the wound; that is the task. And treat until she is healed.
The shape of the forceps used to extract arrows resemble bird beaks, and here is the form:
And there are many ways: large, medium-sized, and small, depending on the size of the arrow.
of the veins of the common body Of the veins through which one cures, there are thirty-one, from which sixteen have their origin.
This is to know: two small ones that are after the ears, which are called the "two herbs"; and the two arteries that are in the two visible temples; And two veins that are inside the two eyes, which are called "aspires"; And the vein that is in the forehead; and the vein that is on the head near the nose; and the two jugulars which are at the neck; and the two veins that are inside the cheeks above the mouth, and these veins are called "augueherich"; And two veins that are on the tongue.
The veins which we usually heal are five in each arm:
One is the cephalic vein, and it's located under the left rib, and they call this 'vein of the head'; And the median one is called 'the artery', and it's made up of the cephalic vein and the basilic vein,; And they call this part of the body "the heart's vein"; and the great vein is situated on the right side of the body, And they refer to it as 'the belly's vein', and it is located on the left flank. It refers to the one that is treated, which opens clearly on the abdomen.
The artery is the vein that lies between the little finger and the ring finger, and it extends for two inches;
and there are two veins in each leg and each foot: one is at the bend of the knee on the left side of the body, and the second one at the ankle on the right side of the body; and the vein that is called "the nesse", which is located in the ankle on the other side.
And in the other leg are two veins above those.[1]
The health of the veins that occur after the ears helps with colic pains and migraines; And the qualities of a healthy person, as I tell you, and it is that you grow the hair until they are long and even; and if they start to poke at their base when they're born, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
And the qualities of a healthy person, as I tell you, and it is that you grow the hair until they are long and even; and if they start to poke at their base when they're born, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow. And rub the arm or veins with a rough cloth; then narrow the skin at the neck of the wound with a needle, until the two veins can be seen behind the ears in the two arms depending from the head: Place your hand on your pulse, and where you feel the beat under your hand, mark it lord of the wound;
Then take the scalpel, and make an incision through your vein up to the bone, then lift your hand all along the vein upstream, And cut and remove flesh and the vein very carefully up to 2 inches deep, and let out blood as long as you see;
Then tighten and bind it until it is healed;
And I have already spoken of the incision and cautery, or in the first book.
The health of the two arteries that are in the two temples, if it turns to ancient inflammation, and for the eyes, and long accustomed earache, and within the body of the weeping fevers, they are the eyes;
And the quality of the surgeon is such as I say: And it is that the patient forces his neck, until the two veins appear clearly; And he feels the pulse at his throat, and then presses to feel for it;
Then lifts the knee above the vein on your right index finger, and holds the scalpel there; Then lift the vein upwards, and grasp it, just as you have done in other veins, and make the cut according to your need;
Then release the patient, place your finger on the vein for an hour, then place it on cotton;
and then make the cut, and keep it open until it heals; and we have discussed this and about its treatment and extraction, or where the book begins.
The treatment of the vein from the forehead is as important as that for the temporal vein in diseases affecting the face, and it causes headache, and redness;
And its quality lies in how the patient narrows their throat by twisting, causing the vein to appear. Then take the tool which is called "the digger", whose form is as follows:
And place the tip on the vein, and press with your hand or another object, and let the blood flow according to the amount you see; Then release the discomfort from the neck and tie the vein as long as it is healthy and has not been cut once;
Always, it is not fitting that the flames be too close; and they are applied across, because the bone is near, and by chance break the flames when they are fine.
The treatment of the two veins that are in the two eyeballs helps with the eyes, and at the nose, and on the cheek, and in the ear for hearing, and diseases of the face;
And the quality of its treatment is such that when applied to patients, their disease forces its way out through twisting with some line, as before;
Then apply the treatment, and let the treatment go through in a straight line, a bit long like the flame, a bit wide, for there is no meat.
And if the flames are subtle, perhaps they break; then channel some blood, as much as you need to, and then bind it with cotton, binding it well.
The treatment of the vein near the nose is good for fever, and for sudden swelling, and for diseases of the face, such as migraines and redness that comes to the face, and indeed when it is old;
and the quality of this treatment is that the patient narrows their throat, then strains their nose towards your left hand, Take a fine long flame, and insert it inside the mouth in the space that is between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open well yet, and the arrow will now begin to move;
and do not go too far into it, and let the blood flow gently according to your need, then leave her for a night, for she is quickly restored;
The healing of the two intestines aids in the constriction of the small intestine, and at the beginning of mixing disorders, and in many diseases, and in dysentery, and corrosion, and herpes, and inflammations;
And the quality of healing is such that the patient's stomach compresses its lumen from both ends, as we have said; And when the masters are positioned on the head of the patient's stomach, and the stomach presses against one point,
Then heal the vein along a bit more broadly than long, then drain off the blood in moderation, or as much as is necessary;
Then redo the operation on the other vein, then release the tie, and hold the veins moderately tight. Let the patient not suffer from strangulation; and leave them until morning, so that the wound heals properly.
Regarding the care of wounds The care of veins in the mouth aids in their condition, and it deals with gum decay, cracks on lips, nosebleeds, and inner cheeks.
And the quality of health is to have the patient stand before you, and hold their neck as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at both veins, one being on the right lip and the other on the left. and recognize them by their darkness, and because within they have small black veins: then touch both of them, and if you do not know which one they are, and you are in doubt,
then touch both of them, and if you do not know which one they are, and you are in doubt, If you cut off the largest portion of each part, and do exactly the same with both major veins that are above and below it, because this is one identical method.
From the healing near the tongue The healing of the veins near the tongue helps after the healing of the head (region), and this is done at the constriction of the throat, and for diseases of the eye, and for diseases of the mouth;
And the quality of the healer is such that when the patient lies with their hands over their head in front of the sun, and they lift the tongue, you look under each side where a black vein appears:
So then for both, do not overdo it on either side, because near them are arteries.
The veins of the arm that we commonly treat are treated in two ways:
either by causing them to be pierced with one broad flame, or with a fine olive oil if the veins are like that of an ax blade, and they are called 'anisel'; and they are wide and fine according to the size and narrowness of the veins. The shape of the flame dart is quite famous and very wide as you see:
And it requires to open the veins full of large visible blood, and those contain large blood and disturbance; and this is the shape of the olive flame:
and it is more slender and pointed, and used for clarifying subtle veins, or it has subtle yellow blood.
The treatment of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with illnesses that are around the throat, and in the neck, and in the chest, and in the stomach;
And it is proper for the surgeon to heal carefully, and he must guard against the artery that is around. And if he cuts the artery, and blood begins to flow out, it is necessary to stop the bleeding, as I have said. And it should not be held by the flame, but trimmed like that.
And if the basilica does not open clearly, it is necessary to extract it and use another; You want no cut in it, or you make an incision in its place where the vein runs through the arm: it opens clearly; and put the flame to it at once, as we have said.
And if you know where the vein lies, it is appropriate to lift the arm in such a way that you press on the spot until you feel the pulse; Then mark where you will cut, and then bind the arm, and prepare to open the vein before it.
And beware not to cut into the artery when you see where it swells, because that's where the artery is: listen there instead.
And if you see it bulging up high like the urine of a child, and the veins are red and subtle, know that these are veins from the artery: Hasten then, place your thumb for a while, then remove your thumb when the veins are constricted, as has often happened;
He binds the arm, and leaves it like this, not moving the patient; and remains under fear, not moving him until he is healed.
And if the wound is not cleaned, and it needs to be done, and you do not have the medicine at hand, then cut through the artery if it opens, for the head of the injured party retreats; clean the wound.
And take a bark from a willow tree, and cut it, and take one half and bind it firmly until the other side.
If the wound is cleaned, that's good; if not, then treat it as we have said, with powders that stop bleeding.
And the treatments are not harmed by many arrangements for the small size of the wound, and the strength of the link of the arm.
The healing of the vein in its middle is helped by means such as bleeding from above and below, and through the belly, Because it consists of the basilica and the cephalic [systems], just like we have said;
And it is necessary for the surgeon to be aware of the nerve which is below, and if he doesn't go far enough, and he finds the nerve, And it swells and the health is harmed, and by chance cannot heal;
And this nerve opens many times, and if it doesn't open in any places due to its subtlety, then it is necessary for you to sharpen the tool beforehand; and listen carefully as you use your power on the nerve.
And if there's a vein between the two nerves, cut it long.
The healing of the temporal artery helps, since it carries blood to the head, and aids with the eyes;
And it is necessary to heal by burning with an olive flame or with a thyme flame, for this is the safest of all veins, because there is neither loss of nerve nor artery.
Through every way, it is necessary to seek the lightest limb and do not be discouraged if the first attempt fails, and one tries again; And by chance inflames some limbs in certain individuals even if the first attempt fails, but there is no reason for concern. The quality of healing depends on your thought process.
The first thing you need to know about surgery is that it's carried out solely for the purpose of preserving health,
and to prevent illnesses from occurring; and ensure the surgery is done in one of the three veins known as head vein, arm vein and basilic vein; that is, the head vein, the arm vein, and the basilic vein. and surgery should be performed at the beginning of prayers while kneeling, and in autumn and after meals during winter, when signs of fullness appear;
And one should nurse properly the first day or the third, after two hours or three days.
The care given for diseases does not have a set time, but rather depends on the need of the day or food, in all hours and at any times;
And it is not advisable to nurse children up to twelve years old, nor a woman who has been pregnant for only three-quarters of a month up until seven months. And one should not nurse the elderly who have passed sixty years.
And when one wishes to heal oneself, in whatever manner that may be, it is necessary for them to expel the bowels with a gentle enema. If there is much of food held back, so that the veins do not draw off the superfluities from the bowels that harm the principal members;
Nor will such a person be healed who is too full of meats, or who is drunk, as long as they are able-bodied, or have dropsy;
and when one attends to healing after colic pain, and vomiting, and abdominal bloating, and frequent urination, and sexual activity, and work, of staying awake and being exposed, and that which drains away the virtue, or due to something from injury or damage to the body;
Then regulate the body's fluids; if someone is overweight due to food and drinks or medications, then adjust their intake accordingly.
Then through bathing, if there is no obstruction, for the purification of blood,
and heal it from the lower part up to three-quarters inside the belly button, as we have said;
and protect yourself that day from work, from pain, and from excess, and from similar things;
And bind and join them, and have the bandages higher than where one is being treated, and rub the arm twice or three times.
Then loosen the tie a bit in the middle, for when it's too tight or not enough, one cannot correct it without;
And then rub the arm with your hands until the veins swell and you feel them.
Then moisten the bandages with a little old oil, then place your left hand's index finger under that vein near the arm slightly where you want to treat. that the blood does not escape and fail when struck by the metal. For there are veins that flow like strings under the hand, and there are some that are full of wind. yet when one places them over the flame, they move towards the flame and cannot open the vein, and thus one is of those;
and if he opens the vein, the wound is too narrow, for in such cases one must have knowledge of these things for the surgeons.
And if they operate on the vein for the first time, that is good; and if not, then attempt it again slightly near where the limb was or above quickly, while the limb isn't swollen.
And if the limb is swollen and the patient feels pain, then they should leave it for one or two days, and do not bind the arm: By chance, an abscess might appear; do not enter water or bathe, then start the healing if it suits her.
And if the wound is small or the abscess is subtle and you doubt that there isn't as much blood coming out as you see, pierce the same in this case straight through to all the flame.
And the work progresses somewhat quickly, so that the limbs are swollen; for this happens many times, when the wound is small.
If you see that the limb is swelling, do not restart the treatment immediately, and place a little oil on it instead, for it helps lighten the body of blood, and is effective in this part where the oil is applied.
And apply the oil when you treat each wound that heals the veins, to stop the flow of blood;
And this same makes tournips and beets when you apply it to the limb; if too large for blood, its efficacy is subtle and diminishes.
And if there comes a large abscess, which happens often, just as when the blood flow is not strong enough for that particular occasion or when the opening of the vein is small, if you hurry, and place on the limb a wet sponge in water and wine and a little warm, and hold it for an hour;
it is necessary that you do this after the blood has flowed from the vein, and if it stays on the limb for some days without turning black or green, then it does not harm him/her; and if you see that the wound has not healed, place on it something made from myrrh or aloes mixed with a decoction of rue, mustard, or similar.
And often, pus and appearance would occur at the healing of the basilica: so then put your hand over, and if you find the body soft under the pressure of the hand, that is the sign of bad health. Hear then that you do not place upon any thing of what we have said, because it could happen in the middle without the artery; but make one plastered area dry to harden the body, then treat with other remedies until it is healed.
And lead each person to have blood according to the amount of its virtue and the color of the blood.
For if the heart is black, let him bleed until it becomes red; and if you see that it's large, let him bleed until it thins; and if it's too hot, let him cool down.
And it is necessary for him who is well-built and strong, needing the extraction of blood, to make a larger incision, and let the flames be wide;
And for him who is weak, do the opposite, and it suits the surgeon to heal little by little, and one must heal him by cutting across, not straight;
And this way of healing saves from the spreading of blood and constriction of nerves, and is better than letting the healer work long rather than wide.
And for the one whose body needs treatment, it is necessary to give them a paste made of juice from large apples; if they are overheated, cool them with blood three or four times.
And if they are cold in complexion, they should consume before a meal a mixture of oily broth with syrup mixed in, or with aromatic honey syrup containing spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cardamom, along with an intensely fragrant syrup.
And if it stops breathing during the operation of bloodletting, it should be advised to inhale beef broth and a subtly fragrant syrup afterwards.
and apply the other things we have mentioned in the chapter of syncope for the evacuation of veins.
And if they wish to breathe more vigorously in their arm, and seek another bout of sweating, whenever they are weakened by extensive sweating, it should be that they sweat gradually, according to the strength of their constitution, continuously.
And if one wishes to fumigate their arm after the first cleansing, and it has strong odors, if they are cleansed seven hours after the first cleansing, or after the seventh hour.
And if one wishes to cleanse another part, then they should do it on the second day or the third.
For there is much blood inside the body that has now heated up, and it causes fever; so you must drain large quantities of it, and widen the cut until it begins to bleed into the gauze; Once you have satisfied all the conditions for cleansing, place your hand on the heart when it starts to heal, so that death does not come upon it instead of bleeding; And this happens many times when the surgeons are negligent;
And it is wrong when you see dislocation of the arm and blood comes out a second time, and if the wound is closed, to press hard upon; Not even if it's been bent, quickly extend your arm because doing this would be ill.
but let it until it heals the second time; or you should place your finger at the tip of the flame, until the blood that has been frozen in the wound flows. And place above one part of the salve reconstituted in water, and gently press it.
And if a vein has been cut, leave it unclosed and do not compress it until the abscess is relieved.
And if there's need to draw out blood the second time, heal it in that same place, or on another vein, or on the other arm.
The vein inside the arm is healed at its own location instead of the neck because it's composed that way.
And the method of healing is such that the patient submerges their hand in hot water, until the veins become red;
then tie it moderately, so that the vein becomes visible, then heal now through it, not too wide nor too long;
and make the cuts small, and heal close to the wrist joint, and if it cannot pass, then immerse the hand in hot water, and let the blood flow into the water, as long as you have enough.
and if it's in that condition, don't immerse the hand in hot water either, because one puts it more in winter than in cold;
And healing of this vein is safer than all other veins, for there are no arteries or nerves in it.
The healing of the rescue of the right hand is worth all diseases to the liver, and this is how:
Stretch out your hand and soak it in hot water until you see the vein; And if you heal it diagonally, and if you do this all over, without causing any harm;
And do not go too far downward, because all nerves are completely naked,
Then put your hand in warm water; if the affected area is frozen at the wound site and cannot come out.
And when you have treated the blood as much as your skill allows, place on the vein where and how to sew it quickly to close, and do thus with each case.
The cure of the one in his left hand corresponds to the disease of the mouse, and do everything as I told you for the right.
The treatment of gynecological diseases is suited for all illnesses affecting the body, such as ailments in the uterus, and retention of fluids, and diseases of the kidneys, and those affecting the old thighs and legs, and similar illnesses.
And the quality of this treatment consists in making patients drink hot water, and rubbing them on the veins until they flow, and above the ankle joint; and if it is located at the ankle, and up over the foot, many kidneys go there;
Cure it then with something larger than usual or at the ankle, where it is more effective.
And if you cure it at the foot, be aware of the nerves that are there, and treat it crosswise as in cutting wood; let the flames pass through quickly.
And if it cannot come out without pain, put the foot in water and allow well to drain the vein.
And if the cure works on the first attempt, then try a second time above with a little more salt because the skin is salty; Don't doubt about nerves, as we have said, and similarly perform surgery on the other side too.
The legs of the sciatic nerve are at the knee joint, and its health corresponds to the pain in the hip, when it's due to blood clot.
And its quality of health is such that the disease enters or affects the leg above the ankle, and twists there for four inches by twisting.
but otherwise the vein does not open; and if it opens, heal it in every way you can, and across the path. And it's wise to handle her carefully because your hands are unaccustomed, and she responds greatly to human touches.
And it's wise to handle her carefully because your hands are unaccustomed, and she responds greatly to human touches. And if you don't find her, if there's no opening or softness on their backside or bottom part, and near the small intestines, be careful of the nerves;
And make sure to correctly follow the blood flow that you see, and then release the connection, put it on cotton and tighten; she is now healed.
Cures using a suction cup
Blasping devices are made of horns, or spiders, or snails; and bloodletting is performed in two ways: either by piercing and drawing blood, or without piercing.
And this kind of bloodletting which involves piercing is done in two ways: either it is by any fire, or without heat;
And two others on each of the ribs under the neck; and the suction cup under the chin; And the suction cup on each shoulder; and the suction cup over the knuckles; And the suction cups on both arms; and the suction cups on both legs; And the suction cup at each ankle; and the suction does not deal with blood, but only minor veins that are scattered in the flesh,
And for this reason does not weaken me at all, as we do with strength of veins; And it should not be administered, nor with any fire or sense of heat, in any illness that comes from overfullness, until all the organs are emptied.
And if it must be used due to the necessity of diseases or by custom, we should administer it each hour at the beginning of her period, or towards its end, and throughout, in every circumstance;
because there are some who, when they need to bleed, have trouble with their head;
And if one finds congestion and warmth within their face, and on their head, and at the neck, and in their eyes;
And if one finds a drop of blood in their mouth, and have difficulty speaking, and are spitting blood; And if someone experiences this, seeing blood and ashes and deaths and similar things through their nose.
And when we see these signs, and especially during the last month before giving birth, we instruct to breathe after three hours each day.
The treatment of the neck helps with the gout disease affecting the head ... that comes from the eyes, and it is not suitable for it to be after the elimination of everything in the body;
And this ventilation is part of the treatment of the cranial area.
It would not be suitable for those who have a cold constitution to use it or if they are experiencing purging, because this causes much harm.
And it would not be suitable for someone who uses it or has cold diseases in their head.
And he who often gets relieved from it, becomes oblivious, and because of this one must place the suction cup somewhat further down due to the confusion.
The suction at the neck is in the vicinity of the relief of the chest and the basilica, because it is effective against the tightening around the wrist, and through the incision of the lung channel, and immediately, and at fullness;
and it should not be applied too tightly, for if it is held too firmly, it may cause disorientation or stomach and heart issues.
The ventilation of the two ribs under the neck can cause head pains, eye and toothaches, and choking, and pain at the roots of the teeth.
And it is in the location of the health of the basilica; and you should instruct the surgeon to position his hand when placing it, not to touch the artery, and not to allow blood flow interruptions.
Ventilation around the chin can cause mouth diseases, gum decay, and other ailments that occur in the mouth; it is located in the health of the two lips.
Ventilation of the shoulders comes from diseases caused by heat and congestion.
The ventilation of the arms is as valuable as three veins of the arm, for it draws blood from these large veins;
and commands the warrior not to fill it too much, for the arm is bare of flesh, and is close to nerves and arteries.
The suction cup on the back is as effective as those near the heart and in the vicinity of diseases, and it is necessary for the suction cup to be large and made of metal, so that it must be well treated; and by chance, if it were thin, it would break and cause major injuries.
The suction cups on the legs if applied firmly bleed well from the entire body and are valuable for old pains of the kidneys, bladder, and uterus, as well as reducing inflammation; they are located in the two knees and ankles and all at once weaken the body after prolonged use and cause loss or weakness in various conditions.
The method of applying the suction cup is as follows: you should place it initially empty and apply suction consistently, then do so quickly, move evenly, and continue without stopping until you see the skin turning red and swelling. Then remove them and be careful about body positions because there are those with thick skin and clear pores: it's necessary to pierce only once, and to make wide incisions that are somewhat deep; and suction lightly.
And if the lump is large, it's necessary to prick twice: first time for the purpose of making a passage for the larger blood flow.
And if the hair is very thick, it should be pricked three times. And when we wish to drain some blood slowly and gradually, we only pierce once.
And if we wish to drain some blood, we often repeat the action; and if the hair is thick, it should be pricked completely through, and the ends are such that the hairs are pierced suddenly.
And it is necessary for those who have thick and hard skin, and whose pores are narrow, that you grease the areas with suction cups of stimulative and dissolving oils: if it's in a state of purple oil or sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil;
And if it's on a leaf, from which garlic, or lettuce, or chamomile, or other similar plants grow.
And if the excess is large and cold, take oil of melilot, or turpentine, or oil of nutmeg, and similar.
And if it is to strengthen the flesh and large pores, there should not be any oil applied at all.
But it is recommended to wash after using rose water, or cold water, or water from the rose apple, or water from a cucumber, or porcelain water, or other similar substances.
And to those who have much moisture, if they rise from sweat, or water of myrtle, and of sumac, and of similar things.
And those who have large excesses rise from old wine, or water of the brook, or a decoction of nettle or chamomile, or other similar things;
and it is not suitable to apply a suction cup before or during the bath, but after the bath for one hour or two; and do not sleep afterwards.
and it is necessary that they know when they should be suctioned and when they have been suctioned. And watch over him who is being cured and is choleric, and if he gets too hot and inflamed; It's necessary for him to consume cold things, such as apples, endive and lettuce, and similar items;
And eat tender meat, and pork, and moist meats.
And for those who have a cold complexion, they should consume honey syrup and moderately scented wine that's between old and new vintage, and eat small portions, and tender meat, and young birds and baby pigeons.
And on the day he gets suctioned, if he must drink more than eat;
And it is necessary to give some people neither thyme nor muscat before suction, or after, to strengthen the main members; And sharpen the straw for him, but it is not good that those who are sick drink it.
The suction cups that are placed to harm the body are those placed on the liver, and on the gallbladder, in gout patients, on the abdomen and belly button and kidneys, and hipbone, because this member does not tolerate being harmed by suction in wounds,
And it's done only to draw blood from limb to limb, in the same way as we place them on the breasts when someone gives birth; to remove the viscosity that is in the limb, as we apply suction cups on the belly and on the buttocks to reduce the size of the limb;
and relieves pain, when there is an obstruction or stone, it may remove the obstruction by its attractive power or evacuate the stone from its place.
and thus does it when placed on the liver and the kidneys where there is retained suction,
And these suction cups are administered empty for suction alone; and never are they administered together with fire, and sometimes they are filled with water.
Just like in the case of pleurisy diseases, and in such a manner one fills the suction cup with hot water, or with water that has boiled herbs useful for this.
The shape of the suction cup administered by fire is as follows:
And it has two and a half spans wide at the bottom, and near the middle there is a small notch as to pierce an object like sticking an awl in it,
And if it is of an iron, heat it until it does not hurt the patient when placing it on the limb;
And have in the middle a rod across made of an iron or a fishbone, to place a candle in charge.
And let them be both large and small according to the diseases and the age of those who take them;
because the suck-pipes for children are different from those for the elderly, and those for skinny people are different from those for fat ones.
And one must place this suction cup thus on the limb:
Take the wax candle or a line of one inch, and insert it through the ventouse which is placed through the penis which is also inside the ventouse. so that the flame is at the bottom of the suction cup, ensuring it does not burn the skin;
and then place it on the limb, and you should do so at the point we have described, so that when one wants to, steam escapes from it, and removes the suction cup;
And follow the groove as before, and repeat this often, if you need to.
In the suction cup then, which is administered in pleurisy illness, for all acute conditions, there should be no excess or deficiency, and it's only given when it's full of water, and placed solely on the limb;
And this is its form:
Nostril plugs are only used for in limbs where one cannot place suction cups due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar. And during their unclothed state from childbirth, like two or three, and others similar;
And concerning the quality of bathing such that when you find veins in calm, clear water without contamination, take them;
and put one nut into gentle water until they are familiar and have nothing in their bellies. and then bleed them with a scalpel or suction cup, then rub the limb until it turns red, and place the veins on.
And when they are full, and cry out, if there is a place where we can put the suction cup, then place it, for this hardly matters after.
If not, lift the side with ease and water, quite well, and then proceed with the incision;
And if the limbs swell too much after the course of the veins, moisten with one and a half a linen cloth in cold water, and place it, until the vein becomes swollen;
And if there are multiple veins, apply powdered vitriol or gallstones, and similar substances, until it becomes swollen;
Here you place half the thickness of peeled peas inside the limb, and leave them until they heat up to the limb, then it will stop bleeding now;
and if you need more, take others without fail.
And if the veins do not readily take, rub with fresh bleeding, or you stick an awl in the limb until blood comes out. and then place them, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will heat up;
And when you see they are giving birth, if you apply a powder of aloes and ground wheat, or ash, they will now be able to push.
This begins the book on fractures
This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it restores fracture and alleviation.
Know this, dear fellow, that the leaves of this chapter are filled with things not found in any of the old books, nor did anyone read a letter from them;
And because of this reason, the knowledge has been removed from our land, for I have never found anyone good;
And I know nothing else, but through the study of ancient books, which I have so diligently pursued that I have dealt with this knowledge in them, and by experimentation, and through my daily routine.
And I have described in this chapter what is contained, and summarized it at the end, and clearly shown the forms of the tools that are used, as I did in those two chapters previously.
So it is necessary that we outline or introduce this book's main points and chapters where the wise people use their understanding, and remain faithful to truth. Let those who have experienced this know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when there is a break or dislocation or twisting or sprain anywhere, it should be that you quickly tend the patient on both sides and the other side, if no injury comes to them completely, such as weakness of limbs, children, or elderly people;
Or when one is too hot or too cold; and eat icy foods, meaning cold jousts, and seed of birds and fawns, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and fill your body with foods that do not completely obstruct the veins as long as you doubt about pus formation or the spreading of material in the limbs; if revive the patient to their previous state until they used it.
And when broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary that the patient be nourished with foods that cause a heavy digestion or have viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, and onions, and nuts, and pies, and beef stomachs, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things. For at times, after an operation, it can move again more quickly than the breaking.
And know that bones broken in old and weak people do not heal or join well according to their nature due to the dryness of the limbs, nor those that are too soft, such as children's bones.
but take care, reset over the broken bone. that is, use large thorns to hold the limbs together until it feels as before; and do not finish his work immediately, for this requires fattening with large meats, as we have said.
And know that fractures are varied in many ways.
For the fracture of the skull is different from the fracture of the heel, or of the leg, and in this chapter I will tell you all ways of fracture. For there are fractures that go to the marrow, and others through cutting, such as the length of a feather for writing.
For there are fractures that go to the marrow, and others through cutting, such as the length of a feather for writing. And if it's a fracture with injury, or a fracture with just a small crack.
And for each kind there is its own tool and proper instrument in the repair, according to what memory brings to its place;
And it is known that the breaking of the bone occurs when the leg twists, and opens well outward, and ends under pressure from the hand;
And when there is no twist nor pain at the joint, and the patient does not feel great pain, there is no break;
But it can well have a twist, or a crack, or a small break. But do not move it with your hand yourself, but apply the remedies that follow, and then gently constrain it now.
And know that when the breaking occurred in the field, and the two parts were separated, they should now put them at an equal point, so that the abscesses are placed both there and across.
And if the pus is flowing out, let him not leave any day until the pus has calmed down; Then place it evenly as you can do lightly and wisely, knowing that restoring this is easier than restoring those with pieces. Then apply pressure, as described later on.
And if in the bone there are broken pieces, and it is divided into two parts, whether they're hands or feet, or at your hand if it's a smaller limb, or at two strings, or at one string and your hand;
And position the limb according to its natural shape, so when the parts of the injured member are healed, you must set it back in all ways that allow motion within their limits as much as you can, and ensure that through your actions no injury or pain befalls the patient;
And adjust well the two joints of the bones according to the best forms.
And hold it well in your hand if you feel that it is not properly set: if it is dressed beautifully, and do not over-tighten, do not press as they do when they remove an abscess by their method of incision and contraction on the limb, as we have desired many times.
And when the limb is set properly, take care to keep the patient immobile, whether awake or asleep, whether turning over or in any other manner; And ensure that the limb is so securely set that it feels no pain. For when it feels no pain, it is not quite right, and you should place it in such a position that it does not feel any pain;
For when it feels no pain, it is not quite right, and you should place it in such a position that it does not feel any pain; and make sure it is placed correctly, so that there is no twisting when you reset it;
and the quality of the limb after breakage should be according to what I have told you.
Know that limbs broken are varied by size and extent and shape.
For there are small limbs, such as hands and arms, and alike: one should wrap them in soft and delicate linen cloths;
And those that are large, such as thighs and legs: it should be wrapped in a wide and firm bandage because the wide bandages encompass all of the larger limb, and restrict uniformly from all sides so there is no unevenness;
Then apply lightweight bandages around, three or four times according to the limb, and hold your hand slightly along the entire bandage, then move upwards from the fracture and restrict less, so the fracture moves a little away from the break;
And soften that bond a little bit by a little bit, until you have taken a large portion of the healthy part, then take another bond and return to it again quickly around the broken limb;
Then go back to the area of the breakage, and apply moderate pressure, neither too hard nor too softly, as we have said in the first instruction above;
Then place between the tied linen bands until they are uniform, then tie everything with one band above, and then put your well-made stars on it, if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or an abscess, then place something soothing for the abscess, and that reduces swelling, and leaves it like that for a few days;
Then grasp them firmly, and make them half the size of a medium stick cut straight, or from wood used to create darts, or from palm fronds, and shape them as in this illustration:
But it is necessary that the splint placed on the fracture be slightly larger and wider than the others;
and should also be as long as it is appropriate to the size of the limb, whether small or large;
then hold them in place just like you did with the first splinting process, then tie an extra piece of string on top of that, as you did at the first splinting around the fracture;
As the wound is larger before, now it's smaller; it requires that the thread be medium, neither too thick nor too thin, and should be of soft linen.
For if the thread is thick, like what I want from works of fools who make their loops on linen cords twisted in the wrong way, and this is great error, because the loop cannot be even if it's too delicate, and it doesn't suit to have less than half a do (a unit of length) between each stitch.
And if the wounds are irritated by the edges of the stitches after tightening during their healing, then place linen patches or raveled wool on them, so that they do not blister.
When the wound is inflamed and the ribs are broken, I will then describe the treatment below.
And know that it is not proper to hold back too much of your efforts when healing broken limbs on the first day. For when limbs are large, it is not proper to apply too much force in the first few days or even up to seven days, or longer according to your assessment of each new development.
And here is the method of the old plastering practice to restore fractures, dislocations and twists: you take flour that remains in the mill's walls, mix it with plenty of egg, and create a paste that isn't too thin or too thick. Use this concoction as needed; this is the common way to use plaster to restore fractures in various positions, even for women and children, because neither excessive heat nor coldness should be applied.
Another method of plastering to restore fractures and dislocations: take three parts of each of these: barley meal, dandelion, rue, and asafetida, along with gum arabic and myrrh; measure it out to be .x. three times the amount specified for each individual ingredient. Mix in a bit of myrrh and aloes also at .v. five times. Add seven parts of alechil (a type of vinegar). Grind all ingredients into powder, then mix with plenty of egg. If the mixture is warm to touch, use this plaster; it has good composition properties and rapidly heals broken bones and is beneficial for many people.
Another method for dressing in the case of twisting: take mugwort and myrrh, each in 3 parts; frankincense and aloes, each in 8 parts; castor oil in 6 parts; Armenian balm in 10 parts. Grind well and mix with vinegar or abundant egg yolk, then administer.
Another method for dressing wounds and fractures in bones that are displaced from their positions, to alleviate the pain associated with them, and for bone injuries: take new wool, and cook it in lard and oil, then apply it onto the wound. These bandages do not heal immediately, but they are better for soothing abscesses and properly relieving bone pains.
Another method for dressing broken bones: take dried fig leaves and terrestrial plantain leaves, grind them together, and make a plaster.
Another method for plastering during the restoration of bone fracture and removing pus. Take root of vismaltive, camomile, flowers of violet, meal of yarrow, one part from each; grind them together, mix with wine, and when the limb is warmed, mix it with coriander water or water, and use it.
Another way of applying plaster more effectively than the first one, when pus is returning during member's restoration. Take roots of vismaltive and linseed, balm, melilot, and saxifrage, as well as violet and camomile flowers from all these gather a part; grind them together, mix with salty water or sweet water or wine according to the heat of the limb and its rest period.
In his book, Hippocrates instructs that only beeswax ointment made of wax and oil should be applied to the broken limb for restoration without anything else. He states that it must not be too soft or too hard but just right.
And it seems Galen that we should place upon the broken limb for restoration, substances slightly heated and somewhat dry, such as myrrh and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another way to prepare plaster for injury and pain: take mung beans and chicken feathers from cooked chickens, or bird feathers, and basil leaves, and sand equally ground, grind them, make the mixture into plaster and apply it.
And then after a little while, be sure that the patient does not feel any pain and that there is no movement of the bone in its place; if you do not relieve the pain with your hands.
And if pain comes to the limb, or itching, if you feel no rest or swelling, hurry and relieve it, and apply the plaster now; take a lightweight cloth and a wet sea sponge, dip them in water, then immerse the limb until the itching stops and the pain is relieved. Then allow the limb to rest for an hour, then place it on dry wool, soaked in water or rose oil, and bind it with a cloth until you are sure of removing any pus.
and let the inflammation settle in the limb, and alleviate the pain, then resume gentle movement, and a bit of plaster, but do not bind it as tightly as before; and proceed with subtlety until it is healed.
And if you notice that pus is coming out and the area is red, painful, swollen and oozing, indicating inflammation throughout, then you will need to apply plaster and bind it, start again as you did initially, in exactly the same way.
And if nothing of what we have said happens to the limb, and it does not respond by releasing anything as described, or if you need to loosen it only after three days, four days, five days, or seven; and each time let it rest for twenty days, according to what can be seen, until the swelling subsides, and brings closer alignment of the bone.
Then you must hold the restriction longer than before, and the animal will fatten its flesh as I have said previously; and if you notice that the skin is drying more than necessary, understand that no remedies can come. Then regularly apply hot water to it each time you reset the joint, and do this once every third day, and drain a little of the fluid.
Through this procedure then cut out the pus from the limb, and hasten healing as the ignorant do, who forcibly straighten the bent limb: that is wrong, and it produces poor outcomes; I see no other remedy than to let nature take its course and heal properly.
Regarding various methods of breaking bones Many ways of fractures exist, and various shapes, and their causes are specific;
For there are fractures caused by the impact of a sword, and the collarbone breaks right up to the syfac which is below the bone, just like in an arrow wound or cudgel hit; thus it is called this type of fracture "arrow-wound" or "cudgel-wound".
When the sword cuts through the bone from above without piercing it, this is called "absolute" fracture; and these are either large or small wounds resulting from such fractures.
And if there is sequential impact, or crack, or fracture of the stone collarbone, or under the stone, or other similar occurrences.
And if there is a fracture partly through, which approaches until it reaches the membrane beneath the bone, or above the bone, and this wound may be large or small.
And if there is a wound that penetrates into the bone as thin as a hair, and this fracture is small, and because of this it's called this "hairline" fracture;
And if the wound is made or caused by striking with a stone or falling, or by something similar, and causes part of the bone to break inside out, and makes the joints uneven just like when goldsmiths melt down pots; if the metal enters inside the pot when they are melting them.
And this happens more in those with wet bones below their head, such as children's bones;
And happens through all these methods of breaking up that small fragments are removed as with bones; and I will discuss them in their proper place.
And know all methods of breaking through the diminution upon them, and the examination by touch, and through the corrupt flesh that is upon.
The appearance of hair is known by this: when one has exposed the bone and rubs inside it, if the breakage shows black.
In the treatment of a breakage, beware of any bad accidents due to illness, if you see no harmful incident, such as vomiting bile, loss of intellect, extension and rigidity, fever ague, and if the eyes emerge and turn red, or show other similar symptoms in various conditions, you cannot be certain of recovery.
And if you do not see a terrible accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
And when the nose comes to you first, and it is in winter, then you should remove the bone before the fourteenth day after the month.
And if it's in winter, you should hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day after the month; so that when the pus around the bone becomes infected, and accidents as we said occur.
And if the bone breaks up to the membrane covering the brain, then you should split the broken part like this: take hold of the piece from the diseased flesh and uncover it on the bone in all possible ways, and more according to the shape of the wound as much as you can.
And if the flow of blood comes to uncover the bone, or an abscess cavity appears, you should use what is necessary, and it is that you fill the area with wet linen saturated in rose oil; And let the wound rest until the abscess cavity subsides and blood flow resumes; then begin inside the bone to remove it, and this is done according to two surgical methods: one of these methods involves making a narrow incision upfront, and this is the form:
And then make another cut that is larger than the first one.
And the second method is that you have several different size cuts, some narrow and others wide, all pointed and made of iron; and execute them lightly, so as not to injure the head.
And if the bone is protruding and hard, it's necessary for you to pierce through internally, so that you make cuts with needles, not fully piercing until beyond the bone surface, and there should be a margin or about half a circle above the point, ensuring the point does not pass beyond the bone; and you must have more than one, so that each goes into its place of the bone's thickness, so that you have needles for all parts; and this is the form of the three types of needles:
The quality to pierce through the broken bone is that you place one needle on the bone and turn with your hands until you know that the bone has been pierced. Then put the needle in another spot a bit after, and do this for all around, then cut out the space of the bone which is between the teeth, doing it more finely than you can and gently as we said, as long as you bring the bone to your hand or any tool you have such as forceps; and make sure not to touch the brain nor the spine.
And when you have pierced and removed the bone, it is necessary that you prepare what remains of the bone from one to another similar tool but it should be more precise and finer than the other incisor;
And if it remains none of the small bones, nor any scales, treat them lightly with surgical instruments; then heal the wound using the methods and remedies we have spoken about.
And another way of doing this is as Galien taught, which is more safe; and it uses strong tools, and this is his word. Firstly, it is necessary to uncover a part of the bone, at the place where the fracture opens and moves, so that when you have uncovered this part, you will place under the tip of this lens-shaped incision, from which its shape is given:
And do not cut from one side only, and make the cut at half a rib, so that when you are cutting, it is against the bone; then strike with a small hammer upwards, so that you gently crush the entire bone, and take care not to damage the cloth that is underneath.
If it's close to the bone, gently squeeze the bone, for the bone responds well without harm and without fear.
And if the bone fracture doesn't penetrate just to the membrane, and the bone is cut only from above, with small pieces present, then after that abrasiveness, and remove the scales with a subtle razor you must have in various quantities, for administering the most suitable one to each area according to the treatise and the shape of the fracture.
If you are in front of large razors, and after even finer ones, and never cease doing this until it is done well.
In each of the other scalp cuttings and finer fractures, it is necessary that you apply treatment according to their orientation; and this matter is not answered by someone who has put their study into this craft.
And if the wound is discovered by him, it is necessary that you take one linen bandage according to the size of the wound, and smear it with oil from roses, and place it on the wound; Then take another double bandage and smear it with wine and oil from roses, and place it on the first bandage; and do this more gently than you can so as not to weigh down the wound, then apply a second layer of linen and don't pull it too tightly just until it touches the wound only;
And leave it like this for one or two days until the abscesses ease off, then remove it and apply remedies such as lily roots, corn flour, incense powder, and arisole, and similar things; prepare a powder from these and apply it to the wound, and after that administer medicated ointments without irritation;
And ensure that the wound is clean immediately after it occurs, do not leave pus behind and avoid having bandages stick together. For when bandages stick to the brain tissue, they can spread and cause great harm. Because when something sharp is placed over it, it invades from above causing injury to the patient.
Then be careful therefore, if no accidents come to the patient as we have said, there is doubt without fear.
And if fear only comes from the medicine that we have placed there, and should it have this virtue, then you must take a portion of honey, and three parts of rose oil and mix them with one spoonful of vinegar, and apply it to the affected area; Then follow the methods of treatment as needed, until there is no bleeding.
Know that never are broken the two parts below the nose or only one of them, because they are two bones; and this one below is cartilaginous, it does not break, even if you bend or twist it, then heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, it is necessary that you bend your little finger or at the nose, and place this break evenly inside your second finger, and through to the knuckle forward, until the nose regains its natural shape according to its form; And do this gently, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain through your operation.
And if the break is in the part above the nose and cannot come to the nostrils, it must be that you put it level with the tip of a hair a bit thick.
And if the break is in two parts, remake another, and try to restore the first on the same day if you can;
But if not, after the seventh or eighth day when the abscess has calmed down, then apply to the tip of the nose with bandages of linen, if the break is in one part.
Or you apply another one from the other side, if the break is in that direction; and make them large enough to fill the hollows of the nose.
And they say that one should moisten the tents with butter and change them each day. I do not think this is correct, but it seems better to moisten them in the preparation of an egg broth, and powdered cornmeal; then leave the tent until the bone becomes hard, and the cartilage toughens.
And sometimes, one should use goose feathers instead of tents, and if you have an egg, wrap it in them, and keep the warmth, allowing the air to circulate among the wounds; do as you see fit.
And if pus comes out through the nose as you work on it, then apply a wet cloth or cotton soaked in rose oil, or in a little pot of almond oil.
And if the abscesses are not treated, one should apply a poultice externally, made from ground herbs and incense powder mixed with beaten egg yolks. Then place it on light dressings and do not bind them too tightly;
And if the bones are broken into small pieces and have been fractured into many parts, one should use suitable tools for this task. Then open the wound, clean it from fragments of bone, stitch or glue it together, as appropriate bandages or salves suitable for this kind of injury would be;
And if there is no wound within the bone, then treat the wound, and apply garlic, until it heals.
On the rupture of the jawbone
When the jawbone is fractured and there is no wound on the surface, and only the breakage is external, not at all broken into two halves but rather split internally throughout, one can recognize it lightly.
It is necessary, if the fracture occurs in the right part, to place your index finger in the mouth on the side of the injury; and if the fracture occurs in the left mandible, you should place your index finger of your right hand on the injured side, and gently apply pressure to the fracture internally, then press it outward with the other hand from outside, ensuring it is even.
And if the fracture of the jawbone is divided into two parts, then it is necessary to provide extension for both halves, ensuring they are even.
And if the teeth start moving or break, or you have to stitch them back together using a thread of gold, silver or silk. Then place wax on the broken jaw and put two layers of linen on it. Place under one layer a large ridge made well or a piece of leather matching in length and width according to the jaw size. Secure this at the ends that you can reach and instruct the patient to rest, and let them consume light meats.
And if you notice that the figure changes, release it on the third day and then put things back in order according to what has changed; apply plaster, mixed with powdered materials or enough eggs or flour of chestnut, after removing the wax. Place a light woolen cloth over the plaster, and if the plaster dries and the patient's position remains unchanged, let them rest until they heal. Many times healing occurs within three weeks.
And when pus comes out during an incision, then apply what we have instructed many times.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, reward nothing of the bone that has been removed; so much delicacy was required in using tools suitable for this task.
And if the wound is narrow, widen it with fire according to your need.
And when you have removed all these pieces and there remains nothing, if the wound is wide, place one plaster suitable for it over it to promote healing until it heals.
By the power of The force breaks many times before reaching the shoulder, and the breaking occurs in three ways: sometimes it is broken and torn into two parts, resulting in fragments that are easier to restore; or there's tearing with an injury.
And the procedures are as follows when there's tearing with an injury: you need two assistants, so that one marks the shoulder where the force is broken; and the other extends their arm towards the affected part. Then make the break equal with your hands, ensuring the shape matches what it should be, without any sign of strain or movement.
And if you need to extend further, place a round sponge of cloth or wool under the shoulder to the hair, and make its size according to your need; then stretch and lift up the force, hold the sponge in your hand so that you can make the break equal as it should be.
And if you cannot draw the head of the force outwards due to it coming forward, so that the patient lies on their back, and places a half pillow under their shoulder, and pushes the shoulder blade downwards, until the bone of the force is lifted.
And then apply pressure with your fingers, and if you find fragments, it is necessary to cut through them; and gently pull the pieces apart. If the bone cannot join at any point from pressure, make a cut near one of your incisions; but place this tool on the force, in order to prevent leakage:
And shape it like a spoon, do not place it inside, and make it as wide as you deem fit, according to the size of the bone and the strength of your operation; and have two holes, as you see, and let one be broad, and the other narrow, just as is the wound you made when treating the bones:
And when you are certain of the removal of pus, if you should clean the wound, and if its rupture is small, or if there's doubt about the removal of pus, then dress the wound with bandages and tents, according to their quantity.
And if pus comes out, if moisture arrives, apply oil roses and vinegar and wine, and place it on top.
The grinding of bone, when it is sensitive to wounds and sensitive to the tailor's work, is that you place on the bone a plaster made from powder from the mill and yolk of egg, and put light cloths on top, and place an apple under the armpit if needed; Then take a very large band about the size of a palm wide, then put two layers of cloth on top of the cloths and plaster; then take a slender pole one and a half spans long and wide, wrap it around that band, making sure the end of the band hangs down. And place the torch on the wound, and turn the bend towards the neck, and over the healthy elbow, and over the diseased elbow; and reset from each part, and when you see that the joint keeps the wound attached, and you clearly see that the stick does not move above the broken bone, then reward each day, and when you release the bandage, then restrain it.
And let the disease heal on its back, and put him when he sleeps, a small pillow under the elbow, to lift the shoulder up; this will ease the strain of the wound from the force by aligning the shoulder blade, or you tie his arm around the neck, and do not remove it unless bad accidents occur, for up to twenty days;
Then restart the plastering if you see that he needs it, and tighten and leave him like this until he recovers; and she is recovered at most in twenty-six days, and less for some people.
Of the breaking of the shoulder
Sometimes the shoulder breaks or splits from its joint, either at the top or in the middle, and not by force; when it is hit where the break has occurred. Treat according to the shape of the fracture, and reset as per its natural form, in all ways that you can. Then apply with ground powder from a mill, along with plenty of egg whites, lightly tucking them in, and place two layers of cloth above. After this, place a large, thin board, somewhat wider than the shoulder, beneath the fracture area; ensure there is no movement at any point on the shoulder when placing the board, and use strips of linen to secure it evenly so that the board stays firmly in place without moving from its position. Keep checking each day; whenever it begins to heal, tighten again, adjust the board if it has moved out of place, and keep the patient lying on their side with the injured shoulder. The shoulder will be healed after 20 days or possibly 25, If this number of days is completed, then remove the dislocation, you can be sure; it isn't simply bone that is able to settle easily.
And if a bone piece appears first and not below the knee, then proceed by removing it, along with the abscess beneath, and do as we have instructed for treating wounds of muscle dislocation.
of the breaking of the foot
The foot is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; it breaks often at the end. And when it is broken through, it leans downwards, causing great pain to the patient and lack of mobility immediately, and suddenly, and by chance vomits blood, and opens inside the broken bone, and one feels this very well.
And when it comes to setting the bone, should lie lay under his backbones, and you place one span between the shoulders, then press on the shoulders, and join the ribs of both sides with your hands, and gradually adjust them evenly in all possible ways until the shape of the bone is as it should be; then place plaster bandages over this fine structure of salt or another lightweight substance, wrap them in a piece of cloth, and tie them around the broken bone so that they do not move. Then bend the joint back onto the back, press against it properly, and reward every hour by massaging the wound area; if she begins to heal, then tighten her up; and if it is appropriate to remove, due to corrosion or itchiness coming from the body, or pain or abscess, act quickly, and loosen the tie, and remove the plaster bandage, and treat the person who came in with the cure methods. Then replace the bandage, and press it until it is fit for use.
Of the breaking of the ribs
Know that the breaking of the ribs happens only in the large ones after the back and within, and do not bend because they are oily; and one feels it well during examination at the waist.
And for the repair, if it is to equalize the breakage, just like it should. And then apply the plaster, and press with a thimble, if you need to.
And if the breaking of the ribs is occurring internally, the patient feels great pain and piercing, like from labor pains, because the bone punctures the tissue; and they have pains all over, immediately and vomit much blood, and it's a serious health issue, and the elderly have experienced severe illness.
And if there are those who say that it is necessary to administer meats which swell the belly, in order to expel the wind from outside.
We do not follow this, for abscesses and pus do not come about unless they have arrived. And if they have arrived, heal them.
And it is said by none of us to apply suckling pigs over the wound in order to extract moisture and this appears reasonable; nevertheless, there is doubt that the suction cup draws away excesses from the body due to its weakness.
And they say that when treating the wound of an animal, one should cover it with moist wool in a hot oil, and place the bandages between the ribs to make the healing consistent all around. Then follow the treatment for pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
And if the patient feels intense pain that cannot be borne by the bone piercing the skin, there is doubt for the patient as to whether they should cut through the wound of the broken rib, and it is necessary to place one or two instruments under the cloth; then you must slice the bone and drain lightly, and afterwards stitch the two edges of the wound if it's large, and treat with plasters until it heals. And when abscesses occur, place moist cloths in a rose oil and place them over the wound; and treat as needed for the abscesses, being vigilant where necessary on the rib or where it should be, until it heals.
of the break at the neck
No fracture occurs at the bones of the neck, and it does not bend; similarly for the spine in the back. And when this happens to none and you wish to determine if it is healed or not, take heed: if you see his hands softened, swollen and dead, and unable to move or stretch, and when you prick them with a needle, he does not feel it. Know that it is fatal in many circumstances; and if he feels well when they are held still and moved, know that the joint of the bone has been saved, and that the disease has been cured, as long as one applies treatment.
And when this happens to the spine in the back, and you wish to determine if it is healed or not, take heed: if its joints are softened and they move against their will and there is windiness and loss of appetite; and when one observes him over his belly, he loses appetite against his will. And when he is observed over his back and wishes to stand straight, he cannot. Know that it is fatal: if he does not labor at all in its cure.
And if this incident does not happen to him, then it is a simpler thing.
And the treatment is that you should extract if there is pus, if it's placed on the spine or on the yolk of an egg, until it calms down; then place on one of the soothing plasters and let them dry, and bind with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where they feel pain, until they recover. And if any bone is broken, then it should be covered with plaster; and remove the bone, then join the two edges of the wound, if they're large, with stitches, then treat with ointment that heals flesh until it's healed; and if the tip of the bone is broken off, which is called 'the tip of the elbow', then you should hold your left hand pouch and place it evenly on the other to your power, then apply the plaster and bandage as needed; then press firmly, and if there are broken bones, then remove them and treat the wound until it's healed.
From the breaking of the bone of the hip
It occurs when the bone of the hip is broken. And if it happens, there should be a slight swelling at the knee; and it runs long, declines towards the groin, brings pain to the leg, and bruising, and inflates that which is broken.
And in terms of restoration, you must extend your hand upwards, as long as you are over the breakage area; and understand where the breakage is and its shape. If the breakage is only at the knee, then make an equal breakage there, until it reaches a natural shape.
And if the breakage is along the length of it or it declines towards the inside, then guide the patient so that they lie on their abdomen, as long as you are able to complete the repair of this breakage. And when you have placed it evenly, set it on the plaster, then place it on a column of wood or charcoal, and hold the wound steady, so that it does not move; and apply the area over the ribs, as long as the limb is even.
And instruct the patient to sleep on his side or on his back.
And if the abscesses swell up and come out, do not touch them until they are calmed down, and apply what we have already mentioned; then return to the process of treatment, tighten it as needed, assuming there is no bad incident; this is how you should proceed.
From the breaking of the shoulder.
The assistants are those that lie between the handle and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, you must restore it according to one of these two methods: wherein one method involves taking a full length staff of medium thickness, in this manner:
And tie the two shoulder blades with two strips each, and place them on top, securing the patient's sides onto one spot. Then, lay the broken arm onto the staff until it reaches to the middle, making a bend of the staff halfway through, then rest it against any heavy object or let assistants hold it downwards; then place the broken end of the shoulder in alignment with his hands when they are together, up until the break returns as it should.
And the other method is that you place the patient on their back, and tie their hand to their neck, then instruct two assistants to have one cut off from where it's broken in his hands, and the other cuts off everything up to one finger length, stretching each one to its respective side.
And if you see that the extraction is more forceful, hold a bandage right over the wound and above it, spreading each minister to their part. And if the wound is close to the head of the shoulder, it should be that you place half a bandage under the elbow, and another towards the knife, below the wound; and also if the wound is in front of the knife, it should be that you put a light bandage, without effort, as long as the wound is equal up to the middle, and up to the knife; then make the cut even as it should be, and hold tight, so no pus comes out.
And if pus comes out from it even after seven days, do not hold tightly any more; instead apply greased wool and oil roset, until the pus coming out is calmed down. Then hold tight, so when you place the plaster on the wound, then unite the arm with the shoulder support, put your hand on the shoulder or chest; apply the bandage and hold it tight both on the support and on the arm, ensuring that the arm stays straight, if nothing prevents it, or if the bone is not broken.
And if you suspect that the bone does not move, use supports for this, and place a larger and stronger support under each cut than the others, leaving an inch of space between each support. Ensure that each support is large enough to pass through the wound three inches from both sides; then hold tightly on the supports as I instructed at the beginning of this chapter concerning wounds, more firmly but not stretching too far apart.
And if you see the base of the nails, and the constriction, as we have said, in your care when returning a broken limb, and you doubt about removing an abscess, should it be left to bind for up to seven days, as we have said; then check each day over the next three days the binding, making sure there is no itching or swelling that appears on the site, or that the infection cannot reach the body because it is too tight. If this happens, if we have said.
And if no such events occur, or if the limb is not released until after two days or more, and remains warm on its back, with his hands on his stomach; place under the shoulder one thick cloth of wool evenly, and observe every hour of the day or night that the figure of the broken limb does not move, or that the bandage becomes soft; if it heals by the power of medicine, and give him the meat we have placed before, in such a way that the meat is at first tender; and when he begins to recover, then it should be large. And it's customary for the shoulder and leg to be recovered within forty days from all; and thereafter you must release and administer baths and medicines of ointments for the body to heal. If there are uneven folds or constriction, then it must remain for dislocation up to three days or two months.
of the breaking of the arm
The arm is made up of two bones, which are called the 'fosciles', from which one is small, and it's this that covers the pit; and the other is large, and it's this that rests under, near the small bone; by chance only the large foscile breaks or the small one, or by chance they both break.
When the small fosciles are broken, the restoration is easy, and the healing; and when the large ones are broken, the healing goes wrong, causing more distress than when they were broken together. If it's only the small foscile that breaks, then gently stretching a bit is what's needed, and setting them even.
And if it's the large foscile that breaks, then you need to apply more pressure; and extend on one cushion, and place the pit of your hand higher than the others, and have the smaller bones lower than the other bones, and ensure they are crooked towards themselves, and another cushion in front of them a bit higher, so that the bones do not suffer any strain. Then stretch out your assistant's arm to the part below their hand, or at one inch, and have another attendant on the other side above. And then place the mirrors evenly, according to its best form.
And if in the break into pieces, you place each one in its own location, and if there is none that grabs onto the bone, and you cannot restore it to its location, then do it upon and through the bone, as we have said before.
And if there is an injury due to the breakage, I spoke about it in the singular chapter; take the treatment.
And if during the commencement of the restoration there occur abscesses, apply glue; that is, a strip of tallow made from rosin and white beeswax, such that it is neither too hard nor too soft. Then place one strip by delicately spreading it upwards until the abscesses are relieved. Afterward remove the tallow and spread with abundance egg powder on the powder mill, then place the sticks, making sure that each stick of the breakage is directly beneath it and somewhat more outward than the others; and know that there should be seven or eight sticks in various arrangements: whether the breakage is within one bone, two bones; and hold more above the breakage than elsewhere, as we have said at the beginning of this chapter; and let the bandages covering the breakage be moist and soft, but not hard nor abrasive; and may the thread, from which these are woven, be made of linen, neither too thick nor too thin. And rest the limb and the ligament for a few days. And if any bad occurrences come to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, it is necessary that you immerse the limb in hot water until that itch subsides; and let the limb not be allowed to rest. And then resume the constriction, and once the bandage is removed and the bone has been revealed, and assuming there's a similar situation, guide it back into place.
And if precautions are taken so that no further constriction can come to the limb because it's too tight, it is necessary to soften it with heat and let it rest for a few days until the constriction ceases, then resume constriction.
And if none of the things we have discussed come to pass in the patient, or if it takes up to twenty days for them, then they can move their hands near their neck, and ensure that their necks are level, while being careful about movement and digestion, sleeping on their back; and know that this strain will be restored in thirty days or forty days, and by chance within twenty days, depending on the compositions and the qualities of the patient.
of the breaking of the hand
You know that in the back of the hand and on us, few breaks occur, and only fold many times.
And when the heel of the hand is broken or folds, it should be treated by having the patient sit upright and directly in front of themself; then place their hand flat on the table and stretch out the fingers of the broken parts, and align the bones properly, making sure they are well connected; and apply bandages and splints, if no abscesses develop, then place an ointment according to the size of the injury; and wrap it in one linen sheet.
And if the break is at the base of the fingers near the belly of the hand sole, make a pyramid from cloths and instruct the patient to hold it against their broken finger; then stretch him with a long cloth, and place the splint as high as the size of the hand's palm, making sure it stretches properly.
And if the fracture is at the front, it must be that you place one splint above and another below on the foot part. So that your hands are open and straight; then tie them entirely around the hand, and seal the joint between the fingers.
And if the break comes to any of the two feet, it's like a bundle, just as should be; and press with the heel, and if you see fit to place a small upright splint to raise the fracture, and not move. And if the break is at the other foot, like in the index or one of others, it's like a bundle, and tie with the healthy one which comes after; or you tie all together, as long as they can hold, or place an upright splint just like for dressing; and take care in restoring and arranging each wound separately, and adapt to what comes up, as I have said.
Of the broken thigh
The bone of the shoulder often breaks several times, and one can see it when it turns in front and behind; and its repair is this: i.e., the first step being to set the broken part above the breakage point, and the second below. And the veins lie on its surface, then extend each minister's line to its equal part; and this is when the breakage occurs inside the bone.
And if the breakage is close to the root of the shoulder, then have one line towards the elbow and the other lines over the breakage. And similarly if it's near the hip joint, so put the lines behind the hip joint, and the extension downwards; then place the bones at an equal distance from their two ends, as long as they follow its natural shape, and then apply plaster, and bind it, since abscesses do not come about there.
And if there is pus to remove, let it heal first before you return to your work and treatment; the wound is made in such a manner. It is necessary that you wrap around the burn .i. bandage twice or three times, and retain the excess, then bend the leg until the heels reach the base of the calf, and place one long thread between the shin and the leg, down to the knee, and guide the ends of the thread over the top; then bend around the leg and around the shin with the bandage, then place a splint on the burn, and place a splint on the bone of the leg; then insert your hand in between the leg and shin with cloth for equal pressure, then begin to bind firmly .iij. times or four times around the burn; and as you go beyond the burn, bind less tightly; then take two threads that you have placed between the leg and shin, and bind them three times above each other, then return down below the thread until you are underfoot; and tighten, so that it does not move from its place, then leave him like this, until no pus, swelling or similar sign appears.
And if it happens, release it and address what comes, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that catch hold, it should be removed, so long as one can; and if one cannot, it is necessary to cut the wound and draw out the strength; and treat him as we have said, until he heals.
And no part of the flesh is broken when these pins are inserted in such places, as in the shoulder and on the arm; nevertheless, no inconvenience affects the patient in this manner of restoration.
Know that the flesh is restored within one day, or somewhat less, or somewhat more, depending on the variety of complexions.
from the groove of the knee
Know that in the groove of the knee there is little breaking, but it bends many times. And if it breaks, it's mostly just a crack, or missing a bit of bone (about an inch), and this happens to all wounds, whether open or closed, and one feels it well.
And the restoration is to place it even with what was round at its ends until it's assembled and moves as it should. Then put on plaster, and add a round stick if needed, then tighten appropriately. Afterwards adjust every arrangement that we have mentioned in other fractures, such as pus formation or similar conditions; for each situation apply what suits it until it is healed.
Regarding the breaking of the leg.
You know that there are two bones in the leg, from which one is called by its right name "ham" and the other is called "foscile"; and any kind of injury or breakage happens just as it does with the arm, and for this reason the restoration process is exactly the same as for the arm, and the procedures are all the same.
And if both bones are broken together, then twist the leg from all sides.
And if the delicate bones are broken, then twist in front.
And if the larger bones are broken, one feels great pain and can see clearly; then twist in the air. Then apply extension, making it level, and tie the ligaments equally; but still, when the breakage is ugly, and there are many fragments, the extension should be less intense and gentler; and adjust according to your skill.
And when you have completed your task, take two lengths of wadded cloth that cover the leg on both sides and are long enough from the thigh down to below. Then wrap these around with two pieces of bandage above and below, and tie them in the middle as well; so that the leg does not bend either to the right or left, and thus is done properly; and no one should administer to it a single piece of cloth as long as the leg, made of wood, and place this under the leg to prevent movement. This should be carried out exactly where there is damage from the breakage or wound; and move the leg each day in order to check for pus or any other complication; treat it until it is healthy.
From the breaking of bones at the knee
At the ankle it does not come from breaking, but when bones at the knee are broken, there is a break and in the legs, powerlessness occurs in multiple positions.
And if it happens that the bones at the knee break, and you see these bones thrusting over one another, place these limbs of earth under your feet just as if they were going somewhere, then put now your foot on his, where the bones are elevated, press them so much until their heels revive; then set plaster and bindings over it, and put a small table at two feet thick under the belly of the knee, then restrain him to the foot insertion, then when you have wrapped cloths around him, and other things that you need.
And when three or four days have passed, remove the bandage, for you will find that the bones are equal, whether they are broken or dislocated.
And if any of the ribs are broken, repair them, as we have said about the ribs of the hand; then place a splint on the broken rib according to its length, and make it slightly wider than that. Then put under the splint the board I mentioned, and apply pressure evenly; and if there are two or three or more broken ribs, break them, placing one splint for each rib according to its size, wrapped in a single linen cloth of the first, then fix the board under the patient's abdomen where it is cut. And while lying on the table top above the patient's belly, ensure that it properly cuts through.
And you must not forget the other matters I have discussed regarding other injuries, once we have talked about them; and correct each incident according to how it should be.
Regarding the breaking of the bone in the hand.
When the bone of natural pregnancy is broken, if it gets enlarged, then let her stay on her side and incline her to the part at the back, held from behind. Then fill the gap that nature has provided with cotton, also put in as much as one thumb's width. Next, release the woman, lift up her back little by little, then, let the cotton jump out until it comes to the opening of nature and the bone returns with the fetus; and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and after she has urinated, put it back in again, do this for seven days or more. The break will be restored. If you see fit, take a goatskin bladder, tie on the nozzle end a stick, fill the bladder entirely within nature; then blow forcefully through the stick until the bladder inflates inside: nature will return to restore the break. Then fill it with cotton and leave it like this for several days or until healed.
And when the bone of the wrist in an animal is broken, or in a woman, if it is restored in such a manner as we have said for the thigh bone; and these broken bones are not to be overlooked by those who put their study and use into them, and read my book. For the breaking indicates more than various positions the right path of restoration: therefore, understand this.
In the case of a broken penis, take an oxtail and fill it with the penis; then wrap it tightly in bandages, and let it be for three days or longer, and it will heal very quickly.
By fracture with wound
It is necessary for the one who has a fracture with a wound, even if it's large, like in the case of the thigh bone or shoulder blade or similar, that they be surgically treated now, so that the surgeries we have mentioned testify to this.
And if the wound is clean, then seal it with vitriol, or if you have nothing else, then start to treat the fracture at that same hour, or on that day, assuming no abscesses appear.
And if abscesses appear, then let the treatment continue until a new day, as long as the abscess is calming down, and don't touch it on the third or fourth day, for you would cause harmful accidents.
And if the bone is broken and visible at its exposed knee, then it should be put back together lightly with your hands, in a small extension.
And if the extensions are not available to make it even with your hands, then you use this tool made of iron, which is seven inches or six inches long, and its width matches the size of the wound; for this task, the surgeon must adjust its size as needed for each treatment of a broken bone; it should be round and somewhat thick, so that it does not bend under compression on your limb during surgery, and it should be sharp in front, and large at the middle towards the front, thus:
And it is called "palainche" because the curved bones should be placed on the visible part of the bone; and strike once, until it heals, and ensure they are even against each other. And if the breakage is subtle, and the tools cannot properly grasp the bone, then you must hold the top of the bone as long as the tool can manage this task.
And if you cannot return the bone back, as we have said, if you have an appropriate tool for this task, such as a scalpel or awl, with your skill; then take out what is remaining in the hard and small cuts of the bone.
And when the bone is returned, and if the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it's not in its natural position. Do as much as possible to get it into its natural position, then moisten with one or two drops of black vinegar ointment, provided this is appropriate; and similarly, if it is suitable for healing; do not place bandages or any other substance on the wound if there is an infection; avoid causing infection and decay at the wound site. Once you have restored the bone, apply these treatments accordingly, let the wound remain open, cover everything properly based on the size of the wound, and take great care that the wound isn't constrained with breakage; and many times such actions result in the patient experiencing illness or corrosion; and make sure to use softer and less intense compresses compared to other injuries.
And if the wound is deep or large and you suspect that there might be complications, as we have said, and if you find pain in the area, it's not suitable to apply treatments; but envelop everything inside instead of applying them, using hard bandages and securing them. And when after one or two days or three days you see blood coming out of the wound, remove what you have placed with all wine, and apply healing ointment for wounds, such as the tetrafarmaçon ointment and similar ones.
And it must be that you dislocate the limb twice a day, morning and evening, until it is joined and sound.
And it should have been so that the limb is bound in such a way that the bone slides down slightly.
And if it continues for the whole day, and it cannot join anymore, know that there are small fragments of bone, so you must seek to open the wound with a probe, and remove all these necessary pieces that cause pain.
And if a fistula comes to the bone, or any other way of corruption, you must treat it according to what he said in his chapter above. And when the bone is broken and open on the limb, such as the bone of the heel or shoulder blade, and other similar bones of large limbs, do not try to remove them, for many times death comes from this, but leave it until it heals; perhaps it will heal after twenty days or thirty days, then treat the wound if you can; and if you cannot, leave it.
The burns that come from sweat
They come many times after the wound has healed, especially near joints, and an ugly thing to see is the appearance of the limb; and by chance it cannot perform its natural functions.
Take care then if there is any swelling: if you administer restorative medicines such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, as well as sanguine collyrium, caraway, and similar others, do so with one of these things, or all together, and mix them with stinging wine, or with a whole egg or with honey; then apply this mixture on the spot in poultices, bind it tightly, and don't release it by hand for several days; then remove it, and repeat another application until the swellings are gone. Or you can apply this on a well-made piece of leather because the properties of leather have the ability to drain all swellings from the limbs; if the swelling has turned hard like stone and needs to be removed, if there is any excess, make it obvious; or continue applying it until it's reduced by any barber, until it's gone, and continue treatment until healed.
When the breaking of the bone has been restored, and after that the limbs are weak and subtle, this happens due to certain reasons: because one is for those who were bound too tightly, and was not bound as it should have been; or because there were too many ligaments, and could not allow the necessary movements in the limb; or for an excess of bleeding; or for overly large movements, not at their proper time; or because they lack much blood within their body, being feeble.
And the treatment is that you must make the patient eat the medicine, and make the body tender until the pus multiplies within him; then give him baths, and bring him joy and ease. After this, apply grease to the limb, so that the grease attracts to the large pus, and washes it often with hot water until the pus aligns with the limb; and restores its natural shape.
The member becomes twisted after recovery.
When the limbs are twisted after restoration, and if the bones break open, even though the body's natural form is lost, it does not lose its function: nor should one believe those who say that we must break all new members completely; many fools do this in our land. These practices are criticized and cause great harms, sometimes leading to death. However, when the fractures and injuries are fresh, they should be immersed in hot water or cooked with soothing herbs like dandelion leaves, roots, and milk thistle, among others. And one should apply a poultice made from these soothing substances; you take greasy figs, grind them with cinnamon, and similar medicines that alleviate heat. Then you make a greased plaster and apply it. Or you take greasy dates and grind them with nutmeg powder, and other such medicinal substances to cool down the heat. And then you make a greased poultice and apply it.
And never should bone be rubbed continuously and for a long time with wet hands. And have the limb moved every hour.
And if the twists have aged and hardened, like bones, and require being treated with iron, if it is necessary to cover up to the bone, apply subtle gentle cutting at the incision; and include consideration and study in the treatment.
This begins the book on dislocations
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing great pain and injury to the patient.
When dislocation affects none, if now is needed bring back without hesitation.
For if one delays, the joints swell up, and by chance, when they are placed back into their position; because it is not proper to move them at the moment they are swollen: many times, they bring on pus and other pains.
If this happens, have a surgeon attend the patient, then let him stay until all abscesses are relieved; then immerse the limb in warm water and oil, then gently realign it, treating each limb as its treatment would be appropriate for its place.
And I have organized the chapters about shoulder dislocations up to this point.
of the jaws
Sometimes the jaws become dislocated backward, and the dislocations of both are according to two ways: or they are slightly bone-like from their places, and somewhat softened; or they are completely dislocated, hanging towards the heels, and causing saliva from the mouth that one cannot hold, nor can close his mouth, and wraps his tongue with speech.
When the dislocation is small, it can often return through several positions.
And if it is complete and accomplished, you should reset it quickly without delay.
And in such a way that the ministers cut near the patient's mouth, and insert one of their fingers into the base of the jaw dislocation inside the mouth; if the dislocation is two inches (ij. pars) then the other hand should extend outside to match; instruct the patient to soften, his jaws, and move them in all directions.
And guide her until she settles back into its place.
And if it becomes difficult to return them, even when the two jaws are together, if they were raised with hot water and oil, until you gently reset them; do not overly strain during the resetting process, as we have said.
And when they are returned evenly, and the mouth of the patient is closed tightly after soothing it, place wet cloths as bandages in a poultice made of rose oil and beeswax, then bind them gently with moist linens.
And let the patient rest on their back, and if they are dislocated, have them lying between two cushions, so that they don't move to either side or force themselves to twist, but please feed them light food until the pains subside, and secure the jaws.
And then let him chew lightly, and do not make any effort to open the mouth for eating or drinking until the mandible is well set and healed.
And if the two mandibles cannot be properly aligned within an hour and are not converted back to their original positions, then fevers and recurrent swelling occur, along with occasional abdominal discomfort, and occasionally, vomiting of pure fluids.
And when you see this, then know that it's a loss; and many times, death occurs to the one who experiences this within seven days.
from the lever
The strength cannot relieve from within the middle of the back and at its base, and is dislocated outwards every time, and one feels this well indeed.
And the process consists in laying the patient on their back and stretching their arms out; then press down firmly onto the affected area with your palm and it will return. Then place them on a plaster bed and use the bolster, pressing it down tightly;
And the shoulder which is close to the blade cannot be reset; if it isn't and if it becomes dislocated once, then you should reset it at its original position as we have said. Then place them on a plaster bed with the bolster, press tightly, and instruct the patient to rest until they are sane.
And similarly, the shoulder blades of the back are brought back when it is removed from its place.
Concerning the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder is dislocated only in three ways: one way is when it dislocates from the part of the scapula to behind; and the second is at the part near the elbow; and by chance it dislocates above, which happens rarely;
And the shoulder does not dislocate behind or within the nerves; and it dislocates from below towards the scapula more often, especially in those who have little flesh, because with them it happens quickly; in those who have enough flesh, it jumps to bones, and returns to bones.
And by chance, some men suffer from impact or fracture, and the shoulder swells due to an abscess, and they believe that it is dislocated because of this.
Therefore, you must test them until you are certain; then begin the treatment.
And you will recognize dislocations when it is moved towards the shoulder blade, and makes a distinction between the diseased and the healthy shoulder, and you will find a clear manifestation of their diversity among them; And you will find a hollow at the top of the shoulder, and from the shoulder blade to the elbow, as if it were an arm. And the patient cannot bring their hand back to their nose, nor move it with any movements;
And also, if it is dislocated at the top, even though it may not be completely hidden, because you clearly find it at the elbow;
And this way of dislocation can only be remedied when it is new, or if the child is sick.
And the method is that the minister lifts his hand from the malady at the top, then places his fingers on the shoulder blade, and raises the joint to its full extent at the top above him; and the minister lifts his hand and extends it up high, putting it under; if it comes quickly.
And if it does not come as we have said within a few days, then the patient should be bathed in warm water; and the minister must apply soothing and calming remedies, such as decoctions of thyme and fenugreek and clover in water, and they should be applied.
Then cover the back of the patient with a strip of cloth, and place on the shoulder blade a poultice of an even consistency, neither too soft nor too hard, then place a stone under it. Put the heel of your foot on the stone, lift the head of the shoulder gently, and pull the hand towards the malady.
And another minister cuts the neck of the patient, so that it doesn't move forward; this shoulder returns now and then, and if you notice it being reset in this way:
And make sure the person is present in a larger space than necessary for the patient; and stands straight towards the side, and pushes the shoulder against the ribcage, and lifts the ribcage up slightly so that the patient hangs down in an upright position; And another minister pulls the hand of the patient towards the belly. And if the patient is too light, you can place something heavy with them and then pull their shoulder down; the dislocation will return now and again.
And another way to reset is: take a long stick and bury it in the ground so that your shoulder is also at about the level of one pistol, and not too large or too small; Then have the patient placed on their side, but with their arm held up, and the arm should remain as long as the length of the stick. Then extend their hand down from the other side to form a shape, and the joint will return to its place quickly;
and if it does not return through all these things that we have said, do this treatment: take one and a half arms of thick oak wood and four large sticks, which should allow the head to be inserted from below evenly up to the shoulder, according to this shape:
Then bind the head to the stick with a piece of cloth underneath, so that the stick does not bruise the patient's arm, then place the stick under the arm against the side; and extend your hand up along the stick from the elbow, and fix the shoulder on the stick, and the arm at the elbow joint, then place your arm on one of the stakes about the width of a thumb, and keep the other hand hanging down, leaving the body hanging from the opposite side: the joint will return to its place now.
And when she is there, in whatever way it may be, if you must put on the seat of the dislocation an equal thread, then place plastered with powder from the mill, together with incense and egg oil, all over the shoulder and around it. Then remove that which was placed upon the seat after a while, and retie the bandage on top of the plastering, and hold the hand at its neck, and keep your hands in this state for some time.
And it is required that he chew a little, until the limbs are strengthened, for it will heal faster; and then continue to chew more after five or seven days, and move it around; and if it's firm and not softened, it will have healed.
And if the joint is loose due to moisture that has caused it or for another reason, it is necessary to apply three applications of heat (cauterization), as was explained in the section on cauterizations before or chapter on cauterizations.
And if you do all this, and it gets dislocated after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot lift your arm up, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is torn or stretched or weakened; and know that the joint would never be properly placed in its place.
The dislocation near the buttocks, and breasts, or behind, if it is caused by pushing and stretching of hands, or administered elsewhere; treat until it's healed sanely.
And if after healing there comes weakness in the limb, and delayed movements, then the patient should take frequent baths with hot water until that weakness is alleviated, and returns to its original state.
From the dislocation of the shoulder joint
Know that the shoulder joint is dislocated at points and returns to them; and if it's dislocated from all sides, even in front and behind, then the shoulder dislocation doesn't respond properly, as you can see it clearly and feel it well; and it dislocates according to each figure. And when you connect the shoulder bone with healthy tissue, you can see it clearly. For the joint is rough and cannot bend the arm or touch its shoulder to any extent.
It is necessary that you reset it in this manner as abscesses heal from within outward, for if they heal from outside inward, it would be problematic to reposition them; and by chance, they may not be able to be fully returned; shoulder dislocation is worse than others, and causes more intense pain, and by chance death occurs.
And the restoration is as follows: when it can be brought back to that position where one can extend their hands to your two hands; and their arms are spread out, and the hands face each other in line with the elbow joint, both inside and outside, then push the joint towards their wrists or at the base of their palm until they return to their place.
And if there is a dislocation in front, it returns when they double their hand against their own and push from the base of the palm with the knife that has been inserted.
And if it doesn't want to return to its place, then apply strong extension; and let each administer extend their arm, and hold them both together, so that they don't move during the extension. Then rotate the arm from each side, then when you have wrapped a long and wide cloth around it;
And when the joints are joined by your hand, if you apply some oil to soften the joint, then press on the joint firmly until it recovers;
And when it's in place, apply dry plaster with an egg yolk on top, hold it firmly in place, and allow the arm to be bent at the neck by the shoulder, leaving it for a few days, then release.
And if the joint is firmly in its place, remove the bandage and leave it as it is; and if you see that the joint does not heal well, reapply the plaster and the bandage, and keep it like this for a few more days until it's firmly set; then remove it.
And if it feels sore after the removal of the joint, and it moves again, wash and scrub beautifully, pressing until it is relieved; or you can put a layer of fatty lamb's wool on the joint, then leave it for one day and night, then reapply and let it enter into a bath. And when it sweats, rub the joint gently, then set it back in place, and then immerse it or bathe with water; and do this two times or three times until it heals; and if you see fit, apply moistened cow fat mixed with butter to it, and apply it; if it returns to its position.
the dislocation of the hand
The hand joint has dislocated, and the return is slight, more so than other joints. In this case, it's necessary to quickly bring it back into place while it's still dislocated, thus making sure that the limbs swell or an abscess arises.
And the resetting is such that you place your hand on a board and extend the minister's hand, then you make them equal so their palm touches the appearance of the joint, and press until it reattaches.
In all cases, you must check if it is in its proper place; then have the patient lie down on their back with their hand extended and moved to determine the placement. And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, have the patient place their hand's back on the table, and you position your hand over that appearance of the joint. If it returns to its proper place now, then it is correctly done.
If that doesn't work, use plaster to soothe the abscesses and leave it like that without needing to restart.
And if he cannot endure it, and you can't put it back in its place after several days, if the joint stays twisted;
And it does no harm to the patient for as long as his hands are swollen, and he cannot strain anything completely: then you will know that a nerve is cut, or an artery; if there's no other way than to apply heat with a cautery in such cases, and by chance there's no other solution.
And when his hands are in place, apply the plaster we have mentioned, then strain it and leave it for five days, then release it and leave it as such.
And if he can't move it well and there's no crack, then apply hot water, and rub until it is clean.
Regarding the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
None of the fingers of the hand are dislocated separately from each other, neither on the back of the palm nor on the belly;
So all the fingers are together, and you prevent the dislocation from occurring in your pockets until they recover, then support the head of each finger, and bend it towards the part where it is disjointed;
And leave it for two days, and then put them equal on the third day; and not let it move, as we have said, and release him that day, and make it move, and bind him again later; and do this often, until it is tight.
And do the same if it is dislocated in the belly of the hand and do it like you did before until it becomes sound; and do the same when it is dislocated on another side.
of the heel, of the back
When the heel, or the back, or multiple heels are dislocated, if there is no treatment, because death rushes to the patient.
And the signs are that discharges jump against their will, they cannot hold them back, and many times parts of the body soften, or both feet, or both arms, or one.
And many times, the shin bone shortens to four parts; that part which shortens at the back is called 'tuberous':
The treatment for this is that you should reward the person if the tuberous condition came from childhood: if there is no remedy or healing at all.
And for that which comes from birth or impacts or similar things, according to old medical practices using big words, it doesn't bring in any significant benefit;
but I have shortened them based on my intention and formed tools in various ways.
I say that in the case of swelling coming to the groin before, it is without pain or health;
And also that which comes straight to the two ribs, and one cannot cure anything else but what is directly related to the back, as I say;
And that the patient's illness extends up to his belly in one equal length, and there is no strain on him, so he does not blister;
Then place one coal in the fire pit and another at the feet on the ground form, and tie a band around his limbs near the illness, and another at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles;
And two craftsmen know how to tie them, one at the head and the others at joints, among these two rods;
And be well closed, the rod as we have said, and the mirror put her palms on the spine form, until she regains consciousness.
And if she does not recover from this cure, take a board of three arms long, and place it over the body, and if the patient is on their side, support the head of the board over the spine, then place the middle of the table on the spine; And place the mirror's feet at the other end of the board, press well, until they regain consciousness on their side; and if you can see, do it at the wrist that turns to the hand.
And you should place two spikes into the head of the afflicted limb from shoulder to elbow, and towards the joints two others, with each spike having about the width of a hand's length between them.
And in each spike place one piece or fragment, where the bend is corrected, and have the spikes firmly in the ground so they do not move; and between each pair of two spikes have a single turning spike, with which to guide the correction, and place two short spikes of hand's length between the two bends to correct the bend.
And then tie the bandage that is among the elbows at the bend towards the head, and the other strap towards the joints at the other bend, and each of the assistants corrects their bend along the entire bandage, and the masters place the spine evenly as we have said.
And when they are even, place a desiccative plaster with plenty of egg white on it, and then add the ointment, and after that apply the paste from a tablet of one and three-quarters inches long. This helps to heal the swollen area and the healthy part of the spine, then bind it with a string as we have mentioned, and make use of subtle irritation until it is healed;
And if no improvement comes at the end of healing, you should administer softening and soothing medicines, with the paste that we have mentioned previously; and every time it is administered, use a piece of pork fat.
And if an appearance comes about at the base of the spine in the back, and you should take care that it is a dislocation; for it's the bone that protrudes outwards, so there shouldn't be any assumption made about it: by chance it could bring death.
On the dislocations of the hip
Know that the joints of the hip and shoulder only produce dislocations, not fractures like other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four parts: inside and outside, front and back; and more so from within, less in front and behind.
And the knowledge of its dislocation from within is that when one joins the diseased leg with the healthy one, it becomes longer, and the diseased knee opens further than the healthy one, and the diseased knee cannot bend to touch the fire. And it is when the leg is swollen due to an abscess, because the shoulder of the thigh arrives there.
And the sign of him who comes to death is that this event is contrary to what precedes.
And the signs of him who goes before, are that his leg is well according to its completion; nonetheless, he does not double the knee without pain, and if you try to make him walk, he cannot move forward and holds back his urine, and swells up his ankle, and when he walks, he walks on his heel.
And the signs of him who goes behind, are that he cannot spread his knee, nor double it, and this leg is more twisted than the other one, and his ankle is softened, and the shoulder joint comes out under the ribs at the top of the back.
The return of this sign of dislocation is that you should confirm that the dislocation is old and remains in its position, if there is no treatment; and it is not appropriate to have any assumption about it.
And for those where the dislocation is recent, and there are four ways of dislocation, if you hurry to return the joint and stretch it inwards and outwards, and move it right and left; by chance should it return, and no further treatment is needed.
And if it does not return in this manner, then it is necessary that you apply one strong force, and hold the leg strongly with two hands, or on a strap that is tied above the knee; And with another application of force extend your hand over in such a way that it presses her hands under her armpits, then thrusts inward against the thigh; and one holds the head to the strap;
And stretch up and down all at once, until the patient is lifted off the ground at once, and stays hanging.
This stretching method applies to four similar situations; and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is correct.
If not, treatment should be given based on its resemblance. If the dislocation is in the pardedens (sternum), you must have the patient lie on his side with a healthy limb, then put the bandage on the root of the leg, and above the heart, then lift it upwards towards the heart and towards the strength;
Then take another minister and hold both his arms, encircle the large part of the diseased leg with your arms, and extend it upwards in this form: if it returns to its position now; and this type of dislocation is lighter than others.
And if you cannot compress it in this way as we said, then you should tie the two legs of the affected side together with a tight string above both ankles and knees, so that the affected leg is extended by more than one span compared to the other;
Then have it hung from the head of a post, and let there be two spans above the ground; then command one assistant to embrace the head of the leg, while another assistants hold on with the affected part, embracing to form the leg, for the joint is now coming back quickly.
And when the dislocation is at the front, if the leg lies down as we said in that with agility, and forces one string properly onto the affected leg and also on the foot;
Then place two twigs, one on the head and another at the elbow, then stick a twig between the armpits of the patient in the shape; and have planted wet cloths around him, to not blister the patient's skin, then extend each doctor towards him, and place them evenly by his hand for the dislocation.
If it comes back, it's good. If not, place him on a table, and press him like we said in the stomach treatment, and lay the patient on their healthy side.
And when the dislocation is in front, it should be extended immediately as far as possible, and according to what I said; and place the patient's pain on the wrong side, then press with the other hand, and extend down towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is at the back, it does not need to extend the limb downwards or lift him from the ground, but he should be positioned just as when his hip was reset at the back, which is similar to us saying about lying on both hips; and so on his face, and the limb should be extended as we have said previously, and must be pressed against the joint to the table;
and it will be right when the patient extends his legs and they are equal; then adjust the thighs, place the plaster, and tie with a bandage, so that the hip does not move.
and let him rest for three or four days, then release the bandage and place the plaster; and if you see that they are equal, tighten again as before, and leave him for three more days; then release the bandage, and make him walk properly, until the limb is strengthened.
Of the dislocation of the hip
The hip joint can be dislocated in three ways: one might say inside and outside, and behind; and it does not dislocate forward.
And the signs for this are to instruct the patient to bend their leg at their knee, and if they cannot reach their knee, you know that their hip is dislocated;
And the restoration of all this is to make the patient sit straight, and extend their leg if they can, and place your back on their buttocks, and put their foot on your feet;
Then take your knee bone in your hands and remove it between your fingers, then bend them two ribs formed by the knee. And another attendant extends his foot until the knees return to their place, and signs show that he has moved his leg lightly towards his thigh.
and place the plaster, and let the leg heat near the thigh, and join them tightly together for three or four days, then release; and do not disturb the injured parts while they heal, until the limbs are strengthened.
And if the limbs are not yet ready, apply strong extension, as we have said in treating the hip joint, until they recover.
From the dislocation of the heel
The heels are sometimes partially dislocated and sometimes fully out, both inside and outside.
And the signs for this are that the ankle swells, and bends forward towards the part where it is dislocated:
The restoration of movement is easy, and you should gently extend it with your hands when it is only partially dislocated.
And when it is completely dislocated, then you should have the patient lie straight, and hold them one and a half ministers forward by the leg, above the ankle;
then pull their foot towards you with your right hand, and then also with the left twice, then stretch them upwards, and firmly press the foot up high.
and do this twice, just as we have said, by pressing and pulling the foot; if it returns, that is well; if not, restart the process, for it will return.
and if it cannot return like that, then have the patient stand behind their back on the ground, and place two sticks firmly in the ground between their buttocks, and tie them with a cloth so they don't hurt the patient.
Then the surgeons scorch the leg, and some other surgeons extend his foot to his hands or between two sticks, Then extend each surgeon equally, and the pincers should be placed between the legs of the patient for holding the patient when they are extended.
Then place the mirrors equally at the dislocation on his hands, and some other surgeons will scorch the healthy leg near the wound, and the dislocation will return quickly.
And when it has reached the point, place the plaster and bind it on top, then firmly secure it in position, and tie the knot to the leg, and guard the nerves that are behind the ankle, so they do not become too tight.
and leave it for two or three days, and if the knot unties, then tighten it again; then release it on the third day or fourth, and advise the patient to walk for four days; and if he walks beyond that limit, it's not secure that he won't dislocate again.
And when abscesses begin to drain, you should soothe them as we have said in other parts of the text, while they are still clean.
Of the cautery tool directed by fire, command the patient to let their hairs grow long and uniform; and if they start pricking at their base, keep the eyes steady so they don't move until they fully grow.
When the shoulders are dislocated, if they should be nicely extended for work, it is a simple task.
And if the dislocations are in neither the back nor the feet, it should be that you have the patient sit on their full length or on their table completely straight, and place your foot where the joints spread open, then press with your foot firmly until they revive.
And when they are equal, and there is no opening, one places under the foot of the patient a board for two shoulders, then holds them in place, and leaves it for three days, then releases it; and makes him rest until he is healed.
regarding wounds and dislocations together
When a wound accompanies the dislocation, and it needs to be restored, many times the patient has died:
if you are not modest in the treatment, and if you are not skilled in the art or have not used it for a long time, and if you are not merciful and patient, do not be rash;
And when beginning with soothing things for an abscess, allow the patient to hold their hand on God's mercy, if you do not see hope for recovery. And when you see hope, then immediately reset the limb in its place, so that the abscesses are relieved and healed.
And when the limb is in its place, administer soothing remedies for abscesses, and treat the wound, as it should be treated, using desiccated ointments.
And if there is also dislocation and breaking of small bones, set the bones, and do what we have said about simple diseases.
And protect yourself from the path of fear, according to what I have said, for this is your duty as per your Creator, and through knowledge you arm and fortify your body. Amen
