You, dear children, I have completed this book which is the essence of medical knowledge, gathering together its completion through my explanations and declarations. And it came to my vision that I would complete this task with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
And because the art of hands is cultivated in our region and has spread everywhere, it has been lost and forgotten, and nothing remains from its original form other than small descriptions in books by the ancients that have been used. And out of this comes error and vanity, and closed are the minds, and science is moved away.
It seems to me that I should renew the arrangement of this treatise according to the method of exposition and disclosure and abbreviation; and will come together the forms of the cautery instruments and other tools of work with the adjustment and preparation of them, as is necessary.
And because no skilled masters are found in our time, the art of medicine has been lost. And it is necessary for the one who intervenes to master anatomy science, as Galen says, so that they understand the judgment of limbs, their shapes and connections and separations of muscles, have knowledge of bones and nerves and blood vessels, and know the number of bones, the movement and location of veins, both mobile and stationary, and where the exits are located.
And as such states Ipfcras that the benefit with the cure is much, and with the medicine is little; in like manner in the art of surgery.
We shall tell you in the introduction of this book that if one is unaware of what has been mentioned, they may err and deceive others; as I have seen many times with those who interfere in this science and abandon their knowledge and experience.
For I witnessed a foolish surgeon who cut out one of the lymph nodes or throat condition in a woman and cut into her neck arteries; because so much blood came out that the woman died in his hands.
And I saw another surgeon who treated a stone in an elderly man, and the stone was large; he took with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
And I have already been called to draw out, and saw the position of the disease and the size of the stone, and if one had let me cut him it would have died.
And I saw another scene where the cure took care of a duke from our land who had his leg broken, and with the breakage there was an injury; and the healers full of ignorance would bend the break over the injury according to strong will, and did not alleviate the injury in any way, and let it go like that for one term. And I commanded him not to disrupt her; and remained like that until the leg swelled up completely and the foot, resulting in loss.
I was summoned to come to him, and hurried to come and straighten the leg; and when I heard it being dislocated so much that it became peaceful and did not feel any pain.
But every passage for corruption was already confirmed or part of the body and could not be cured; and the process of corruption would continue within the member until the entirety of the limb was lost.
And observe one other site where an abscess opens and gets clogged up, then inflames due to the wickedness of its owner's authority.
For a cancer, when it is filled with melancholic humor and is in such a place that all can be removed from where it has become corrupt, then it should not be touched by iron.
And because of this, skilled children, you are required to know that the work of hands is divided into two sections: knowing that it has danger in multiple conditions; and I will show each part of this book where there is fear and danger.
Because it is necessary that you keep this practice, so that no one can speak ill of you.
If you take your weapons in hand, and treat your illnesses lightly yet firmly, and use the best way so that through God's grace you come to health and be blessed; and leave unbearable diseases without complaint of healing; and remove your weapons from those who make you doubt, and have faith in yourselves so that you can go from this world to the other of glory.
Galen advised in some of his admonitions: "Do not take false illness as a cure, lest you be called foolish by others."
I have composed this treatise according to three chapters.
The first chapters deal with fire cauteries and medical cauteries, and organize the chapters up to the belly; and describe the forms of instruments, and the metals of cautery tools, and all that is necessary for work.
The second chapters are about cutting and piercing, as well as suction cups and wounds, and arrow extractions, and similar things; and the chapters are organized with descriptions of instruments.
The third chapters deal with restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and they are organized up to the belly, as well as descriptions of instruments.
Just as we remember our work, it is necessary for me to describe the quality of each aid and the harm of each constitution.
I say that the qualities of aid and the harm caused are the longest word and most subtle science and the secrets answered. And many wise people spoke about this and agreed with it. And they were content with their words for me because I fear the length.
I say that fire cautery is universally effective for any constitution where it has substance, knowing there are two constitutions: this means hot constitution characterized by substance, and dry constitution characterized by substance.
In the hot and dry combined constitutions, there was no agreement and they said that fire cautery is great help; and the other said the opposite: that fire cautery only works for diseases coming from heat and dryness.
For the nature of fire is so hot, and should never be treated with hot illnesses by heat or drying; and it's stated that those who argue against this claim that the cauterizing tool provides great help to hot and dry diseases that come into a person's body. For when you compare the body of the person and its moisture to the nature of fire, you find that the body is cold.
And I agree with this word. For I have found it true on many occasions through experimentation.
And every path, do not interfere with it unless he who has tried it does so, and who knows through long usage the art of cauterization, and the diversity of human constitutions, and the dispositions and causes of their diseases, and the manifestations and the time span; for other constitutions we have no fear, similarly in cold and moist illnesses. And all the parts should resemble and agree with the cautery.
Know, children, that when a fire cautery is assembled, it possesses the secrets of treatments, and offers more benefit than a burning medicine cautery.
For fire is simple, and leaves no scars on the body except where it burns, and does not harm any other part of the body.
Hot remedies spread from one limb to another when applied, and cause diseases in limbs during healing; and by chance they move the disease.
Fire, due to its height and because of the goodness of its substance, does not do this unless there is excess.
And this is what I have found through experimentation and the length of my service and study in the art, and it matches with the truth of things; and for this reason, I apologize for the length of speech, as I do not like that I force you to accept the secret associated with fire and the quality of work, how it relieves diseases from bodies, as the philosopher explains in demonstrating. Now receive it into your thoughts.
And know, child, that they determined when the cauterizations should be performed, and studied them meticulously.
And I say that cauterization is applicable at all times, because the nuisances occurring are reduced by the aid of the cautery; and indeed, if the cauterizations are for necessary pains beyond which cannot wait until bigger maladies affect the limb.
And never think like the foolish people do, child; for a disease healed by cauterization does not return. And they say this way: but it is not as they believe, because cauterizations are only medicine that alters complexion and dries out fluids causing pain, which are worth more than medicine for the quick increase of its strength, and for the virtue of its work and its authority.
And there exists no disease that comes exactly according to the complexion of the disease and its location, as well as its virtue. And they gather together in him the excesses due to the consumption of foods and similar things, if cauterizations are not administered within him where there is a lack of excesses and moisture, such as dense cauterization for pain, and similar things, so that this type of pain does not recur; but this happens rarely.
And not many people understand why cauteries are called the last of medicine, and this is seen; but they do not believe that cauteries can come after medicine, but their understanding is false, and it's said that cauteries are the last of medicine because when we administer methods of treatments in any illness and they do not work, then we administer our cautery, and it works. Therefore, clearly understood, cauteries are the last of medicine, not according to the understanding of people who simply say so.
The old ones said that gold cauteries are more effective than iron ones, and they stated this because of the quality of gold and its high substance content; and they claimed that the metal parts of the cautery do not cause corrosion, but this is not clear since I have proven it, and found that it does occur in some people; and gold cauteries work better than iron ones, as they said.
And still, when you heat the gold tool, you do not know when it is heated by the color of the gold, and soon cools down; and if you heat it too much; then send it to the fire; and thus there is enough prevention.
And that's why we use our iron cautery which we have prepared for our work.
So you should order this chapter on the shoulder joint until it reaches the elbow, because its visibility will be easier to find.
with an olive cautery
A fire cautery is suitable for moisture and cold on the head, and there are two types that we apply due to an illness called 'soda', and because of many fluids that descend from the head as sweat, and ears, and due to a multitude of dreams, tooth pain and throat pain, and most especially for all diseases arising from cold such as paralysis, soda (or gout), apoplexy and similar illnesses.
The form of this cautery is such that the patient's body should be purged by a dissolving medicine to modify the head. It varies between three and four doses or between four and five, according to what the properties and the temperature and the habituation of the patient can endure; then you make adjustments to the head of the patient afterwards.
And then place your hands in contact with each other and put your palms on his nose. Afterwards, place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two nostrils; and let where your middle fingers go bleed, then heat the cautery which is called 'olivare', this is its form:
And put him in the middle sign of ink, and do as you descend and steady your hand little by little while turning; then lift your hand alone, and test whether the bone appears .i. sol small; and if you do not see it, continue with the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you; afterwards take .i. poc of powder, and apply a soft moistened cotton inside, put on top of him, and let him .iij. days; after that place on one part butter; and leave for as long as the scorching is removed; afterwards treat the wound with ointment known as 'tetrafarmaçon', until it heals properly.
And if they said that concerning the old ones, that when an injury remains open longer, more purging occurs; and because of this movement helps.
And they say that with these we should leave the cautery applied until part of the bone is burned, and then once this part of the bone is burned, it should be treated.
And it is said that one must let the cautery burn there, and press so hard against the bone as wide as a thumb, just like women place in their flasks when they use them because bodily fluids are forced out; and should one allow the wound to be long open; after this, one should clean and bind it.
And these two ways of using the cautery do not seem to me to be good for all purposes, except when there is a way for fear; and I think that I should leave them as they are; because the joints become weakened by continuous exposure to nature's solutions, as we have shown in other limbs; and even when the joints of disease are naturally weak, and my first impression of using cautery is more healing and effective for me, and with this method I perform work thus assembling health.
of the ancient pain in the head
When chronic pain occurs in the whole head and lasts long, one must use the patient's ears and pills that are called "cochies", and treatments for head and ear purification along with bandages; and if one applies the cautery as we have previously mentioned to them, it helps.
Take care that the head of the sick is of strong nature and not too cold; then apply the cautery on top of the spot a little as we have mentioned above.
After make the cautery on each horn of the head up to the bone, just as we said before, and do one more cautery where it is called 'vassel'; and take two levers for which you place suction cups; and lift your hand so that you don't go until the bone: the patient feels much greater pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of this further; and it should be that the cauterizations on the horns are more gentle than the one used to cauterize the middle part of the head, which is this shape:
Of the fire cautery, When suddenly the part of the head comes to have an acute pain, and the illness extends up until the eye, and the head is cleansed by purifying medicines, and other treatments that I mentioned in the division of diseases have been done, and none of this helps: then you do cauterizations according to two ways, namely with ague medicine and fire.
The fire cautery from ague medicine involves you taking a spoonful of garlic, and placing the peel and minced portion in two small pieces on each side of the head. Then conduct the temple or the part where the pain lies, in such a way that you can spread the garlic throughout the skin; when it is spread, cover well with this method and let it remain like this for 12 hours; then remove the covering, take out the garlic, and leave the wound thus for two days or three. Then apply a poultice of butter until pus comes out.
After the treatment of ointment until it is clean; and if you see that you should apply some burning remedies as I have written or in the tenth treatise on burning remedies.
The iron cautery is done in this manner. Heat the shape of the cautery as follows:
And call it "closed" because its head is made in the shape of a bell where there is one and a half inches of curvature, and at its center has a small appearance; and place it on the painful area, and keep your hand steady while slightly move the iron just a bit, until half of the thickness of the wound is burned; then lift your hand to prevent the artery from burning, which leads to an abundance of blood.
After placing linen wadding, place it on the affected area for three days; then replace with wet cotton soaked in butter, and continue to treat the area with ointment until it heals. If you wish to cauterize this headache using the iron cautery which is called "cultellare", do it at its tip, and be careful not to cover the artery in this headache that is not old.
Of a migraine
When you treat migraine as we have previously described in the divisions of diseases, and you don't find relief, and notice that the cauterizations mentioned earlier in medicine do not suit it, then it is necessary for you to heat the cauterization called "cultellare" until it becomes white; and thus cut along a line half an inch long on the body, and move your hand once, and pull it so as not to touch the artery and that you stop at the bone; and be careful of the jaw that moves when eating, and let only the tongue move and avoid spasms in the patient, and beware of bleeding from the artery when it is cut, or if the procedure has great fear and similarly for those who do not know about it and are untrained; and leave the work halfway through; but I will tell you how to stop the bleeding once the artery is cut, and show you its location in this book.
And if you see that this cauterization does not suit the illness, and the patients are suffering, apply it in the middle of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it heals; and if you observe, administer the cauterization that we have said or chapter on extraction of the artery, with a two-bladed cauterization tool; and these cauterizations are better than the other one and more helpful.
of the pain of the ears from part coldness
When pain from cold affects the ear, and treatments have been applied using dissolving medicines and other procedures we discussed earlier in this section, if the pain persists, then apply this type of cautery known as "dots", following which is its usage:
After applying the cautery all around the ear, or in both sides of it if pain is present in both ears, and move away slightly from the root of the ear after you've marked its position. Apply ten 'dots' on either side of each ear; afterwards treat until the site becomes healthy.
of the torment of the mouth
Tortures that must be treated with a cautery are not from those that move by blood flow, as we have said in divisions of diseases; and do not make a cautery for the appearances coming from scarring and pus of nerves.
When you treat this type of torture that moves by water and from head discharges and gargling, and if it's not effective, then it is required that you cauterize the patient with three applications: one at the root of the ear, another slightly beyond the temple, and the third in adjusting the two lips. And place the cautery where health reveals itself, and cauterize right at the tip of the ear above a little below the outer ear's edge, and another at the temple as long as a thumb; and let the cautery burn up to halfway through the brain; and this is the shape of the cautery.
And the appearance of the surgical knife that we have described previously is a bit more refined, so it requires that the knives be somewhat thicker. After treating the wound as I have said before, until it heals properly.
When it comes to apoplexy being chronic and treating it as we have said, if it is not effective, and the patients do not have fever, then make four cauterizations: two on each of the horns of the head, and one underneath the head, and one at the part that's called 'vasselz' as we had mentioned before, and the last one on the mouth of the stomach; and treat it in accordance with what we said previously.
of liturgy
For this illness, you should give the patient large pills and brain-dissolving tablets; after that, remove the head of the patient thoroughly, and place the sinapic plaster on the back of the head as instructed in the treatment of plasters. And this is how to perform cauterization: do it just like I have said.
If it's healing like this, well done; and if not, do the following: three cauterizations on either side of the head as it descends to the neck, leaving an interval of one thumb between each cauterization. And treat it just as with others, and should you see that it has adjusted, and the patient tolerates this, then do a single cauterization in between; and if necessary, two more above the two horns, and treat until it heals. And let the cauterizations called "olive" be performed, as I have previously said.
from cold or injury to the head It is necessary that the head be cleaned of years and what we have said before; after treating the head for the patient, then do a cauterization near the wound on the head, and on each horn, and one at the back and three below the spine of the neck; and if you need more than this, and the body is moist and the patient tolerates it, and the disease has spread, then perform four cauterizations along the spine of the back; and leave it until the deepest part is fully healed, then remove your hand; after that treat until it heals, and let the cauterizations called "olive" be performed which we have said before.
From the treatment of epilepsy
The epileptics should only use the cautery on those who are phlegmatic, and first modify the years of treatment and other remedies that we have discussed in the section where the body is large and suffers from hunger for medicine.
And if it's a child who can't bear the suffering, make them gargle and chew, modifying the treatment often with good meats; after this, you should have their head in the middle, and I do one cautery according to what we said before, and one cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the body is strong and suffering, I give them cauterizations as I said for those who are paralyzed and have a softening of the limbs, on the spinal column both at the back and neck, and let the olive-shaped cauterizations be done according to the method that I've described.
If the body is a child's, I perform one delicate cauterization in this manner:
When due to the reason of melancholy are excesses or fluids corrupted and thickened, then the cautery from the parts' cautery as we have said to him who has paralysis.
And if it is due to the reason of melancholy that these excesses are declining towards melancholy, and there is malaise from moistened organs in the body, then one should drink something according to which makes the brain clean, as was explained before in the division.
After removing the head of the body; after do .i. linen twists well made, as .i. circle, if you place it around the head; and let the body parts lie properly aligned and held firmly in all directions; then apply the liniment and rub with old bee wax butter; and heat it moderately on fire so that one can bear it; afterwards empty the circle from within through the head, and let it cool down; and do this to each part of the body once a week with another good regimen until it is healthy.
If you see that the cauterization has been done by making points with the cautery on all parts of it. This way of cauterizing moistens the brain excessively; and then place moist cotton, butter, and gelatin fat upon it.
of the irritation of the eyes When eye trouble first arises through the symptoms I have mentioned in the division, then begin and continue to instruct the patient on things that purify the head, and keep them away from all moisture, and make them sweat or bathe several times fasting.
After commanding over his head, and have him cauterize in front of it, and make him receive two cauterizations on the two temples when the alleviation of the trouble is among the two eyes together, or if the alleviation is in one eye; then apply to every cauterization all the veins and arteries that are around the brain, and have them cauterized long according to the width of the temple; and guard against bleeding out, and if you see too much blood coming out, then stop it by applying pressure as you know how.
And I will teach you about the extraction of arteries and incisions using cautery, how to apply it; and never should one use cautery or burn across the two bones behind.
of both tears' courses
When the tears from the eyes are old and accustomed, and located on the veins, or across the arteries that lie beneath the apparent surface of the head; and one can see they are cold excesses of phlegm. So, I apply the cautery as I've described at the beginning of this section: .i. cautery around the eye, and .ij. cauteries on each of the .ij. temples, and .ij. cauteries or burn across the .ij. bones; and if there is need for more, carefully apply additional cautery above the eyebrows with every .i. small cautery.
of the paths of tears within the eyes
When you apply the remedies as we have instructed in the division, and if they don't benefit, then give the patient three nuts to drink; after that, have them drink their own urine, and apply a cauterizing agent or an olive oil-based cauterizing substance; and perform two cauterizations using the 'clavilis' cauterizer on both sorcis, slightly over the hair; and be careful not to cover the artery. And this is the form of the cauterizer which is called 'clavilis':
When the wick of the oil has been softened due to disease and moisture, then cauterize with this cauterizer which is called 'olive'. Here is its form:
And if you see that it is done twice by two needles as long as the needles are; and do not let go of your hand until only the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner I said.
of hair that touches the eye None of the times has it been that the hair of the eyebrows turns to the gums and touches the eye, and in this case, one does the cautery according to two ways: namely by fire, or with burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they grow long and even, then have the patient in a healthy position. Afterwards, on the paper of the eyes draw a figure that is as large as a mint leaf and includes the beginning of the sign between the hairs; then place damp cotton soaked with egg white and garlic paste on the eye, then heat the cautery which has this form:
After you've cauterized on the figure that you have drawn a little bit at a time, such that the burn stays in one place; and signs of health are when you see the paper returning, and the hairs are raised to the edge of the eye; then lift your hand, and leave it like this for three days. Next, place damp cotton in butter until the scab is removed; afterwards apply the ointment until it heals properly.
And if hair growth starts occurring after this, and the paper becomes softened; then resume with the cautery on that same area as before. If hairs have emerged, apply the cautery until the paper rises to its natural position and is even, without touching the eye.
The cautery of medicine that burns commands the patient to let the hairs grow until they are large and even. Then make the shape of a laurel leaf from parchment; then take French soap and living charcoal, each about half an ounce, and grind them well together; and prepare it quickly so it does not cool down, then apply it directly on the form like a laurel leaf, and place it on the paper under the eye. If the sickness lasts for one hour only, you should open in one direction, and if both sides are also affected; put wet cotton in each eye as large as an egg; let the patient's head rest on your hand supporting the medicine, press with two fingers and hold the rest of the face every time the patient feels the irritation from the medicine, because it feels irritation similarly to fire. When you have done this for a while, if let the medicine sit on your hand. And when the irritation has passed, if you lift your hand away, and reward it if you see that the paper is lifted just as it would be lifted by the constraint of fire or incision; and if it's like this, then everything is well. If not, then apply more medicine onto your hand wherever the medicine hasn't worked yet, until your actions are even, and your eyes are at a proper point; then place wet cotton in butter until the burned area is covered, after that cleanse your hand of the ointment known as "dyafenis" and another one, until it becomes healthy.
And if it is necessary that you guard well in your operation by great caution so that no medicine mixes with the oil. And if the paper becomes moist after, and the hair pricks at the eye, then apply the medicine to the part where the paper has become soft from the proper clean oil; as you did previously; cleanse until it is healed completely; this is the form of the leaf of myrtle:
And know that the oils of men vary in size and degree, and according to this be your constraints; and do not let the right way be answered by him who studies this art.
regarding the treatment of fistula by cautery
When you treat a fistula as we have described in the sections on diseases, and your treatments are not effective, then it is necessary for you to perform a cautery according to this method.
Instruct the patient to place their head in a healthy position; and scrape the temples of their head between your hands in such a way that it does not move or twist its head; afterwards put moistened cotton on the eye, either under an egg or from garlic juice; then heat the cautery which is prepared: and over the head as if it were the shape of a quill feather, place the cautery there; if you see, let it be pointed from one end to another, and if you can see, let it also be like a tent; but always remember that whatever is under should move according to your work.
After pressing the fistula if it is opened, and treat the infection, then dry it up; and if it is closed, open it again, and remove from the body; afterwards place the cauterizing instrument in a form, and hold your hand on the cautery at the part under the nose above the eye, so that your hands do not cause harm; and put the cautery into the grease of the oil, and let it be corroded.
If you come to the start of the cautery until the bone, it would be well. If not, continue with the cautery once more and again as needed, and leave it for three days; afterwards place moist cotton in butter, and apply the ointment cure until it heals. Once forty days have passed since healing began, then apply corrosive water medicine until the bone is exposed; and follow the king's rule according to what he prescribes in his chapter.
And there is a way to cauterize fistulas that none of the old ones mentioned. Understand what a fistula is and do as follows; after this, place one sharp camel bone in the opening, which has its form here: And I do it to the size of three grains of poppy; and hold your hand or the camel bone firmly, and don't let the patient move, so that the melted wax does not spread in its own direction; and it is appropriate to put cotton moistened with butter or oil on the wax: the wax serves as the opening of the fistula, and the healing proceeds wonderfully through cure.
And if the fistula is healed through the cautery method that we have described, that is good. If not, then it should be treated with garlic, and restore the fistula to inside the body near the nose according to what should be done in its proper location.
This translates to "cuts on lips". This sentence translates as follows:
When you treat these wounds as we have discussed in sections, and if the treatment does not help, then apply a small surgical instrument according to this form:
And immediately place it in these wounds until the oil comes out; afterwards clean the wound with tallow until it is healed.
from the abscess of the throat
When an abscess comes to the root of the throat or into the uvula, or on the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after it has rotted and swollen and festered, eventually turning into a fistula; you should treat it as we have discussed in sections, but if this does not work: then you must apply a cautery according to the size of the fistula; afterwards remove the contents of the fistula, keep your hand steady until the metal rod reaches the bottom and towards the middle; do this once or twice, after treating as discussed for curative measures, until it heals. And if treated in this way, it is good; but if not, you should uncover the wound, remove the decayed bone according to what you find in your treatise.
of tooth movement
When the gums are softened by moisture and teeth move,
And in this way, the moving tooth is fixed,
of the pain of teeth
When tooth pain comes due to coldness, or there is coldness or fever, and medical treatments do not work, then it must have a cautery according to two ways: and the butter cautery and the fire cautery.
Butter cautery if it is like that you take butter from a cow, and the tip on a iron or ant's spoon; after take cotton and envelop around the point of a tent, and make the butter to cool down, then put this on the hurting tooth quickly and hold until it becomes cold; and do this often until the power reaches to the root of the tooth, and if you see wet wool and cotton in cooled butter, then put this on the hurting tooth, and place hot iron over it for as long as the fire goes into the tooth.
The fire cautery if it is like that you take a coal of iron or an ant's egg, and make it big so that the fire does not come to the pain in the wound; after heat up the cautery, from which the shape will appear later, and put this on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery becomes cold; do this often, for the pain will be relieved that day or the next. And it is necessary that the wound fills its mouth with good butter in the hurry of this cautery, and then pull out the iron; and this is the shape of the cautery:
When the scrophules are due to cold blood and wet humours, and they don't comply with digestion by medicines, then you should heat the cautery as shown below. It will have two openings for the fumes to exit from the other side; and place the heated cautery near the abscess once or twice, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; if the abscess is small, adjust the size of the cautery according to its quantity, and leave it like that for three days; apply moistened cotton soaked in butter until all pus has been expelled. After this, continue treatment with ointments and poultices until healed.
When moisture invades through the veins of the heart and especially when it comes from a cold constitution, then it is necessary for the body to be emptied first with diuretic medicines; afterwards perform the cautery at the root of the throat, and ensure that you do not come right up to the throat, but burn until just beyond slightly.
Of the touch When all and the diseases of the heart are due to cold moisture, and the body doesn't have fever nor dryness, and it's an old disease, then you should perform two cauterizations on their veins; and another cautery in between their buttocks under the breasts. Let these cauterizations be those called "clavile" according to the form mentioned before.
And if you see it, apply the fire cautery at exactly all points of the cautery called "poins", which was previously outlined in the sickness of ears; and let these 'poins' go up to thirty (30), or perhaps a bit further. After this, treat the area according to what was said beforehand, and set the cauteries for three (3) days following this form:
And these cauterizations are lighter because you do them three times in each area.
regarding the dislocation of the shoulder When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. After that, bandage the wounds on his back and sides; after that, release the kidney inside the bladder from your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated internally, heat up the cautery until it has two points, as this is how it should be shaped.
And apply the cautery to the kidney until it reaches his side, and bring together four pieces of the cautering; and for this, use the cautery that has three points, because the pattern of cautery consists of three pieces; and the nerves follow the delicacy of a tent and this is the shape of the cautery that has three points.
And no time is attached to this first nerve, because there are seven cauteries involved.
After placing the cautery on it, grind with it; after that, allow the patient to rest, and do not let the limbs be strained for too long until they are well supported.
And if it is released from above, where little has happened, then make a cautery on the thickness of the main cauterizing rod, or in many parts by touching. For the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed, and the patient's body is healed.
of the weeping cautery
The old ones said that we should do the tearsin fire cauterizations from the roots of aristologe, and in this way: take a root of aristologe long, the longest you can find, and dry it, and also make it as thick and as long as your finger; and put its juice in oil, then hold it to the flame, and cauterize once between the elbow and neck, and twice smaller ones slightly down on the part that is under the beard; and three times between the fifth rib and the sixth, descending a little behind; and one time near the heel, and another above the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and four times at the sides of the ribs below the cauterization that is between the two shoulders; and do not squeeze your hand, rather act freely as when smelling.
And it was said by the old that no man uses a feigned fire cautery at one razor cut, and they heat it and put it between the ribs, until it reaches that abscess; and if there comes relief from the pain, as we have mentioned in the abscess of the liver. But in this work fear arises or the patients die now, or a fistula occurs which cannot be cured.
"De la mice" is French slang for "from the mouse," referring to something that is coming from the mouse (as in the small animal). In English, it could translate roughly as "from the mouse," though context would determine its exact meaning.
When you treat the illness of the mouse in those we have spoken about regarding the divisions of treatment, and it doesn't improve, then apply three methods of cautery that are all good.
There is one way which is as follows: make three cauterizations, or four, drawing them according to the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the liver that we mentioned before; and do not hasten your hand across all the cauterization, and let the patient be soothed by their back;
And another way of cauterization is that you heat the cauterizing tool with two noses, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift out the kidney which is at the mouse's place, or where the pain comes from the left side, and let it be lifted according to the heat, according to the shape of the body, and the cauterizations should be according to the width of the body.
After I place the two heated needles until they are pierced from the other side, and then remove the cautery, afterwards you will have four. And if you see fit, sear with the entire cautery on three needles. After treatment when it has expelled pus over a long time, and this counts as much as any other treatments previously mentioned.
of dropsy
The fire cautery is not suitable for dropsy, except by the method called "asclytes". When you treat it according to the methods we have mentioned in sections and your treatment does not benefit, then you should make four cauterizations around the anus, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one place under the breast. And let the cauteries be well close to the spinal keur.
After letting the cautery heated for a long time to burn thoroughly, do not stop the cure after the cautery; and healing would hasten, and both sides of the burnt area would join together with God's help.
The shape of the cautery for the belly is like a knife as we have demonstrated before; and the one for the back should be round, according to what was put forward earlier.
regarding swelling of the joints When the joints swell in someone who is hydropic and filled with yellow bile, it is necessary to apply a cautery on the back of the foot between the first and second fingers. Then lift your hand using the cautery without turning. And do not go too deep inside, otherwise it would remove the yellow bile, and use the cautery according to this shape:
After performing on both legs at the tip of the knife cut; and place the cauterizations along the length; each one in front of the knee joint on one leg and the other behind, down the middle of the leg; leave the cauterizations to burn for a long time without treatment until the wound heals; after curing the other treatments as we have said.
of memory
When the stomach trouble is caused by cold or moisture, as long as the retaining and digesting powers of the stomach and intestines are overwhelmed, and cannot be cured through usual treatments; you see the patient suffering greatly with greenish fluids, if you apply a large cautery on the stomach according to what he has said before, or stomach cautery, moving around the stomach. And four more cauterizations inside the subtle area around the mouth for each of these, and two subtle cauterizations at the elbow joint, and two cauterizations on the hips.
And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, apply the fire cautery to the base, and one cautery on each navel, and two small cauteries on the stomach under the large one, because the treatment benefits when there is good help.
regarding the treatment of hemorroids
When the hemoroids are located or have a foundation, they may be old and consist of large cold moist putrefied humors, and if treatment does not prove beneficial following our instructions in divisions, then apply cauteries: three on the spine of the back, that one is fully exposed from under the buttocks gradually and in triangulation, and one above the anus. Four times;
And if you think that the stomach is chilled and the food doesn't cook properly, and you see swelling of the abdomen, then apply one large cautery to the stomach as was mentioned before, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen using all the clavicle; and leave the cautery in for a long time. Afterward, treat the affected area until it has healed properly.
of the soreness which is called "thelul"
When you treat the swelling called "thelul", heat up the cautery until it looks like a rasp iron, and then place the entire hot end on the thelul; and leave your hand as close to the cautery as possible near the vein's origin, from which blood flows. Do this once or twice, and if there is more swelling, apply each part of the treatment similarly as we have said; after the treatment with beneficial ointments until they heal properly; and if you apply a large-hot cautery on the area affected by "alchatim", it will provide greater relief.
of improperly treated wound
When the patient cannot bear surgery or incision, as we will describe in its proper place, if such a disease should occur that can only be cured through cautery.
When there is no opening and it is aged with festering corruption and moisture, if you want to test this thoroughly with a tiny probe, be sure that you understand the size of this opening. Heat up your cautery until it seems ready, and apply it into the fistula according to its depth, then continue heating the cautery until the diseased pus is burnt away, one time or two times or three times depending on your need; and beware not to burn the nerves and large vessels. If the fistula went inside the body and reached the intestine, be careful of this situation, and do not perform these actions in a healthy part of it, remember that you mustn't harm others; after the wound heals until it is clean, and once pus has been drained completely for a long time, then you know that the healing process is complete. And if the pus hasn't drained fully, understand that there's still corruption in the fistula, and bone tissue has been damaged internally; act accordingly on one of these situations we shall mention in its proper context.
Regarding kidney disease When abdominal pain arises from the kidneys and large wind movements, it doesn't affect men equally, so it is necessary that you apply a cautery on both sides of the kidneys, as well as to the wrist area where we have previously mentioned; if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three applications of the cautery in a line, and they will provide more assistance.
From the bladder When the bladder is thick and moist due to heat and moisture, so that the kidneys retain urine, then you perform a cautery on the lower part of the bladder, where the pubic hair begins, and one each side, and let each cautery be as long as one finger; and you do one cautery behind the back, or two if needed; and make the cauteries in a V shape according to the form previously described.
From the mare's tail When the mare's tail is cold and moist, and it does not allow anything to conceive, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends delay; and when they come, they give off great pain: then you must perform three cauterizations inside the vulva, as we have said or in relation to bladder cautery, and two cauterizations behind the back; and make the cauterizations in a V shape, as we have said.
From the hip
When the viscous moisture descends to the cavity of the hip, and because of this reason it moves out of its place, and the signs are that the leg is longer than the other when measured together; and you find the legs from their origin visible, then it should be that you apply a cautery on the cavity of the hip with a mark resembling a circle for one firebrand. And you shall stand in front of the limb within the cavity as she curves, so that the cavity is inside the circle; and if your fires are like those where you have cauterized the stomach.
And if such fires are not available to you, then make three olive-sized firebrands that are as precise as all your stones, and perform the treatment until it heals.
The pain of the hip When pain occurs in the buttocks area, and this is due to coldness and moisture, and the patient's treatment follows what we have discussed about division and cure procedures that are not effective, suggesting an old disease: then it is necessary for you to cleanse the body of thick fluids using foul-smelling pills or other good-looking pills.
After you perform the cautery; and regarding the method of cautering there are two ways: this means combining hot medicines, and fire cautery. The fire cautery has several methods, among which one is like this: you should make three triangular cauterizations according to this shape, and each makes a good depth and large ones, and leave an equal space between each cauterization the size of a coin, and these are olive cauterizations; one should never make a cauterization in the middle above the buttocks area, because there are four following this shape:
And if you see that the circle-cautery, as we have described before in the dislocation of the buttocks, should be used; but do it this way so that all the buttocks are contained within the circles, and all parts of the keur (or area) is heated.
And this is how it is done in sciatica, when the pain stays in the hip and does not reach to the thigh or leg. And if it comes down to the thigh and leg, then one applies two cauterizations there where the patient says the pain stays, and one above the ankle, four inches up, on the left side a bit; and may use surgical knives for this, or burn away thick skin around the knee; and if the patient feels that the pain extends down to just below or near the foot, then cauterize there where he senses the pain with three points or four at the point of the cautery which is called "points".
And if more work is needed, do so; and if it turns out that the pain is spreading from the knee towards the thigh, apply a cauterization using either an incising or circular tool. Make sure to take great care in all your cauterizations, ensuring you don't stop too soon when burning nerves and large arteries, and refrain from causing more harm and constriction to the patient than necessary.
And I myself have seen many who applied the cautery on the ankle down to the foot, and they burned it so much that the leg became swollen all around, and likewise the feet were affected, becoming painful and putrefied. After this, the person died due to an abdominal distention solution.
And if the pains are in two parts together, make cautery on one and on another, according to this manner. // And the surgeons say in the cautery of the hip, about which is mentioned here, this is the way: shape a piece of iron into two similar items each as large as a small finger or a little less, place them head-to-head so that they are positioned side by side and from one to the other for an area equivalent to the size of a pea; ensure that these pieces are interlinked in both parts and resemble knots. Also have two well-made iron pins; this is its shape:
And heat it until it is completely red and emits steam, then place it on the afflicted area of the hip, and twist it near to the healthy side. And apply one cautery treatment once and allow it for three days; and after this, cover it with butter, and keep the wound open long thereafter; continue dressing with ointment until it has healed completely.
Albucasim states that we use very little of this type of cautery for the fear of his judgement, and there are few who actually use it; yet such a method is among the better cauterizations which one can endure, and leaves scars where they occur.
of the pain of the back
When pain comes to the back, whether by falling or from percussion or due to too much evacuation, or due to similarities of cold matter spread out, none of these appearances warrants cauterization, because it is someone who came from an infusion of cold matter.
It is necessary after this that the patient has been freed of rotten pills or other appearances, and that one applies it to the back, where the pain is located, three lines marked with a cross, and in each line according to its strength and quantity what the body can endure; and do the cauterization according to the cautery called "points"; and if you see fit, apply 3 or 4 cauterizations at the middle clavicle according to this form:
This disease often affects children, and the signs of its beginning are that they suddenly become weak when standing up, with fear; and you find an inflammation in the last spinal bone at the back and a similar appearance to other spinal bones.
When you see this and you notice it being treated, if you apply the fire cautery according to this form.
So that the fire cautery touches each part of the spine equally. And if you see it, apply the fire cautery to the inside of the spine using a point. Two or three lines deep, and have the points close together. After that heal it until it is healthy according to what we have said, and be careful not to use the cautery in a way that causes pus formation which could involve nerves.
Of the pain in joints
When joint pain arises due to moisture spread throughout each body member, and when pain comes from the feet which they call "gout" properly, and when it is caused by cold reasons and can be cured with medicines, they are treated in this manner: make the fire cauterization inside the joint of the foot, and have these olive oil cauteries take this form:
And if you need to touch on the foot of the patient, when they are applying fire, do it with a complete cautery saying "point". And if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, when this happens many times, apply the fire on each knee. Three or four times over every part, throughout the olive oil cautery; and if you need more, then do so, but make sure your hand stays inside until the heat of the cure is burnt away.
And if the pains descend to the knees and back, administer the cautery that we have told about in our chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, make marks inside the bend of the elbow two lines wide; and if there is no pain left on the back, make marks on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come up to the elbows or shoulders, cauterize each part, and take good care with the patient and give medicines. For if you treat him well and purge phlegm, he will be cured with God's help.
Of the rupture of the scrotum
When rupture occurs in the lungs, and the bowels descend into the kidneys - it is novel. It's necessary that when you see them to cure, do not disturb that day; use things that allow the wind to leave his belly so that the intestines descend from his belly; after let him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to shave his armpit until the bowel are repaired, then remove them with your fingers, and mark with burning under the rupture on the bone of the knife, and in every sign make it similar to half a circle above the heart. Then heat up the cautery which has this form:
Till it is white and smells of scents. Then remove the bowels up to their position; and have his ministers shave his hands so that they don't turn back; and work well on his thighs with the patient, and put 2 pillows under his thighs and another one under his buttocks which shaves his hands; then place the cautery at its sign throughout your hand, and keep your right hand straight as you reach until you touch the bone, and if you don't reach the first time, continue again once or twice until you reach to the bone; and be careful so that the bowel doesn't escape when you do the cautery; don't burn it; and ensure this way patients' skin does not get burned or any other damages.
And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worthless. It's necessary that the children's cautery be subtle according to their size and also large people should have theirs as large as their measure; after three days treat his armpit with butter until the scab comes off; afterwards apply other ointments until he heals properly, and let him stay on his back for forty days so that the wound is well closed; and it's necessary that his wounds are treated long enough, so that bowels don't escape when he wishes to walk in chambers.
And after forty days, when he wishes to stand up, he should wear a well-made bandage and do this for forty more days; and with good rest, he should work little and avoid overfilling himself in drinking or eating, and overstraining his voice. And when he follows this advice, he will be fully recovered. And I shall explain the treatment of trimming next in this chapter. of the rupture of the belly
When ruptures occur in other bellies and are visible, and you see that they are not growing any more, you should apply fire according to their size with the cautery, and use one-third of the charcoal; after that, treat it as we have said; and none of the old ones said that one must cauterize at the angles of the cautery to this form:
The first sign is when the skin begins to swell and make a line across the width of the cut, and another down below, and move your hand along the entire iron stick for cauterization. But the initial applications are lighter and moister.
from old pain in no limb When pain comes to any limb, whether from falling or being hit, and if this pain lasts long, and medicine does not cure it, then it must be cauterized with the cautery called "points", and the cauterization should be according to the length of the member, its smallness and weakness, and its effectiveness, as well as its location in twisting and its pain. If the first application of the cautery is good, that's fine; if not, apply another one after it. Such situations require that the cauterizations affect the limb closest to them, for which reason you should perform cauterizations until the illness is cured.
Of cautery by fire, command the ill person to allow the hairs to grow long and even; and if they poke at their base, hold the eyes still so they do not move until they grow.
The treatments are aided by fire cautery many times and especially illnesses that come from the putrefaction of blood and melancholy. If you see it being treated by cautery, beware if the illness is at its start, and when it is cured according to what we have said in this section, so that it doesn't recur or remain and you doubt whether corruption has spread throughout the disease, then do this five times with fire cautery: one time on the head up to where the nose meets it and another towards the forehead at the ends of hair; and two times on each of the horns, and once behind on the chin. And keep your hand such that the cautery comes close to bone, until the scabs come out completely so as for the vapors from the large humors can escape. And cauterize it in the middle following as what is done before.
And if the cautery is everywhere scattered; and it clearly disappears, then it's appropriate that you apply these cauteries that we have spoken of to the head, and one cauterization near the nose, and two cauterizations on the spine at the neck, and seven cauterizations on the spine at the back, and one large one at the throat and another in front, and two on each shoulder; and two on the ribs, and two on the tendons of the feet, and one on each joint of hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and be careful about the nerves that are at the heel bone, do not burn them. And no single cauterization is done over the bone of the wrist, and another over the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And know that the more cautery I apply, the more help it becomes for the patient, and they benefit from it; and know that patients do not feel pain during cautery as healthy ones do, because their bodies are already thoroughly corrupted. And you should have large and small cauteries according to limbs and joints, just as you will find in instructions on iron tools. After the cure, dust the area with flour mixed with honey and other remedies until it heals properly.
of inflamed
When inflammation appears in any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and bandages, but not healing, then I apply cautery to the limb according to its size; and let some of the cautery enter slightly into the redness of the disease. Then treat it with ointments until it heals properly. And every time one makes a cautery, on the hand and foot and back, at the exit of the nerve that paralyzes the limb, and in this way the inflammation is removed; and still, no one should interfere unless they are knowledgeable about limbs and the exits of moving nerves in the body.
Of cautering with fire, command the patient to allow the hairs to grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When the disease called "albaras" is grown worse, and medicine in its natural form is of no use, then apply cautery from a small fire to some extent, according to the quantity of the root being treated, until the pus is removed and its color changes; then cleanse with flour and lentils mixed with rose oil and leaves of plantain, and blood from chicken and blood from duck, each using one part; mix all together, then wrap in a cloth, and leave on the affected area until it heals.
Curing syphilis with cautery
When the chancre begins to develop and you see it start, if you stop it by observation, use a fire cautery that appears like a circle. And around its circumference apply the cautery to the chancre all over. And some say that one should also apply the cautery in the middle of the chancre; yet this seems not well to me because I fear it could lead to ulceration and corruption, which is something I have already seen happen many times; and a more rational thing is for it to be cauterized around the edges with the fire cautery called 'circule', as we have said in the context of using cauteries.
Of swelling that cannot die.
When someone has a disease called "adubelati", and it doesn't die or due to the excess it causes or because of the age of the sickness when it is old (meaning too old) and he/she has little blood, or because of its length; and you see that it needs to die quickly: then use small cauteries around by applying them in various places; afterwards leave it like that. For it will hasten to die.
And if you see it pierce through completely to all points of the cautery, if you heat the cautery as described:
And place your hand in the middle of the disease which is called "adubelati" as long as the cauteries have pierced through the heart, and use such cauteries that the sick feels outwardly in such a way that the progress of the putrefaction be checked. After the cure until it's healed perfectly.
The cure by fire using iron
Another method for disease involves one referred to as "corrodens", which is nothing else than a limb deformity, causing the limbs to be affected similarly to how dry twigs are burned. If you notice this disease in someone capable of undergoing a cautery procedure with fire altogether, then apply small and large iron cauteries according to what suits the area where the illness is present; after burning all around until you eradicate every corruption, leave nothing behind so that no part of the corrupted remains. And then let it be for three days, and while the ashes from the fire burn on your treated limbs with oil until the burned areas heal away and any remaining corruption. After the use of ointments causing growth. And if after three days you see that healthy tissue does not grow, this is well; and should this not be the case, restart the cautery procedure where there remains corrupted on your limbs. This deformity is sometimes cured with medicine in place of fire cautery; yet still, fire cautery proves to be more helpful, and I have already spoken about the cure for ague medicine within a specific division: take what you need from it.
From stones that come into the kidneys
Often times when stones pass through the kidneys, a disease occurs which is called "clos" according to our understanding, and it is a large lump that causes pain in the kidney. The cauterization for this disease happens in two ways; namely fire cautery and hot water cautery.
And if they are converted beyond the body's borders, and often happen in the hands and elbows, it must be that you bring forth a hot cautery; and do this manner: take an arnica stick or iron, or a goose feather, and place them on the nail and thorn, meaning for warts; and place the stick where the skin reddens fully around it, then add some hot water, and keep your hand tightly held, pressing your hand back so that the edge of the stick touches the root of the nail, and then find the path of the hot water deep down to the root; and allow the patient a little exposure to the hot water for an hour; then leave them like this, and it will uproot all at its roots. Do this one after another, until you have treated every single one in your body, then cleanse of any growths that generate flesh.
the treatment for trembling
When some tremble from cold or nerves, or from the quartan fever or other conditions, it is necessary that you perform this treatment: four to five hot iron applications on the spine of the back; one application between each vertebra; one on the skin and another under the stomach with an olive cautery; if this doesn't stop the trembling, hasten the recovery from the cold illness.
The pus-filled boils
No matter how they appear on the surface of a boil or pus-filled pustule that comes from large decayed materials, it is necessary at first when they start to appear to apply cauterization to each tip of the pustule: a fine firewood stick of myrtle, whose point gets heated by fire, or from a long root of aristologe, or with the lens-shaped cautery. And it should not be cauterized in the beginning when they are starting to appear, according to this method, and it will not grow pus forwards, but will relieve the excess causing them and make them well; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
when the artery is cut Many times there would be great flows of blood from the artery that is cut during the wound or when incising an abscess, and similar occurrences; and it's very frustrating to have to deal with bad smells.
And still, when this happens to any, if you hasten to place your index finger on the wound of the vein, and hold it not too tightly until the skin is soothed under your finger, and no drop leaks out; then heat several olive oil cauteries with both small and large sizes, until they are all red. Then take one or more according to the size of the wound and the place where the artery runs through it, and place the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and keep the cautery there until the skin is completely cooled.
And if it jumps out when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cauteries are done, then quickly take another one of the cauteries that are at the fire.
And do not stop performing this one after another until the skin is cooled down completely; and be careful not to burn the nerve that lies beneath, and so no harm comes to the patient; and know that when the skin has receded from the artery, one cannot cool it properly themselves even if the artery is large, unless you do this through four methods as we have said: by cautery, or extraction when it has not been treated yet, or by strong winding of a thread, or by medicines applied which have the power to cool blood; and then tie and restrict it accordingly.
Whoever administers it will apply stretching or tightening of cloths tightly or place burning things upon them, or other similar actions, if they do not gain from it then they did not.
And if this happens to anyone and they have no sight or medicine at hand, when faced with a wound in the vein, they should put their index on top of the wound as we have said, and stretch it so that it remains stretched above the wound and above the vein; and not move it, but moisten it with cool water often until it's very cold, until the blood is frozen, thickened, and remains stretched. And make preparations in advance for cautery and medicines for what they need.
We have told you in the first chapter about all diseases concerning which it is necessary to apply a cautery of fire, or hot medicine, and we discussed their causes and tools, forms of cauterization; I completed that chapter up until the feet, and now I shall proceed through this chapter on my own path as these are found more readily for what one desires.
And just as I begin this, it is necessary, dear reader, that you understand that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than with the first treatments of cauterization, so great caution is required for these.
For in the work of this chapter, there are many times bleeding when opening veins and making incisions on abscesses, and treatments for wounds, and extraction of arrows, and cutting into stones, and similar matters; where there is doubt and fear, and it leads to deaths of some.
And I advise you not to engage in folly. For many ways of people come into cures. Some come from those who are so troubled by their illness that they die lightly due to the anxiety they find in their sickness, and the severity of their wickedness; and for these, one should have fear. And among these are those who understand its meaning and say: "Wait, I am brave"; and the illness is spiteful. It would be inappropriate for you to agree with those who come to your door in this manner, but show greater caution towards your honor than your covetousness, do not act foolishly but wisely from those about whom you are certain, and about whom you can take advice; use prophecy and indication in the remedies of your ailments until health is achieved; this will help you gain good reputation, fame, and long memory.
Dear child, Our Lords give you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to aspire from the holy inspiration of His hand, Amen.
Or I have commanded this chapter in devising through chapters, according to what is before or the chapter on cauterizations, which I have devised from head to feet, for you will find it more easily of that which you will need.
from the head full of water
Know that this disease comes very often during childbirth to children, and when the mother constrains too tightly the head of the child; and no time does this come about because of a response that one might know.
And I have never seen this disease in anyone other than children, and among all those that I have observed, their death was hastened by it; for which reason, I think it's worth trying to divide the work into partial treatments.
And I saw an infant of theirs whose shoulder was filled with water, and the head swelled each day until it could no longer bear it; and he believed so much in the moisture that he died, and this moisture is assembled all over the bone under the axilla, between the heart and the bone; and the works are such that if the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, you cut open through the head a large crack; and it goes as long as two hands, as long as the moisture flows; and see this shape of the spasmula:
If the moisture is more concentrated, and the abscess is larger, make two cuts in a manner like a cross, according to this shape:
And if the moisture is inside the bone, and you see the edges of the head opening from each part, and water jumps out when you press it with your hand internally, and this does not stop: then it is necessary to cut through the head three cuts in this manner:
And after the incision, extract all moisture outside. After holding the cuts of bandages and powders, apply wine and oil, and leave like this until the fifth day; then reset it, treat the wound by tenting and applying ointments, and allow the head to be held equally afterwards, finally have the patient consume dry meat from a small source of moisture until the limb is comfortable and healed.
And another way of incision is to look at where the opening of the abscess lies, and the position of the water; for it's never ahead, it's never behind, it's not on the right side, nor is it on the left.
Cut then the area where the abscess opens, and the space of water, and make the cut according to your ability; and be careful not to cut the artery; and watch for a stream of blood, so that the patient dies from the flow of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
Of cautery by fire, command the sick person to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they pierce at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When it happens to any illness that is called "congestion" as in the eyes or at the anus, and this disease is old, and the treatment with medicine does not help, then the last resort of treatment is cauterization using this method where one severs the two arteries.
So then, if you cover the eyes, the patient should be placed on their back; after that, rub their head with a rough cloth until the arteries are visible, then pull out the mass from its throat using two cloths. Then look where the vein lies, and determine the position of both ears relative to the eyes, making sure they are in line afterward; then mark the eyes with a cross, then cover each eye with a sharp spatula about half a inch thick until the bone is reached, and this should be done by applying pressure over the width of the head.
And if you see it, pinch the pus at the artery and over the vein above, cut also like two inches through.
And when the vein has been cut, if you push the blood continuously outward from high up.
And if the artery doesn't open upon pressure, it is necessary for you to measure the length of the space of three inches, then puncture and go until you reach the bone; and what needs to be removed from the blood is six cubic centimeters, and by chance a little more or less depending on how the patient can endure it, and the filling of the artery; then look at the wound: if there's still a bit touching the bone directly below, if the incision we make doesn't come up against it, then compress the wound tightly and tie it, and apply ointment until it heals.
Of cautery with fire, command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When old age comes, and acute coughing, due to the moisture of tears and the heats in the temples and lower back being long established and similar things, it is treated using methods of medical cures, but none of them provide relief. We should extract the arteries from the temples and cauterize them as we have recounted.
And the method of extraction is such that the patient should be made to feel through their temples, and hear the artery which opens at the temple, because it opens well by its beating, and responds very little except in some people who are too cold; and if it responds, then compress the neck with cloths, then rub him with a rough cloth, and immerse his head in hot water until the artery clearly appears. Then take the form of the instrument from which this is done:
Then gently burn the leather until you find an artery, then pull it upwards with forceps and remove all the meshes that are attached to each part; and if the artery is delicate, pierce it at the tip of the hook-shaped nail. Then cut out that section according to the size of two bones. For if it isn't cut properly, blood will leak everywhere.
And draw blood from two veins up to three inches; and if the artery is large, it must be tied with two strands of a strong silk thread for at least four centimeters before suturing the wound, so that pus does not come out before the healing of the injury, nor cause further bleeding; then cut off the excess between the two threads in this moment. And when you can see, if possible, gently apply the cautery from the cut to the bone as long as the bones are cut; and this is the finished work, provided the patient does not have fever and he has a warm complexion.
For the cauterizations help to finish off infections; because they provide more assistance in dealing with moisture. In the extraction of arteries, you must fill the area with old cotton and place it over well-made tents; when they are released from their binding, apply dry medicines that create pus and tents until they become clean. If there's no artery cut, treat as you normally would, hurry to cover with a cautery or use the space with vitriol on your hand so that the cut is cauterized; if you do not have this present, place ice from your hand onto the area until the cut freezes and then rinse with cold water until it stops bleeding, applying pressure as needed. The one that becomes wetter in the extraction of the artery should be burned by a cautery trenching through two parts, but ensure the trenches are well spaced to retain longer heat. For when the instruments are too tight, they hold less of their heat. And it should have .i. inch of space between the two knives, and then when you have made a small incision with both edges, place the hot iron until it reaches the bone, and cauterize the wound in two places; and keep them far apart from each other because there is no welding from this cautery throughout; and this is how the cautery works:
Of tears
When the tears from the eyes are flowing through the veins located above the testicles of the head's chief part, and no medicinal cure helps, you see the skin turn red, and feel or perceive like tremors; and in places that are moistened and damp such that the paper hairs fall off, and heat up the papers, and burn from the heat of the tears, there is need for this kind of treatment.
And they named the old one "the wounded healer", and you should do this to the patient who has this illness: let them have hairs or front hairs, then make three cuts evenly across the forehead according to its length; let one of these cuts be as long as two full lengths across the forehead in a downward direction until it reaches the nose, and the others two at each side of the forehead above the papers. And guard against making incisions into the arteries located above the papers; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the two jaws, and let each wound have an area equivalent to one and three-quarters times the length across.
From the incision that is made behind the temple up to the second incision; and charbroil all the area between the two grooves completely to the flesh which is above the bone. Then make another cut from the middle incision up to the other second one, and then extract this pus-filled content.
If a tool is placed in the first groove which is called "cultellaire", and it is very sharp on one side, but not sharp on the other, it's shape is: And place the cutting edge of the tool towards the fatty layer under the skin and the rounded part towards the bone, and insert it as far as you reach to the middle groove. And remove all vessels that descend from the head along with them until the incision is continuous up to where it opens on the skin, and then make further cuts in the middle groove up to the other groove; and then extract the blood evenly, and express the wound for the blood taken; then put a piece of old cotton in each groove, and place wet cloths soaked with wine and oil and garlic above them, making sure no pus leaks out; and on the third day release the bandage, and apply large amounts of water and soap to it, then continue treating it with ointment with basil and rose oil, and other treatments for wounds until healed.
of the eyes
When it comes to sudden catarrh that is habitual, and you see the eyes heavy and small, and weaken the vision, and burned papers; and the hair falls out, and one feels feverish during the aches, and the body shivers; then know through these events that those substances and that phlegm do not come from many veins, and the wet cure that is being used, if it is this.
And you should instruct the patient to sit up straight at their forehead, then make a large incision through the forehead, and another of considerable size. Start from the left temple incision to the right temple, and ensure your cut goes down to the bone; and move your hand away from the temple nerves that move during meals; when the bone is revealed, allow all the blood to escape using a sponge, then cleanse between the two lips of the incision and place old cotton, and linen material. Then cover with moist cloths soaked in wine and oil, and avoid letting an abscess form. When it's removed, it should be rubbed on the bone until flesh begins to grow, then treat with desiccating substances that promote growth.
In this manner: take two parts of the wheat flower, and four parts of the root of wormwood, and make them into a poultice; and apply it to these wounds to promote the release of pus everywhere.
Of ear perforation
Everything that chokes in the ears is one of the four things: or grains, or beast, or mine stones or similar things such as iron; or seeds, such as peas, beans, lentils; or draining substance such as water and oil and similar things.
When it chokes in the ear with a piece or other matter that doesn't fit into the ear or grows in the ear, place the ear to the sun. If you see the stone, apply drops of violet oil or saffron oil; then proceed with extraction; and make him sneeze with pepper, and stuff his nose when he sneezes, and insert pieces of cloth or wool into the ear; and hold the ear above. This cure often works; if it doesn't work, apply extraction with fine needles, as described below:
If it leaps like needles, that's good; if not, proceed with extraction using a slender needle of small curvature; and if it doesn't leap through this, take an arachnid hair and pinch the tip of its hair or the ear petal strongly, and apply wax to the inside of the hair thread so that nothing can enter with the thread; then shape the force, as we have said many times; and if force does not come in such a manner, grab from here and take its other ends, put into some no instrument is suitable for this purpose, and place a little cotton inside; then press the lump onto the stone or anything else, and pull with force. And if it doesn't leap through all these things that we've said, hurry to puncture the ear in such a way that pus can come out and spasms occur; and the method of incision is such that you first make a surgeon's incision on the tympanic membrane and remove blood according to the measure of its virtue, then have the surgeon sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear where fat hangs down; and let the cut be like a moon until you reach the stone, then break the bone according to your ability and suck it quickly into your mouth; and treat until it is healed. And if it's grains and they swell up, you should perform extraction; and if it cannot come out, then use this small spatula according to this shape:
And prepare to make an incision on that grain. But do not do this when you think the grains are wet due to ear moisture, until you have done many pieces; then extract them with delicate forceps and a suction tool, as we have said, so that the extractions go smoothly.
In water, then, when they sneeze in the ear, so that the patient uses their first cough reflexes, and widen the ear with old cotton. And stay seated right by that ear where the water is. If it sneezes out through this, it's good. If not, take several stones according to the length of your fingers and gently, then heat them a bit on fire; and place one or two pieces in their ear, and draw away from his foot from another side, and strike with another stone against the stone that is inside the ear; and don't stop doing this from stone to stone until all the water sneezes out completely, and thus it sneezes out completely; and if you see, take one reed, and insert one of the heads into the ear, and the other head with fire until the hottest reed is burnt; then redo several times until all the water comes out completely, as we have said for stones.
In the removal of the beast, if it's of small size, like a flea and similar things, treat it as we have said in division; but if it can be felt, go for extraction with forceps; and this is the easier thing to remove that is in the ear.
In the extraction of worms from ears, when you are treating them as we have said in the division and treatment of distillations, if the cure does not work, it is necessary that you look at the ear to sunlight: if no worm appears there, if treat it with sharp needles, and if nothing appears, take the form of this:
And it should be tight below and wide above. And use the finest tip of your tool according to the amount of suffering caused by the malady, then form each part completely with the rod; do this often until all the worms have come out. And if they don't want to leave on their own, numb the inside of the cotton swab as I've said for stone extraction; and if they don't come out forcefully as we've said, administer distillations that the old ones have proven in worm removal, and you'll find how to treat them with distillations; and distill your oils and medicines into the ear using this tool, according to its form as you see it:
And it should be made of silver or a small piece of iron below with two small openings for distillation and above to cover for the purpose of distilling inside. And to press within the distillation use a properly made tool from iron for this task, and take one comb and wrap cotton around the tip beforehand. Then pour your oil or juice, and what you see of your medicines in the cotton, and let it be in the ear; then push all the cotton into the comb completely, and press your hand smoothly until the oil is distilled or excess from the ear; and listen to the maladies inside, and let these distillations be heated for a moment as one would when they are being distilled into the ear; and make sure it's not too cold because medicine wouldn't work as well otherwise.
Of ear piercing
No child is born without any loss in their ears; and this same thing happens with injuries to homes, or a fetus being born inside the ear, and these piercings occur once within the ear if one cannot see it; and never does more than half of the loss be seen clearly.
That which comes from within, if one cannot see it, is of healing damage in various positions, and concerning this thing that we can observe, you should place the ear under the sun; and look inside: if you see the apparent pus, as the work has formed with this substance:
And be careful to cut forward and behind evenly all around, ensuring not to damage the ear; if the pus is from a birthmark or a part of the ear, then use fine pins to gently pinch it until that part of the flesh has been completely excised.
And if the operations are made inside the ear, take a thin and light rasor, sharpen it slightly in fire, then place it near the ear. If you feel the operation causing discomfort to the ears of the patient, make a slight incision and be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear; then put into the ear a patch according to its size around the protrusion, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment in the wound.
Continue this for as many days as the wound is healing, or take a patch and moisten it with rose water, and apply powdered vitriol. And if you see swelling in the ear, it is necessary that you remove the patch and replace another one that is wetted with a cerotic made from roset oil and wax, until the swelling is removed; then cure it until it is healthy.
And if bleeding occurs, immerse an sponge and dip it in cold water, then place it on the ear, and use other remedies that remove the bleeding which are treated with distillations.
Of the ashes of papers
In the month when they come from papers with hairs that are wet and dry, it is necessary that you spread them out using tweezers and forceps, and cut off its roots with a scalpel; then place sulfuric acid on the area.
And if you don't remove it, then cauterize with a small lens cautery, and after the incision, make sure to remove the cauterizer; and many times repair, because no part remains from its roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots get burned and do not return.
Regarding the gravel
Many times in papers, there are some things that seem greasy by their form and hardness, and because of this, it is a disease called "snow," which forms a large pool of moisture on the paper. The procedures are as follows: watch if the snow melts from one side to another; this is a simple thing to understand. Do it broadly at first, then lightly cauterize each part, then pinch and cut it off. If you cannot cut it without piercing the paper, or if it causes any pain to the patient; if the tear is large, with stitching present, treat until it heals; and if it's small, don't exert much force, because the ointments will heal it quickly and keep the wound from getting infected.
And if the snow falls down into the ear towards the upper part, turn the paper and place the snow on a pin; then cut it off from both sides. And if the paper is moved away by incision, this does not cause any harm; and when the snow has been cut off, drain out the salty water and treat the wound until the injury heals so that the patient recovers healthily.
of the grease of the pus
Exinach is a grease that seeps onto the sheets of papers above, and this happens more among children than adults, and causes much to their eyes, and it comes to them in tears at mornings, and they cannot look towards the light of the sun because tears rush into their eyes; and for that reason, they lie on their beds immediately, sleep upon them, and have their papers wetted by their eyebrows from the exinach which opens up in the eye. And when you press your hand to it with your fingers and feel exirnach between your hands.
And the method of the work is that the patient places their head on your healthy place. And then take one linen sheet and set up a tent in manner of a circle according to the quantity contained by exirnach from each part, then put it on; press with your fingers from one side and another so that exirnach gathers within the circle; and cut in the center of the moisture in the knife make a slit of size, and should not be larger than the wound when you do for opening veins; and make the leather around completely until you see the exirnach coming out from the slit according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Then remove it all as one piece of linen cloth between your fingers at the front, and twist your hand to the right and to the left until it is spread out; and make sure you do not get stuck in the slit, that you come up to the edge of the knife right up to the eye, that you do not hurt it.
And if the incision does not open at the start of the wound, increase a bit the wound gently until it opens; then stretch it as we have said. Then soak with moist cloths and water, place them on the wound, and hold in position with bandages.
And if there are people who grind grain and put it on to corrupt the moisture that has remained. Then treat them until they become sane. And if an abscess forms at the wound, then the treatment with healing plasters continues until they become sane.
"Des poils de papier" translates to "paper hairs". This phrase could be used metaphorically or in a literal context depending on the surrounding text, possibly referring to fine, thin materials that resemble hair.
When the papers are born with hairs adjusted other than naturally and they grow old, they harm the eyes and cause illnesses such as habitual tearing and paper putrefaction, and albugine, until this is the cause of destruction to the eyes; and then one must cure according to four methods: or by a fire cautery combined together, or by medicine according to what was discussed in front or chapter of cautery, and it will be made either through incision and sewing, or with ligatures, according to what I shall say.
It must be that you put the head of the eye in your health, then turn the paper of the eye with your left hand; if it is converted, it's good; if not, take one needle with two threads above; and do this across the edge of the paper where the hair grows under these hairs, and pull both threads across the entire paper, and turn it with the rasp; then cut in that part beneath the paper, beneath the adjusted hairs, all along to the large tear up to the small one; then remove one thread, put a small cotton tent and a silk cloth underneath the paper, then draw on the paper a figure like an oak leaf, as if of laurel leaves, and it must be that the figure is according to the amount you see raised above the paper which is placed under all.
And if there is need for such that you must use a large amount of paper according to how the paper has softened; then cut along the entire tear over the two lines that you have marked, and start from the large tear up to the small one; and should there be one of the cuts near the natural hairs in their growth stage as wide as a root, then insert the needle into one of the corners of the eye, then scrape it all off; then join the two lids with a sewing of a needle with two fine threads, and remove any blood, and allow air to dry the excess thread on both eyelids up to some sticky things if you see them being made; and if this is not so, then do not worry about it, then leave the stitches and threads for three or four days; then treat the wound without a stitch with dried and tightening substances, because the paper recovers from the healing of the wound and the joining together of them, but the stitches are irritated (as they say the old ones), and this is work without fear.
And if there is another way: and it is that you mark the paper with a shape that is as like a leaf of myrtle, as we have recounted, at three inches measured according to the form which is here:
then cut those on top evenly according to the shape that is here:
And if you don't have the ability to hold the forceps, and the thing isn't even, take one thread with two needles, place it in the shape; and put a second thread under the large cut, and the second thread under the small. Then lift your hands evenly, and lift all the skin over what you've marked, as we have recounted, then stitch together the two edges of the wound, and treat until it's healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with ointments and similar healing substances;
And it often happens that the paper hair turns to ashes: if you should use what we have instructed for incisions; but the stitch is more artificial in both cases.
The treatment of canes follows this form: and you should convert the paper and cut it inwards according to what I have said, then make two canes by art, and two fine threads each as long as the length of the paper and as wide as its thickness; and take two heads from each part; then assemble them smoothly on what stands up above the paper of the eye, and draw together those two canes from the two parts. And leave them like this for a few days, and the skin that is drawn tight will shrink and harden and smooth out, until it escapes by itself.
If it lingers, and if the patient shows any signs of strength, then treat until they are healed; and when the wound is stitched up, and if the paper lifts and no longer allows hair to grow; this is the form that you will make the two canes according to this figure, and according to this length and width:
The work consists of such actions as you need to take: grasp a slender needle, and attach two strands of silk thread that are delicate and fine; then join the limbs together, tie them both neatly, and make the lengths of the threads about a palm long. Next, prepare one more fine silk thread for short use, and bind its top with the thread; then place the patient's head on your healthy side, and let the sun illuminate it because this is a subtle and small operation; afterwards, stick the needle into the root area where hair is attached until you pierce paper quickly while lifting it above the natural hair. Then pull out all the hairs up to the line, and bind them again in that line if there are two or three or four or more; finally remove your hand as soon as all hairs appear from every part of the line with the natural hair still attached.
And if the operation has been treated properly and no hair comes out with it, then pull out the line from underneath until you have pulled all the thread that was ordered, as long as the line can be seen through and past the edge above; then pull out the line and the thread, and rest the eye for two days or three, until the hair has grown back in its place and a new one has formed. And if the hairs are small, accompany each with one longer natural hair, and leave it attached to that or let it be left there, as long as it grows out straight, then lift it.
Of the infection of the eye
When this disease, called 'aleacrati' or 'putrefaction', affects the eye, there are two ways it can happen: one naturally and the other unnaturally. And it occurs suddenly from a wound, or from surgery or a cautery, and through similar incidents.
And the way to treat this in the eye is that you cut through that seal, and open up the eyelid, and put linen strips inside it, and keep it sealed until it heals; and it should not be used in treating the eye with things that dry out and restrict. For if you do this, the disease will return worse than before; but use things that soften instead, such as fenugreek; and washes of water or vinegar and linseed oil are cooked, and apply butter of garlic to all the oils, then wrap it in a strip, and heal it with these actions.
And the treasures of your treatment are that you must be cautious not to seal it back up in the same shape as before; and these treatments we have spoken of only apply to the remedies for this disease, so they do not return in the same shape as before.
The fluid that comes into the ear
This disease which is caused by a foreign body truly called 'axacrati', and it is natural and accidental. The accidents come from wounds, cuts, cautery, and similar things; and the way this enters the ear is that you take an awl, in which there are two threads, and insert it into the flesh, and have the needle pierce through to the left lobe of the ear so deep as possible, making the threads go into .i. inch of the flesh; then the flesh goes up over the entire length of the awl, and the opening is about .i. inch wide at its widest point.
And if the shape of the paper returns according to what is appropriate, it's good; if not, take a knife and put it in the cut, then turn the paper, and make two cuts inside the paper; and there should be two cuts at each angle of your incision you have made, so that when they are assembled, the shape is like the shape of a letter which has non 'two griesche'; then remove this flesh according to how thick its edges and cuts are from where it touched the paper, then join back together the two removed parts with a thread; then apply the cure as we have said for medicines that soften, and bandages, until it heals.
And if the disease comes from a cut or stitch or cautery, it is necessary that you make a full-cut along the hair where there are papers, and according to what was stated previously; then cut between the two leaves of a book, as I said before; and must perform the work in accordance with the shape of the disease, for it varies much in form, and the doctors should prepare all tools so they can return the figure to its natural shape; and even the patients themselves, according to what they need regarding treatment and instruments across various positions.
right away from the paper
When this stitching occurs on someone's hand in such a way that the paper above is sewn with the white of the egg, and cannot move or do its natural tasks, then it is necessary that you place the tip of a razor under the paper and lift it up; and stretch it with tongs, until you get to the subtle spatulate at the tear which should neither be too sharp nor too deep, so that the patient does not suffer from the spatula being too sharp and irritating their eye. And make your incision, then scrape off this combined piece lightly, in such a way that the paper regrows according to its natural shape; and heals all of it, and do not use any salt water in the eye once, and rinse with gentle cool water, and clove oil; then place between the paper and the eye a linen tent, and cover the eye with wet wool. And after three days, use a colander and other sowing tools until they are all healed.
Of the eyelid
Know that the eyelid is in two ways: it is nerveous and resembles one hard tendon, and another which isn't nerveous, but seems like a frozen white moisture. When touched with iron and cared for using pins, neither can be done; both similarities start near the large tear duct, grow slowly and slowly until they cover all vision and light, and the movement of the eye.
And the way of incision is such that when the patient places their head in its healthy position, then they operate the eyes; and lift the eyelashes with your hand, then place the edge of the nail using small pins, and extend it above. Then take a needle, and insert two hairs from a horse, or cow, or ox, and one strong thread; and double the needle point slightly and pierce it in the nail, and poke through all the way with the needle, and tie the nail with a string and place it above, and scorch along the entire length of the hair line that follows under the eyelid and the hair until reaching the root near the tear ducts, leaving only the very fine inner part of the eyelid untouched by the thread. Leave the natural membrane of the tear duct area intact so that no body's tears come through the incision as usual; and the nail is extended at just the edge of the nail bed, and under the thread, exactly like what we have described. Then the scorching should cover all the inner part of the eyelid from this point onward, forming:
And ensure that the cautery doesn't touch the fatty tissue and doesn't damage it. Do not puncture the eye. After making an incision, pour a small amount of powdered sulfur into the wound, make a bracelet from silver nitrate, and let it stay until another day; then treat it according to what is required until they are well.
And if the nail is not sensitive and you can't push in the needle, many times this nail-like appearance needs to be treated with medicines. It grows just as I described in the division section, and if you see it become thick, then the eye feels ill due to the disease, take the cautery lightly in a sharper way according to this shape:
And cut the nail slightly upward, and if you see that it doesn't thin at all and it presses on the reason, then drip silver nitrate from your mouth into the eye, and also use a red bracelet and sulfur. Keep this on until another day; then start the next treatment according to this same process, until all is removed.
If nothing opposes your sight, like pus-filled sores, then proceed and start by treating the pus-laden sore until it's clean. Once it is cleaned out as much as possible, resume the work procedure as before, until it's cleansed.
And if there appears the flesh from the eye in your sight by great harm, you should suspend its use and take a part of it but not all at once, so that no tears come forth; then apply red balm to your eye which is made from stibium.
of the flesh that grows on the pupil
Eyebrows of some men do not grow at all from birth; they cover the eyelid and stay close to the paper, seeming like a rose made of wax; and veins are such that when the patient's head is in good health, then the eyebrows form themselves. And so this happens with every segment of that flesh according to what suits it, and you hold it up with strength. Then cut out the first segment of flesh, and go cutting until the end, and watch not to wound the eye during surgery; and make sure your incision is as small as we have discussed in the operation on a nail and the delicate parts of the body where one removes a bone, just like how it's demonstrated after this chapter.
And when the incision is completed and all flesh has been removed, use oil of garlic or distill it with red cordial medicine which seems like corrosive remedies, and place a cotton on the eye that you can cover with an egg, so that there's assurance of pus formation; and if nothing stays there, and the without shoes is on top, and you suspect of pus heat, then leave the eye and treat the abscess with things that soothe it. Then return to your operation as long as it's healthy, and thus make many segments heal under this resemblance.
But nevertheless, it is necessary for you to treat each weak eye of the natural way; and of the accidental way, in iron operations; and do not let your hand enter any of these operations until you see that this member is suffering from this operation.
of veins and eyes
If the veins around the eye are red and cover it, allowing vision loss for several days. Then, at first, you must observe if there is anything wrong with the eye itself; other diseases besides sebel do not exist here. Therefore, treat as follows: instruct the patient to place their head in your direction of health, then suspend those veins up to the thirtieth degree according to their intelligence, and let the thirtieth degrees be delicate and double in this way:
And let there be two veins of thirty-three degrees each in one row, according to this form:
Then proceed to treat those veins delicately, and let the blood flow for an hour after another treatment, until you see those veins move out of the eye; and be careful not to damage the eye with the ends of the spatulas. Perform this operation at noon in front of the sun, and be very vigorous in your work so that you only remove those veins; and when you have completed this task, apply a collar of green and red distilled liquid to dissolve what remains due to sebel.
And if you don't have the ability to do all of this at once, create a poultice using things that soothe the pain from the eyes and leave it for several days until the pain is alleviated and the fear of an abscess has been confirmed. Then continue in this manner as described previously until they are healed; and this is how one uses strength:
from the duct of the eye
The treatment for what is called 'arissati' (a type of fistula): when you treat it with a cautery and with hot water according to what I have explained before, and if it does not heal, then there is the place where you incise in front of the abscess, at the point it should die, and remove all the moisture that is there, until the bone is uncovered.
And when the bone is exposed, and you will see the decay and blackness, if you take it with all the tool used in its formation; and call it 'hard head', and made of iron as large as one big spoon, and pointed like a file according to the present form.
And place on it the part of the corrupted bone, then press your fingers on it, and squeeze a bit until you know that this decay has stopped; and do this several times, then restore that part with medicines that have been dried.
When these joints are fused, and the flesh begins to grow, and the body of the bone is fused, and remains like this for 40 days, and does not heal and becomes abscessed again, if no bad events occur, then you know it has healed. If not, there is only another way: to bring back the fistula to its original position according to this form; and when the bone is exposed a second time through iron and medicines, and once it is exposed, take one nail according to this form, and fix the iron joint at three angles, and make the shaft as thin as possible until you see like this:
Then place your hand on the bone under the eye, and keep your hand away from the eye socket. I. Poc, then continue moving your hand all around until it pierces the bone and you feel the pain through this motion if your hand stays near your nose; and then return to applying dry medicine as I instructed you to do, and when the flesh begins to grow and harden on the patient's face; if something lighter appears at the site of injury for the sufferer.
from the exit of the eye
When the eye opens completely and nothing comes from disturbing the heart or diminution, it is necessary that you tie the sufferer's head; then heal them, then place suction cups or pincers without causing pain to suck, then apply on the eye. I. The preparation made of cassia, aloe, incense, and sarsaparilla, and then strain the eye, and plaster it with strips and pieces of cloth; and the way of the cloths is that you take cloths that are quite soft, double each one in four layers, and then place them one after another according to the amount the eye needs. Then strain it from above with a hard bandage formed, and repeat the suction cups to suck without causing pain. Then remove the suction cups and leave the eye strained day and night, and if your strips loosen, then continue straining as much as necessary; then remove the strip after day and night, and if you see that the eye has healed, it is good; if not, then repeat the plastering, cloths, and strip again until it heals.
At the rupture of the vitreous membrane
When tears come in the vitreous sheet, then opens and comes out strips like pieces of paper so as a resin seed, and is observable; thus if you see this covered, the operations are such that you prick at the root on one part below up to half above, then prick another hole with a double thread at the end of the tear; and make it pierce, and leave the first needle according to its position. Then cover the other side with the double thread and tie some part of the vitreous sheet together, and tighten well, then remove the needle and place wet linen over the eye with plenty of egg mixture; and let it be as long as the thread breaks along with the sheet, then treat the eye with comfort remedies until the wound heals. And none of these times should the wound be restrained by the sheet from each part of a circular piece of cloth, until it is healed.
And when the eyes show significant symptoms, if you puncture at the delicate membrane that passes under the eye, and remove the moisture and descend the sheet beneath the eyes, and do so immediately; then strain until it is healed.
From the flow of the eye
This disease known as 'alcunnati' is not due to an oil that has been assembled in the eye, resembling water flowing down, and it is not water; and the appearance of the work is such that you make the patient sit upright on a bench or chair, then take their head between your hands and move them until you see the oil coming up above your eyes; then it should be applied and not descend and be removed with lightness, and observe the oil's contents as they were originally; and if it does not descend immediately, know that it is water, and if the descent of the oil doesn't occur as planned, this follows our instruction. Then make the patient sit between your hands, then take a fine spatula and perform on the corneal tissue .i. inch along the continuity of the conjunctiva with the corneal tissue and crown, until the oil has discharged; and when it has discharged, distil into the eye hot water mixed with honey, or water boiled with fenugreek and honey, then apply another treatment until it heals.
From water in the eye
We have the signs of fever in division and what needs to be pierced; you must perform this according to health. It is necessary that you place the patient between your hands, outside light by the sun, tie the healthy eye tightly and firmly; then place the paper on the patient's hand where the eyes are on one side or on the other; next take with your right hand (where the eyes are on the left) or your left hand (where the eyes are on the right), the instrument called 'almagda'; then place the tip of this instrument underneath the crown, about the size of a hair's breadth in that part below the eyelid to the minor tear duct; next force the 'almagda' tool vigorously and twist your hand until it pierces the eyelid's paper and feels that 'almagda' comes to the void thing; and the measurement of the path of 'almagda' should be equal to the length of space which is from the pupil to the end of darkness; this is the crown of the eye; if you see bone through the paper by the clarity of the corneous cloth, then place the instrument until it reaches or touches where the fever lies, and express something out one way after another. If the fever descends now, you will see the patient in front of him and the tool on his eyelid.
After a short rest. If the fever returns by the second path, apply force with the tool and when she is installed and no longer rises, gently remove 'almagda' twisting your hand little by little; then replace in the eye a little of the powdered gemstone essence, and remove that eye outwards. Then place at the bottom of the eye ointment or wet wool in rose oil and abundantly in egg whites, and bind with the healthy eye. Thus, those among us who are of our time, let's use a comfrey paste with plenty of eggs.
And if 'almagda' cannot enter the eye through its hardness, because there are certain men who have too hard eyes, it must be that you take the tool called 'alberit', which has this form:
And then pierce only the conjunctive part, and don't go too far forward, but make it about half an inch, then insert some alum, as we have said; and after completing your work, provide one anointing agent, on which he sleeps on his back for a week. And remain entirely still, eat light meats, and do not move his head to the right or left, tie him according to his position until the third day; then release him in the same gloomy house and test his vision, make sure he can see things clearly, then put him back on his chain until seven days have passed. And it should never be that you perform this during the process of healing or after an incision now, but you must do this because the pain will increase rapidly.
When dealing with abscesses, you must release the eye before the seventh day, and use an ointment to soothe the abscess; and when it is relieved, then release the sight and place on his face a piece of gold for covering one day, and be in this gloomy house. And then leave the house slowly, and adapt him to his surroundings. Know that no students should interfere in such cases.
And one came to us who was from the Island, who told us that there they used alum powder, through which water is extracted, but still I never saw anyone like it in our land, nor have I ever read about it in old books; and perhaps it is a new thing.
And these are the appearances of the forms of the magd, because those who do not know them see them; and they belong to a mare properly:
And these are the head of their kind with the same subtlety, and the rear at three angles away.
of the flesh near the nose
No matter how they are born or where they originate, various sorts of horned flesh (chars) exist. Some resemble scorpions with the shape of a bird's foot; and there are those that have horns extended in length with a reddish color, while others have horns of good color. For those chars that are reddish in color but not excessively long, it is necessary to place the patient between your hands facing the sun; then work on their nostrils, sprinkle the essence (oncine) over these flesh humps, and remove them; subsequently, collect what you can withstand at the subtle sharp point of the spatumile from one side until you know that this flesh has completely hardened.
And if there's no remaining thing that we can't cope with, when you open it all together with two fine light instruments, and ensures nothing is left; and if something isn't surmounted or has pus oozing out, then the surgeon should operate according to how it should be done; and if it's malignant pus, act quickly and apply cautery until the pus becomes thickened and all the muscles are healed; then pour out water or let the air in or use wine.
And when you sew it up, and if the moisture reaches until the palate, know that it's healed; and if moisture doesn't leak as it should, then there is new flesh forming in the bone above, with the surgical tools not coming near to cut: therefore, one must force .i. thread of linen somewhat thick, and hold your hands firmly, ensuring each knot has an inch or less spacing between them; and place that thread through the hole of the patient while making sure it's at their nostril's reach, pull the thread gently until it passes from the nostril into their mouth; and this method is often done with children in schools, and it's a simple task for someone who wishes to do so. Hold the head coming out through the nostril with one hand, and the other head coming out of the mouth with another hand, making sure you know which comes next when being guided by us standing here. Do this until you see that the knot has corrupted that flesh, then pull the thread, drain blood, moisten the thread in Egyptian ointment, and sew it back up again as before; do this for .iij. days or more, until all the pus is corroded from the remaining flesh; and then place a clove of garlic into their nose for several days until it heals, and if any need for drying medicines exists, use them; this is how to purify the head using the surgical tool where oils and dried medicines are distilled in wine.
And use it made of silver or iron, resembling an open lamp, like a cane, and guide it in the same way; and if you see fit, then make a closed cane, and fill the surgical tools to purify the head; and hold one hand on the head when heating oil or any liquid.
from the neck to the nose
Many times a disease is born at the nose and grows and becomes large until it is visible to look; and for this reason you should begin by cutting it, and treat with bone all together, then place in him the fire cautery or hot medicine; and if one delays in cutting when it is large, beware if it is hard, of changing color, of poor sense: do not touch it with iron at all as it is an abscess that has grown inwardly; because when you cut it even once, it causes great harm to the patient; and if the abscess is touched by heat, not by changing color, and you see that one can cut everything off, let the patient relieve and cut the head with fear, and treat him with dry and restraining things.
when the nose has been cut and sewn
Know that when incontinence of urine comes from one of these internal organs, it benefits little, for not all people. Thus, if this occurs to none, then observe whether the wound is fresh over its entire blood; and then adjust the two lips towards a stitch, then treat until it heals entirely; and if the lips are already dry on both sides, you should sear every part of their skin until they heal, then join the two lips together into one stitch, and hold them tight, and dust with dragon's blood powder mixed with incense; and place the powders over a plaster piece of strong or other soldering plaster, and leave it until it discharges on its own, then treat with ointment until it heals entirely.
The method of the stitch is such that you unite the wound: either with needles, as we have said in regard to stomach stitches; or with thread, as I have instructed.
extracting from the lips
In the work of this chapter, there are often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
From the flesh of the gums
Many times it begins on the attached gum flesh, which the old would call "albulus"; you should hold this with your forceps and cut to its root, allowing blood or the blood to flow. Then place under a vessel of vitriol powder, or other drying and restrictive powders; if that flesh returns after the incision, and many times happens, then cut it again upon the second occurrence, and cauterize it: if it doesn't return even after the cautering; these are the forms for treating such.
Of cauterys made with fire, command the patient to let their hairs grow long and even; and if they pierce at their root, hold their eyes steady so they do not move until they fully grow out.
Many times teeth and their roots are gathered at the head of the teeth, between the mouth and gums, with unattractive and rough scabs present; and often there is a black tooth and citrine tooth along with worms until corruption reaches the gum, causing tooth decay. If it means that one must let the patient lie in your hand, and his teeth be at your service, take out any teeth or scabs while nothing remains.
When you treat the tooth because of its pain and it takes time to remove as much as possible, do not stop early; one should not let any residue be left behind. Because this material is so high up that if there's any leftover from the extraction process, it could cause issues. Therefore when the patient is forced to endure treatment, you must be certain of their tooth. Many times during this suffering, the patient perceives pain and believes it to be a toothache, so they extract the good tooth; but throughout this process, the pain does not diminish until all the bad teeth are removed, which has already been proven in our medical knowledge; and when you are certain about the tooth causing the discomfort, it's necessary that you sear inside the tooth with a hot spatula for insulation of the gum from every side; then move your hand or use your fine tweezers right away at first try and attempt until properly dislodged; then firmly secure the tweezers in place; have the head of the patient over your knee, keep it still so that it doesn't move.
After removing the right tooth without breaking it, and if it doesn't fall out spontaneously, take none of these tools and insert it lightly in each part, and move it like you did at first. And if the teeth are pierced or fractured, then it's necessary to fill them with wadding where they're lost; and if you gently extract them with tweezers, do not break them during extraction; and be very careful when working around the gum tissue for tooth removal.
And you should carefully ensure that you don't break it and leave a part of the tooth, which can cause the patient more severe pain than before due to the sensitivity around the root. Be aware not to do this like ignorant doctors who in their haste and boldness break everything at once, and do not bring about what we have advised; but let this illness come back many times through the operation of this great disease by the roots that remain or from breaking the tooth itself, as we often want it to happen. And when you remove the teeth, wash your hands with wine or vinegar and water; and if bleeding occurs, which is common, then coat your hands in vitriol (sulfuric acid); and if this doesn't work, cauterize them.
The shapes of the tools, which you are to use for pulling out the teeth first, should have long points and large handles, so they do not double when you pull them out; and these are their forms:
And let them have large parts that do not bend during pulling, and be made of very strong iron, and have teeth to hold the movements.
from the root of the teeth When the root remains during extraction, it is necessary to put moistened cotton in the mouth with butter for one or two days until the teeth are dissolved, then use tweezers called "algefi" which make the head appear like a surgeon's beak; and they should also be made just like a file, this is their form:
And if the roots do not wish to emerge with all these claws, it is necessary that you uncover the entire flesh right up to the root, and insert the instrument which is called "althali", meaning palmache, as depicted here:
And let it be fine and thick so that it does not break at all, and if the root jumps out through this, it's good; if not, use all your instruments, as depicted hereafter:
And if you assist with this instrument which has two points, as depicted here:
and other tools that are placed according to the spacing of the teeth, and this instrument that seems like large pliers, as shown here:
And let this tool not be able to break it, and know that few tools of bone exist; also other tools, which are not counted; and the skillful surgeons find their own instrument by themselves, according to what their operations and diseases show them. For there are parts of diseases where the old did not teach any tool because of the diversity among these and if one breaks part from the carriage or others' bones, or if it rots, then they search for the tools that suit him, which I have said, and assist with gestures, as this is their form: And may they be large and well held to hold the bone so that it doesn't escape, but can be held and removed; and then restore the place with medicines suitable for this, and if there is decay in the bone, and it's small, then find all of this instrument:
When the tooth appears not according to its natural form, and the shape is ugly, especially in maiden women, you should know if this tooth was born after another one and it's not in its rightful place, and one cannot pull or grind it: then extract it; and if it's next to a tooth, take this instrument that has this form, which resembles two small beaks, and is sharp from iron on the tip.
And the file slowly in my hands for the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can be filed, so I file it from half a file as it is shaped:
and similarly like the file used for making needles; and grind the tooth slowly gently in my hands for a while, until it doesn't move till it finishes; then make it flat at the end with all kinds of smoothers, if it's too sharp and it irritates the tongue, so you need to smooth out the roughness until it is even, so that it doesn't irritate the tongue nor spoil speech.
when the tooth boils
When the tooth in front of the gum, by percussion or by strike, and if the patient cannot press against what they eat that they do not defecate, and you have cured them with restricting medicines, this does not work; so it must be restricted with a golden thread. Since silver threads become green and decay, but gold never decays; and choose the size of the thread to be neither too small nor too large, according to the amount of space between the teeth; and if you see that they are aligning the teeth, take the thread and two buns of it between two healthy teeth. Then place them against the diseased teeth, as long as you can see clearly until a healthy tooth from the other side appears; then repeat this process up to where your covering stops, and pull your hand subtly and carefully, ensuring they do not move at all; and bind it onto the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape. Then cut the threads with pincers, and join them together, placing them back between the healthy teeth, and put it in such a way that it doesn't irritate the tongue; and then leave it like this tightly as long as it can stay. If it loosens or the threads break, you bind it with another thread if it can sustain and serve for its entire duration, and this is the alignment of the teeth and the pattern of joining two healthy teeth with two diseased ones, as you see:
And when the tooth is dislocated, you put it back in its place gradually, just as we have said; and do not interfere with any forceful attempt which isn't cautious or endures pain, and each time one does not make the shape of a bone tooth of a cow, and then place it at the spot where the defect exists, and bind it like what we have said, and it stays and serves for as long as possible.
covering the wound on the tongue
No instance arises from knots that come off the tongue or nature, which we are born with; or by accident of healed wound; and the operations are such that you work on the mouth for the sick person, have their head in your hand, lift their tongue; then cut out the nervous ligament along the wide part, until the tongue is released from its position, and if there's hardness or swelling, and it's due to sudden wound healing, if I cut off the hook and cut through that connection; and ensure that the incision isn't too deep right at the start because an artery might be nearby; and when you're done, lift the head up until it’s pinkish and calm, then put under the tongue a linen bandage; and rub the sick person every night so that the wounds don’t heal. And if blood bleeding occurs, put vinegar inside the head; and if the nose doesn't drain, cauterize it with the slow cautery device which suits this best; then treat again until they’re healed.
And if you notice it's of color or blackish or hard, so that the patient doesn't feel anything, don't touch it because it's gangrene; and if it's turning into phlegm, and there is moisture, then cut off the hook, and make a thin incision on both sides, and relieve them from both sides; and if the nose doesn't drain in your operation area, put vinegar over the burnt spot until it's healed completely, then continue with your operation as long as you're using force; then lift the head up and wipe it with oil, and treat again until they’re healed.
removal of abscesses from the throat
No matter how often blisters arise in the throat that are called "godath," and they're properly termed as two almonds. When you treat them, just like we've said in the division, if they aren't healed, be careful: If it's an abscess with a small opening and is slightly colored, do not touch it with steel. And if it's red and has a big root, do not touch it with steel either, because of blood flow issues; but let it bleed until it stops, then you may remove it, or it would break by itself; and if it's white in color and the root is thin, prepare your instrument to cover, but first check that the abscess has cooled off and is calmed down. Then have the patient sit near the sun, their head in a healthy position, let them open their mouth, and have the surgeons hold their tongue between their hands, pressing the tongue all over the instrument until this shape forms; and use silver or very thin iron, just like knives:
Can't you press the tongue with all this instrument, and you see the abscess, take the thimble and place it in the almond, then pull it down more than you can; and pull nothing from the strings with it, then cover it with the instrument until this shape forms, resembling some forces; and always let the head be bent, one after another, and are very sharp, and made of iron or silver:
And if you do not have this instrument at hand, take tongs like these instead:
And make the incisions on both sides and name them. When you have completed one of the glands, complete the other in the same manner, after which gargle the patient with hot, then cold water and warm water, as long as bleeding occurs, then continue to gargle with water that is hot or pomegranate seeds that are cooked, or bay leaves and similar things until all the pus has been drained. Then proceed with the treatment once it's healed. If any other abscesses develop in the throat besides the two glands, then treat them accordingly as the two glands would be treated similarly.
And I treated a woman with an abscess that was inside her throat, specifically a small one. I had almost entirely closed the whole throat, so much that she couldn't breathe through the blocked passage and also couldn't eat or drink anything, and she died if she continued like this for about one day or two days. The abscess was so high that it had pushed four bones out of their places from the neck. I hurriedly acted immediately, put in a spoonful into one area, then removed the lump along with a large portion of flesh; afterwards, I filled her mouth and pressed her tongue; subsequently, I inserted a spoonful into these abscesses, and took back only a small part, and out only came a bit of blood; thus, she was relieved of her blocked throat. She began to drink water now and then wine, and I didn't stop treating that abscess over a long time; the abscess grew again and filled up the space I had emptied until it became very large; then, I supported her and cauterized inside her throat: she stayed like this without growing worse; I left these parts, and only God could do anything further after me.
From the eye
When the head of the eye ascends and becomes red and long, it's called "perpendicular"; and if it is somewhat swollen and spherical, it's called "eye". When it has been treated as we have said in division, and the treatment doesn't help, and you see that the discharge from the abscess is calming, and it is subtle, then you should take it; and the one that is spherical gathers together and isn't long; and it is blood-filled or of yellow color or black, then you must avoid making an incision on it. For there's great danger to the patient. Therefore, when you see it, according to the manner I have said, by its swelling and lengthiness, you should make the patient face the sun, and press their tongue against the instrument we previously described; then insert the needle into the eye, and drag it down, and take it with two of the instruments that I mentioned in the incision of the two almond-shaped glands. And you mustn't remove more than necessary excess beyond the natural limit; because if you remove too much, you can irritate their voice and speech; and after making an incision, use what we said about the incision of the two almond-shaped glands, and treat until it heals. And if the patient faints from removing the eye, then you should apply a method against its fear before cauterization treatment. And the manner of cauterization is sharp. And let the patient's head be in your state of health, and then press their tongue against the instrument we mentioned in the cautery chapter, and fix it with a lively hot coal, so that it isn't too thick or too thin; and utilize the movement of this tool, as described here:
And let our head have a hair or where we put the medicine, like in movements of a spoon, and place the tool entirely with the medicine on the eye; and the patient lies still on their side so that saliva and moisture drain out of their mouth from the medicine inside, so that it doesn't go down to the throat and cause irritation; then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it onto the eye for half an hour, until you see it relieve and the medicine's actions are calmed. And if you see this, take cotton and envelop it with any tool, soak the cotton in medicine, and place the tool entirely on the cotton in sand, until the cotton dries out on the eye; and do this often, until the cauterization is complete, then let it dry, and rest for four or five days. And if you need to repeat the medicine's cauterization procedure, then repeat it, and after the cauterization, cleanse inside the eye with cotton dipped in butter, and clean off what is left of the medicine; and rinse with cold water, and rinse with gargling until it heals completely.
This treatment is safer with an incision rather than using the cautery; if it's treated by fumigation in this manner, gather lavender, thyme, oregano, rue, chamomile and parsley, and similar herbs. Combine all or some of these into a single pot, put it there, and let it boil. The pot should be well sealed with strong clay, and inside the pot place one tool according to this method: And use silver or iron, and have one of the shoulder tools placed in the mouth against the disease until the steam rises from inside to the womb through the cervix, until the womb is dead; after that repeat this many times, until the womb dries out. Ensure not to do this at the beginning of the coming of an abscess fever, for many things can happen; and don't perform this tool when there's a decline in the abscess fever. And if this instrument isn't present, take a rod and place an eggshell inside the head, so that the mouth against the disease doesn't get too hot; because the eggshell does not let the steam weigh down the mouth, and it's a good treatment for health together.
Many times it clears the throat bone or spine of fish, without any result; if you must do this, take what you can see and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument until you see movement. For anything that does not appear and is retracted in the throat, you should make the patient vomit so that the disease comes out as though it had been cooked in the stomach; by chance if it escapes through vomiting; or if the disease swallowed a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a lettuce root, or a crumb of dry bread; and tie to the sponge a string, then swallow her; when she comes up to the mouth, she will clear up, and then you pull with force; and if it doesn't come out through this method we've mentioned, take one tool of ash according to this shape:
And make the tools sharp near the head so that they can enter the throat more easily and have the head raised up high; and be careful not to touch the epiglottis, letting nothing pass or pushing any bone inward; ensure that the patient pushes the tool when it moves or if something is loose; if you push it down, or pull with strength equally across the entire tool until it reaches full force.
of the windpipe
No treatment has been applied to the windpipe as I have mentioned in division, through medicine cure; and if this does not help, then examine inside the patient's throat towards the sun, pressing their tongue with the tool I instructed you about. And when you see the windpipe, extract it little by little using a piece of thread or fine tongs suitable for this task. And if this doesn't work, take some hair and insert it into the affected part of the throat, then pull out half an iron coin from there and do this repeatedly. And if the patient sweats with cold water all day long, then fill one cup of cold water and rinse their mouth with it, then spit it out without swallowing, and move your hand frequently; and as soon as the windpipe feels the cold water, they will vomit.
And if it doesn't urinate as we have said, instruct the patient to subfumigate with asafetida, using the instrument described in the fumigation of the eyelid; do this many times because she will not be relieved by bleeding. And the way of this fumigation is that you take one pot containing burning charcoal, and place it covered with a perforated lid in the middle, and at the bottom of this pot is where the instrument's head is placed; then release your fumigation, and have the patient put the tip of the stick into their mouth, and seal the mouth so that no fumes escape but flow until reaching the nostrils; and now the blood will come out. If it doesn't urinate, you must again commence the fumigation many times. And let the patient endure thirst, consume salty foods and such, and do not drink water; then it is necessary for her to expel this through this method.
And the shape of the tool with which we treat the bleeding is such that when it can be seen, it resembles curved scissors for entering into the throat; and has the appearance of a doctor's beak, and it has been sharpened like a lime, so whatever she takes in, she cannot leave; and here see this shape:
The chapter on abscesses
No descriptions of abscesses exist as recalled by the memory from one to another in this book, they differ in perforation and incision; it's done in two ways wherein one is akin to its appearance itself, and due to moisture. And the second way depends on the joints or their locations within the body. because abscesses at the head are different from those at the base, and abscesses at the meaty part of limbs are different from those that come in articulations, each has its own judgment in operation.
And if with abscesses one must not pierce until the boil is dead according to its maturation; and if there are such that it's necessary to pierce when they have grown and are not dead according to their maturation, like abscesses within joints. For when abscesses come within joints and are left until rotted inside, by chance if the ligament and nerve of the joint become corrupted, this is the cause of contraction in that limb. Or if the abscess is within the main member, and you delay the perforation until it's dead, it will harm the principal member; or if it is within the base, if you pierce it then so that it becomes dead; this should not be done to pierce a growing abscess without full digestion completed, except for that which is within the base, which does not rot fully and remains deep inside, causing a fistula; and cannot heal properly in great extent.
And it must be known when the time for perforating the boil that is dead according to maturation, and this is when the pain subsides, and departure of fever, and reduction in pain and heat, and movement and hardening of the head of the boil, and other signs; And you should let the perforation occur a little above the boil location or at the point where it opens, and wherever it appears. And make the perforation long throughout the body, and if the boil is on hands or feet, or joints and nerves and arteries, and all areas that do not have wrinkles.
Among those who bend, according to that limb. And when abscesses are in the meaty part of your body, if they are punctured, you should let the puncture remain until digestion is fully accomplished, as we said before. For if you pierce it beforehand, it may stretch along with his body by the venom from him, and be full of all sorts of filth; and by chance harden the skin and the underparts of him. And for any abscesses that are punctured according to the width of the body, according to what the limb needs. It should be that you introduce small abscesses, small cuts; and in large abscesses, large cuts, and many wounds according to the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses or where you must pinch with a knife, and cover them; when it has turned as much as half a cloth piece, and is flattened, then should be done similarly as one does for breasts: and for those that are split into three angles, and for those that are cut like the leaf of myrtle, like abscesses from angles; and for those where you make a round cutting, and other cuts and similar slicing.
Those who don't have a head, such as abscesses on the surface, it should be that you completely pierce them; and when the abscess is large, and has a thick wall, if you puncture it you should not remove all the pus at once in that moment, but remove only part of it. Then let the abscess stand until another day, then leave nothing on the wound; do this repeatedly for large to small sizes, until all the pus comes out; similarly if the patient is weak in strength, or pregnant women, or young children, or old and decrepit people. For the spirit trembles every time with the release of pus that it might accidentally kill the patient, and you would not realize it. So then avoid this chapter by great caution, when you have punctured your abscesses, if the wound comes out, and look to see if the wound from the abscess is small; and if it's a full cut, should apply linens or old cotton on it; and for large abscesses, with many cuts, then it's proper that in each one you make a tent so they go side by side; and if you have cut into the abscess part of the skin and you've sewn it together, then fill it with old cotton or flax rags that are not moistened, and secure them until the third day; then heal, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs in your vein, then apply cold and soothing for a while. And if the bleeding persists, then take management and treatment, and use the powders that I have mentioned in this book, and if it's in an area affected by fever, or if the blood is very nervous, it's proper to put wet tents and cloths on it with wine and oil; and if it's hard, and the body part is fatty, then it's proper to apply wet cloths with water and oil, or wine and cold oil, until the third day as we said. And then remove the tent and drain and treat it properly until it heals.
And it is necessary to know this universally in treatments of abscesses: now I have told you how one should proceed before treatments of abscesses, and here comes the chapter.
of the womb
Where small abscesses come from, and their methods which are like meshes, such as the one you would find under a ewe's belly, there are many similarities. There are some that are fatty and full of moisture like pustules; and there are others that are hard and stony to the knife, and there is no doubt if they contain an artery or not. And in cutting during surgery, it is as follows: you try all one instrument called "entromissoire", which has this form afterwards, containing something inside. If it contains moisture, then it cuts through long. And when the moisture is drained, then scorch without leaving anything behind that contained the moisture; because it returns immediately once nothing is left in it; then dip cotton into Egyptian ointment if available; if not, into water and wine, and apply to the wound, allowing it till another day; and this will take care of what stays through the night. And after that, repeat the cotton treatment as before on the second day, and the third, until you know well that it does not stay overnight; then treat the wound with ointment suitable for healing, until it heals.
And the size above the abscess stone and the wetness, it is lighter because there is little blood. And if none of these abscesses or head have any moisture, and among two abscesses that I copied from an old woman's head; and found the abscess as a soft stone, rough and white, and could not break it; and even if you had pierced neither of them, one would do just as well to make incisions like on a stone. For other abscesses coming or at heads of children and roots of ears, the opening should be for all days to the most depending upon it, so that the body can exit; and treat them according to how they need to be treated.
Of the scrophulae
Many times abscesses occur in the throat and around the glands, and sometimes in the neck or on the collarbone, and they are soft and often stick together. Each scrophula is properly within its own compartment, just like a nodule and an abscess at the base of the neck, as we have said; and there are many appearances of these scrophulae. There are some that contain moisture, and others that refuse to comply with treatment. In such cases where you see good arrangement for surgery and resembles the color of the collarbone, it neither swells nor moves under the throat or artery or conduit, and is not deep; then it's necessary to cut above it, scrape each part, and pinch both lips around the glands if needed, as we have said in abscesses at the base. And treat slowly, be sure not to cut the nerve or vein, don't go too far inward that you cut into pus or trenching, make sure your hands do not slip away, and do not look too far ahead, so that you do not cut more than necessary.
And if you cut the vein or artery, and it doesn't allow you to open further, apply vitriol broil or any powders that stop blood loss onto the wound; and leave it there until abscesses are alleviated and the wound begins to heal. And when the bleeding stops, resume your work, as long as you complete it; then based on your judgment if there are no small pustules remaining, remove them. And if in the root of a pustule there's a large vein, you should not cut that pustule at its root but tie it with a double strong thread and let it drop out by itself without harm. Then treat the wound with old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, then apply treatment.
And if you have removed the entire pustule, it is necessary to assemble the two edges of the wound and sew them now. There should be no excess left due to the size of the pustule. You must know how to cut through its root, drain it properly, and then stitch as we've explained previously. Those pustules that have excess substance, puncture them where they open; and do so like the one mentioned earlier, ensuring you're cautious, then administer remedies with ointment and similar things, until what was rotten begins to decay; and when the wound is well cleaned, apply a dressing with ointment and bandage until it's no longer infected.
regarding squint
The old ones spoke and wrote about the operation of the throat cutting; but I never saw anyone do it in our land, and this is recorded from their words.
For those with squinting vision, it is necessary that the incision in the throat referred to as "epiglottis" be made; and one should not seek aid for this, because all the veins and the heart are sensitive to individuals who have abscesses either inside their mouth or in the throat or between two almond-shaped structures. When the illness is within the channel of the heart, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid the loss that comes from strangulation.
Therefore, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, it is necessary that we make three or four small cuts through, between the two circles, so that the size of the cut does not touch the cartilage.
And these shoulders are suitable for the section of the epiglottis that has no meat, and the vessel is long in the neck.
And if the surgeon is fearful, it's necessary that he extends the throat skin to all the nape of neck, then cut through the jugular until he reaches the windpipe; and avoid blood vessels, should you see anything, and then scrape out the tonsil, as we have said.
And it's demonstrated by the division of the windpipe stream which forces its way through the broken neck, and through the loss of voice;
And leave the wound open for a while.
And when the time has passed since one doubts strangulation, gather the two mouths of the wound as neatly as possible, and all along the skin but not through the cartilage; then administer medicines that produce flesh until it is clean.
Albucasim insists that one should not perform this until the throat is completely swollen, and the patient is judged dead, and the defect has been made. So cut into the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe normally, and they breathe through the wound, and thus are protected from death;
And because the old man was instructed to leave the wound open until the disease's illness passes, and it has passed in three or four days. And then they instructed to sew up the wound and treat it until it was healed;
and I will tell you what I saw. I saw that a maiden took one dagger, and stabbed it into her throat, and cut some of the windpipe.
And I was called to treat her, and found her as dead.
I uncovered the wound, and found that blood was issuing from it, and indeed she did not have a cut vein or exit route but rather her veins were exiting through the wound.
I hurriedly, and thus treated the wound, and cured it as soon as she was healed;
and didn't leave the young lady until her voice had recovered, and she returned after to her condition.
I swear by heaven that in the surgery of the epiglottis there is no fear.
In the large throat
Thick abscesses are called "throat hernia", and they are large abscesses of a black color, and are very common in women;
and according to two ways: natural and accidents; or naturally there is no cause.
And the accidents are according to two ways, from which one seems like pus coming from us, and the other way seems like an abscess that comes from our blood. And there must be fear, and it does not suit to make fire outside that in this which is small, and the proof and search for all the introduction: if you find it as thin as half an inch thick, and cannot fit into any vein, then cut it, as one would cut a notch, and guide it with all its shaping, if there is even the slightest opening; and thoroughly clean it out, then treat it as needed, until it is completely healed.
from the wound
Many ways are there for us, of which I will say all the similarities;
And it is fitting that I mention all the differences that exist between us and dislocation.
I say that dislocation is characterized by heat and fever persisting until the ebullitions have passed and putrefaction has occurred; thus, the fever and heat are brought to rest.
With respect to dislocation there is no heat, fever or pain, and it contains 1.5, which is its own sack and lies within the body's structure, starting off like a boil, and becomes enlarged;
And they depend on two appearances, whether it's oily or moist, and none of their colors are like what I've mentioned in the division.
When you come to the treatment of a new wound, you should first test and inquire about all the instruments known as 'entromissors', according to whether their form matches or comes before or after in the chapter.
And the method of inquiring about abscess discharges from wounds is that you should drain more moisture than what you find in the abscess, and make your cuts little by little until you know that the instruments have reached the pus, then it must be according to the size of the abscess;
Then remove the entromissor, and take care not for any rupture.
If moisture is involved, whatever its nature, if you make an incision as I have described for other abscesses;
And if after the first incision no moisture comes out, know that it is fatty, then cut accordingly for other abscesses, and take hold of it with forceps, and gently scrape off from each side, and protect the area where you will remove it, ensuring a clean extraction using the tool;
And if you cannot extract it cleanly, then extract it piece by piece so that nothing is left behind.
For if anything is left behind, it will recur through repeated occurrences;
And if it stays a little bit, and you aren't troubled by it, apply some corrosive watery powders to the wound, and restrain the wound, and place soothing things on abscesses that are warm, and treat other treatments until he is healed.
And if it's large for us, tie the two sides of the wound together, and treat the one who is sucking on flesh.
And if the vein is too small or otherwise causes concern, do it quickly and fill the wound with powdered vitriol, and let it sit for two to three days, until the wound begins to heal, and rest the hot bleeding; then continue with whatever has been left over from new treatments.
Here are the forms of the incision tools, and there are three ways: large, medium, and small; and if you have four square pieces called 'albaret', and one called 'breb', and they come in three sizes: large, medium, and small, to encircle the abscesses of fistulas;
And they are also like the needles from which one removes the thorns, and made of citrine quartz or iron or silver, and those that are yellow in color perform better than black lead for encircling the deformities of fistulas.
And they can be in three ways: large, medium, and small, depending on the width of the defects.
The shapes of the clamps are like those you see here: large, medium, and small; and if there are two curves in the clamps as well, just like these.
And if the clamps have two curves and come in two forms as well; and if they have two curves each, or just one curve each, also coming in two forms; and all these are necessary for their use.
The head of this to whom one makes his sharp, and among these is there who cuts not power but from one side, where one sears the flesh, because in it one does not cut the vein or the nerve.
And of these introducers their instruments are placed in gloves, so that the patient does not perceive them during the opening of abscesses.
And there are three ways: large, small, and medium, just as you see;
And one uses none with much force except in the thigh muscles, such as legs and arms, and nipples, and at joints, and in similar cases;
And never did one make another tool small, resembling whips of hawthorn wood, according to this form, upon which one stops blood.
And it is placed only once at the healthy site of arteries and veins, and never in accordance with this large form:
Never do the nipples of some men swell as they begin to become corrupted, until they seem like nipples of women.
And remain ugly and swollen, and whoever tries to cure them should do so according to this method described in line b., up until point .g: Then scrape off the fat, and fill the wound with medicated ointment. Then join together the two edges of the wound for suturing purposes until it is healed.
And if the belly sags down, and is flattened due to its size like it happens in women, if you make cuts above it, by two similar slits; So that one holds the other at the end of each, such that the longer line contains the shorter according to this form, from this line B up to the line G; Then scrape off the skin that is between the two edges, and remove the fat, and apply what we have instructed about suturing and powders, and what is necessary for treatment until it is healed.
And if it isn't clean, or the incision hasn't been fully made, because the patient doesn't want to rest, or due to the bleeding, you should fill the wound with wet cotton in a corrosive ointment; And leave it until it begins to chew and move the meat and fat, then treat it until it is clean.
removal of abscesses from the armpit
Wounds that come from around the glands are methods of scrophula hard swellings or when there are nodes, and if they contain moisture.
Thus, those that contain moisture should be cut according to this shape, from the line b until the line .g: And when all the pus in the abscess is drained, fill the wound with old cotton and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton and apply ointment as long as the wound is healing.
And if the abscesses are like scrophula swellings, cut them as we have said in cuts on scrophula swellings, and if the wound is filled with pus, then apply a cautery as we have said before.
from the rupture of the artery
When an artery is ruptured and the skin above it is sealed, many times abscesses result. And similarly, this happens with the pierced vein and abscess.
and if one knows how to do it like this for an artery, the abscesses are long and deep; and when you feel it with your fingers, if you feel resistance; and when it's about the vein, it will show up as bulging outward;
And it is madness to remove this abscess, and similarly when it's in the armpits, and under the arms, and on the neck, or in other parts of one's body, and it's very large. So then it's necessary to avoid the iron treatment. Likewise, one should avoid in the case of the head, and also in the case that there is swelling from arteries, they do this above the skin for a long time;
So then it's necessary to avoid the iron treatment. Likewise, one should avoid in the case of the head, and also in the case that there is swelling from arteries, they do this above the skin for a long time; Then proceed with cutting through the flesh until you can beautifully remove the artery from the tissues, as long as it is exposed;
Then insert a needle under it and pierce until you reach the other side of the body, then hold the artery with a double thread on two needles, as I instructed you in extracting the two arteries that are located between the temples;
Then do not allow the hand that is between the two points of the introducer to move until all the pus has been expelled and remove the abscess;
Then perform the treatment that drains the wound, as long as there is discharge from the point. Then treat with the accompanying ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess is of the size of a vein, it is necessary that you mark with your hand all the part of the abscess up to the skin. Then pierce the needle through the place where you hold with your hand and let it go, and have one doubled thread, so that you can pull it from the other side of it; Then tie off the abscess, as I have instructed you, or use two threads from each of the two shoulders to bind it;
And if you doubt that the threads will hold, then pierce another needle with both of them through all the abscess from the incision of the first needle, and pull the threads tight in four turns;
Then cut away the excess of the abscess as it comes out, then trim the remaining part neatly and leave what is tied.
Then put on one wet cloth dipped in wine and oil, then give it treatments and applications until the wounds are healed.
removing of abscesses from nerves
Also like abscesses that come into the artery and the vein, abscesses occur in nerves when they are punctured or due to too much work, and similar things.
And this happens more often at shoulders and elbows, and in all places where there are joints, it's one kind of abscesses, and its color looks like the color of flesh, and can be in various postures without pain;
And when one restrains it by form, the patient feels pain, and is not fully contained by the body, but only within the hollow.
And moves well in all directions, neither forward nor backward, neither above nor below. If it's in joints, iron doesn't suitably cover it: by chance it would cause constriction;
And the one that is on the head or forehead causes the skin to blister. If the abscesses are small, use a pair of forceps and grip them at their base;
And if it's large, suspend it at the navel, and scarify, then set the bones and stitch the wound together, and treat until it heals properly.
And large swellings hang down It happens in the belly and nowhere else often, and it's an illness called "fungus" by its appearance, and it is delicate at its root, and has large heads; and there are both small and much larger ones.
And I saw two homes where there were four bellies that looked more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference at all, they were white, had a small root, and were cracked, and they corroded even with moisture.
I collected and found it to weigh in the first 1.8 ounces, and in the second 5 ounces, and in this operation when you observe that the patient is moist, and the color of the flesh is white and moist with a subtle root;
If it's cut too wide in the operation, and let the fire cautery be present before you. For the surgeon often sees excessive bleeding many times, and if it doesn't stop with you, then quickly take the cautery to help;
And if you see the patient is frightened and fearful from the incision due to the heat of the iron, then take a good piece of hemp thread and tie it to the flesh as we have said, and leave it for two days;
And then restrain, and do not cease to pull the thread of plonc until it reaches the joint, and each piece without causing strain; and if the roots are large, so that fear is felt during the process for the belly, but you can properly pull half.
And then cauterize so that it does not re-erupt; then treat the wound, and ensure you do not allow a pus-filled blister to form with poor sensation and milk-like discharge.
For it is an abscess that has opened, and I will come to the treatment of gangrene afterwards.
And if you are blind.
When the appearance of the boil comes through a wound cautery or a cut from sepsis, and it appears on the belly and in some parts of the intestines, as happens in other cuts, where blood cuts out of veins or arteries according to what is before, or due to windiness;
And if it's due to the rupture from sepsis and through the opening of the boil, its color is similar to that of flesh, and it's a light matter with little pain, and opens from various exits. And if it's due to the opening from the intestines, then it's more diverse, and when you press it with your fingers it comes back and then returns again, and by chance it gets stuck, and swells quite at the entry of the bath and through strenuous work.
And if it's due to moisture, it's a simple matter, and it opens well when you press it with your hand, without constraining it; and if it's due to blood, it opens through these signs - the abscesses are large and hard, and are situated according to their quantity.
And if it's due to windiness, the breath is at the nostrils, and the veins so that you see whether their appearance is for blood from an artery, or a vein, or windiness. It's necessary to leave the treatment alone. For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in the chapter about abscesses, for arteries and veins.
And if the appearance seems to be on the intestines or in the belly, you should instruct the patient to prick their side and have it extended entirely straight, then seal it completely around the belly. then command it to heal quickly between your hands, then go into the area that you have marked with all the pus. then extend half of the pus to above all the large curve;
Then operate on half of the abscess extending above the binding, and hold your finger in place, and observe the intestine. If you find it caught by the binding, remove the binding, and press the intestine towards the back of the belly;
And if you find the bowels, take them at the navel, and remove any excess.
And if the artery opposes you or the vein, if you insert them deeply inwards, then return to your work and take two needles, and set aside two pieces of thread, and place the two needles inside where you pierced when you made the incision;
Then apply pressure with four fingers over the needles above the puncture; and if you see it, remove the needles, and leave the wound to heal until it scabs, and remove any dead flesh by itself. Once the wound has become subtle and scabbed over, then treat it as necessary, and remove the puncture like we have said.
Once the wound has become subtle and scabbed over, then treat it as necessary, and remove the puncture like we have said. And remove the blood or moisture you find, then treat the wound as necessary, and suture the wound.
and gangrene
We have discussed the signs of gangrene and how to treat it with medicines, as well as avoiding iron treatment. We say that if gangrene begins in a moist area or in the same place repeatedly, such as in breasts or cooking areas and other similar places, you should remove it entirely when it's just beginning; but for large and old gangrenes, it's not advisable to touch them, because I've never seen anyone recover from them, nor was anyone ever cured of gangrene before me.
And for the incisions, if it's in an area where you can remove it, as we have said before, you should cleanse the patient of black pus once. Then let a surgeon assess if there is any swelling present, then proceed to cut open that area; this means making sure the incision site is clean and ready for treatment. Next, scrape off all traces of gangrene and hair from around it, and remove everything from the edges as well, ensuring nothing remains. Let the blood flow freely without obstruction, cleanse the wound thoroughly with your hand or anything else you may have on hand, and if bleeding in opposite directions occurs compared to an artery or vein incision, cauterize until the bleeding has stopped; then treat it further until it heals properly.
From dropsy We have discussed the signs of dropsy in division, and how water assembles, and the signs for each sign, and the treatment done with medicines, and that which is treated with iron: these are only examples; one should not use iron in these four conditions: to know, peritonitis and lymphedema, because it is a fatal thing; therefore when you treat this dropsy condition known as 'eclites' using medicines, and the treatment doesn't help, if the patient seems weak or has another disease besides dropsy, such as stomach pain and other related symptoms; then do not use iron, for there's doubt; and if you see the patient very pale, and they have only dropsy aside from any other illness, and their age is neither too young nor too old, you should proceed like this: Lift the patient's leg with your hands, and have the ministers press the belly from above at the lowest part near the heel. Then take the thorn-syringe according to this shape: And make two cuts of about an inch each pointwise, but not so deep that it can reach the intestine when inserted, and cannot be seen;
Then look to see if the hernia is pressing towards the intestines: if it should be that you must cut in the vicinity of the belly button, .iij. inches straight down from the navel; and if the hernia is due to illness affecting the liver, then your incision should be on the left side of the belly button, .iij. inches; and if it's caused by the gallbladder, then your cut should be on the right side, and it shouldn't be that the patient lies prone with the cut so that excess fluids do not flow to the weak part.
Then pierce all the skin with the tool and pull it out, lifting your hand from the sputum between the skin and the stomach as much as when searing a finger or part of that; then puncture the stomach until the pus comes to his eighth part, and this is where the water leaves, then pull gently, and hold the tool in which this is formed: And it looks like a thin silver cane, and it's made of iron or bronze and light, and about .i small parts on one side; and if from one side, .iij parts; and .ij from another side, and .i from another; and cut your hands as a feather would, this is the form of the incision that the writers cut in their feathers.
At the top is the stomach, so that when the tool comes to water, it now goes out from above the tool; empty it then half or a third of it, because if you drain more than should be in this hour, by chance the patient dies due to the release of his spirit of the weapon, or he vomits, or he approaches death.
but adjust it according to the amount of its virtue, and according to what the virtues suggest about the illness and its pulse; then place the tool and hold the water, and now this is held due to the numbness that comes from the tip above the scab, as I spoke, you pierce in this manner; then repeat using the tool on another day, if you see the patient suffering under it, and draw out a small quantity of water.
Do this every day, and refrain from overusing it as long as there's no relief but a small amount of water. And if you doubt the illness, and leave more water than necessary, if the burial or sand feels hot, and with much sweating or bathing under the sun, and if it gets bluish; then drink and take medicine for drying out until it's healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and liver after extracting the water, as I explained before.
Regarding the constriction of the penis No child is born without any hairs on the penis, or if there are hairs they are small, or not in place. If it suits to pierce them all at once with two very thin points according to this shape: then put one of these thin copper points and bind and keep them for three or four days, and when it wants to urinate, remove the plug, allow urine, and then put him back; and sometimes it doesn't suit because the urine that comes out no longer leaves the plug closed. If the hairs are small, if there is medicine for a copper plug, as we have said before, if it will enlarge. Those who do not have their hairs in place are blind, because no child is born with hairs at the tip of the penis, so they cannot urinate until they lift their penis upwards; and they cannot have sex because the matter cannot come till the scrotum, and this is a bad disease.
And the way of treating it is that the patient lies on their back, and holds their penis head and testicles in place as if they were holding a feather's length, so that the hairs lie flat in the middle, just like it should; and be careful not to let blood flow out many times, and if it does happen, stop it with someone who stops bleeding, and treat the wound until it heals.
The boils of the penis Many times sores appear on the penis, and there's a terrible appearance to them; some are bad and others aren't. It is necessary that you weigh them at an ounce and a half, then prepare and cleanse them all thoroughly, place Egyptian ointment-soaked cotton over them; then cure with diaphanicon balm until they have healed. And if the sores are evil and causing pus and leakage, it is necessary to apply a cautery to them. Once you've treated them, and if the sores are located on the penis and have parts within the skin and parts outside, it is necessary to remove the inside part of the sores first; and when they heal, then treat the external area. For when you treat them together, there must be no assurance that the head of the penis will not be pierced, leading to darkness and corruption in the penis and anus; it's necessary to remove everything that is dark and corrupted, then cover with a plaster made of apple pomace and flour, then apply other treatments until they heal.
And if there is bleeding or corruption, apply the lunar cautery according to this form: The cauteries assist each other as a whole: that means during bleeding and in case of corruption. If the head of the penis becomes infected or removed, it's necessary to insert a thorn into the penis and let the patient urinate while holding it; and when the skin has become loose at the head of the penis for those who have not been circumcised, or due to wound or abscess, then you must burn with one instrument made from hair until all the ties are released, and liberate the head of the penis from all sides.
And if it's hard to describe this procedure, then you should burn with hot iron at the root of the penis and scrotum for some time. Then cut cleanly between two fingers, and place a thin linen band dipped in cold water right there, so that it does not touch directly.
Of circumcision
Circumcision is not an injury to continuity like other wounds; however, when we perform this work of our own volition and for children, it must be necessary that we do the best job, and cause the least harm for their health.
I say that the old did not instruct circumcision of their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we only have this practice based on what we have acquired through experience.
For I wanted the largest part of the masters and surgeons who performed circumcision between the first day after birth and one week later, and for all a newborn; if there was a knot because there are two sheets, and by chance one is placed above and the other below.
Or the wound is covered, and there is double pain, and in the first days after birth the tip of the limb is not secure; and in the trimming of the nail by chance the knife misses the mark and cuts too much into the work, and they are born like this more often than necessary, and I want this.
From the trimming done with force on all the threads I found the value of experimentation, for the strengths cut just as well above as below.
For when you press your hand, cut it in halves equally on the line. But let the threads be well inserted between the skin; and do it in such a way as the first cut was done that you make the child think, if they hear, that you are only tying the thread around the penis just there and then allow it to move in all possible ways that you can. Then make it stand straight between your hands, and hold the strength in your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the tools; then push your hand on the penis and blow or speak softly, and pull it up until the head of the penis is inside. Then clean it well from the dirt that has accumulated, then tie its root with a double thread, then tie under the first two by half each other. And hold them at their two thumbs by the second layer to the pouch and the tip index finger, and divide between the two threads, then lift your breath quickly and pull the head of the penis.
Then make it stand straight between your hands, and hold the strength in your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the tools; then push your hand on the penis and blow or speak softly, and pull it up until the head of the penis is inside. Then clean it well from the dirt that has accumulated, then tie its root with a double thread, then tie under the first two by half each other. And hold them at their two thumbs by the second layer to the pouch and the tip index finger, and divide between the two threads, then lift your breath quickly and pull the head of the penis. Then let the blood drip slowly and slowly, because it's the pus; and put powder above and above the powder one spoonful of glue from a raw egg beaten with rose water, mixed with rose oil that is good and fresh, and leave it there until the next day, and treat it another treatment until it heals.
The shape of force during creation is like this: the two shoulders should be placed and cut, and the shoulders should also be as large as the arms evenly.
The error in creation is when the kidneys within are displaced by incision; thus it's necessary that you extend to your fingernail, so that the ribs make an opening; and treat equally; if you cannot hold at your fingernail, then use tweezers, and then proceed.
And if they exceed three days, and the one near the penis is swollen, let him stay until the openings are alleviated, and lightly scarify; if you can move it as much as you can, and avoid the part of the penis, it will not harm him at all.
Then treat the internal parts of things with powder that we have spoken about in treating powders and if you press too hard on the kidney and it goes above, it will not cause harm. So treat it accordingly as we have said until it is healed.
regarding the retention of urine
The retention of urine is due to the formation of stones, or blood being frozen, or the presence of worms, or birthed tumors, or similar things that we have discussed in the section;
And if the urine is not relieved, and you see that the retention occurs due to stones in the bladder or at the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary for the patient to be kneeling. And have their feet under the back, and extend their belly from the part above the back, and restrain the patient so they strain as much as possible; and thus forces the neck of the bladder to express the stone above, because this results in the urine being relieved.
And if she doesn't come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, it is necessary for you to administer extraction with all the instrument that is called "syringe", which is like this: it should be made of subtle silver wire, like a bird's feather; and should be about five inches long and half an inch wide, and should be subtle at the tip.
And the method of its release from urine is such that you take a double thread, and tie one end to the head, with another piece of wool or cotton, and insert the head of the thread inside the catheter; and remove the excess length of the thread up until it reaches the tip of the catheter. Then, grease the catheter with oil or butter and beaten egg yolk, and have the patient sit on a chair while you pull out the bladder and penis with wet oil and olive oil.
Then gently place the catheter in the penis, until it reaches the base of the penis. Next, fold the penis upwards towards the opening, then place the catheter before reaching the bladder and feel when urine starts flowing up to the empty thing. This is not done following this order because for what guides her is twisted; then pull out all the thread piece by piece and piece, allowing the urine to follow the thread, then remove it carefully and make sure that the urine flows properly.
And continue using the catheter until the bladder is emptied, and assure the patient is comfortable.
On diseases of the bladder
When burns or blood occur in the bladder, or pus is assembled there, and you see distilled waters and remedies, then prepare with all the instrument which is called "clepsis" (water clock), and its form is:
It is closed, and if it has three parts: two on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and let there be a passage through them so that the medicine can circulate properly inside without addition, if moisture can be treated, and to expel when necessary;
And when you see the medicines being discharged in the bladder, place the tip of your finger in the moisture, and direct them towards the one who is pulling; if you pull out the moisture with the finger, then reinforce the puller immediately afterwards; if the moisture enters through it, will come to the bladder now, so that the patient feels it.
And this is the form of the subtle bladder stone which one treats with cathartics for the bladder: thus it is.
And it is made of silver or of iron, and the head is placed higher; and from this point to about half an inch above the pubis bone; then take a sheep's bladder and put in it some moisture with which you are supposed to treat the bladder, then tie it between the two pubis bones using a thick double thread. Heat one piece of that moisture on fire; then place the stone head in the urethra, then press your hand against the bladder with all of that moisture until the patient feels that this moisture has reached the bladder;
And if you don't have the bladder, take a piece of parchment and make one circle, then pierce it roundly through. Then insert a strong thread into these holes, then join the circle as you would assemble a platter, and put inside what appears with moisture and water, and tie in the instrument; do this like you did with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
from the stone
We have discussed in the division methods for stone expulsion and medication; and we have explained the differences between mature stones that cause pain, and all their signs, as well as which stones should be surgically removed; and regarding the bladder and penis; and I will explain this clearly and briefly to you.
I say that the stone in the bladder often occurs more frequently in children, and this is a sign that the urinary infection has spread throughout its subtlety; and it causes pain repeatedly, and there's a sensation of fullness in their urethra, and they urinate many times, then develop an urge again; and at these repeated urges lies the kidney; and until about four years old, children experience lighter healing due to their condition; it becomes more painful for those who are older, being somewhere between childhood and age; and the treatment is generally easier for those with larger stones than for those with smaller ones.
And when we come to the treatment, it is first necessary to cleanse the patient through diuresis in order to drain all the toxins from the intestines. For it often blocks trying to remove the stone.
Then take hold of the patient by their elbows, and stand them up and move them backward, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and emerges no higher than their chest; then have them sit between your hands, with their arms resting on their thighs, so that the bladder is fully sloping downward; then guide it and touch it from there;
If you feel the stone in space, now hurry to cut on the stone. And if it doesn't urinate at all with touching, moisten your index finger of your left hand; if the patient is old, or your middle finger, if the patient is young and fully grown; then stand it on its base, guide the stone, touch it from there; when you feel it with your finger, draw it to the neck of the bladder; then press towards your finger, and push through the skin where you see the cut.
And command the attendant to press the bladder with his hand, and tell him to extend his right hand up at top, and with his left hand hold the skin that is near the scrotum in the area where the cut will be made; then he pushes out the prostate gland, which is its shape:
And make the space between what is inside the coions and the foundation, not in the middle but at the edge of the left snow (ice), and be straight on the stone, and your hands should be close to or against the foundation, and its size should go through so that it's wide outside and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large;
By chance if the press is where it should be that's against or on the foundation, let it break naturally without effort; and know that there are parts of stone with angles and edges: if they're rough to come out; and if there's a part beneath it resembles a pebble, round shaped, from which the extraction is easy.
In such places where it has angles and edges, make the size larger; and if it doesn't break, then you should grip with the tongs that are like a file at their tip to pull on the stone so that it doesn't escape; or you use a tool that is slightly curved at its tip; and if you can't devise this way, then make them one inch wide and long, and if they're not hollowed out from both sides, then you force them with vitriol.
And if there are more than one stone, start by removing the largest at the neck of the bladder, then go upwards, cut forcefully through it, and take the smaller ones after if there are any others. And if it is very large, you might have to make a larger incision. For two things happen to the patient: or he dies, or his urine comes out right away from the place where his limbs cannot join; but still, strive with your forceps, or with your pincers, until you remove it piece by piece;
And when you have completed your work, fill the wound with frankincense and aloes and dragon's blood, and bind it up tightly, and apply one oil-soaked piece of linen or in a mixture of oil and wine, or oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the inflamed abscess; then restitch the patient's neck, and do not remove the suture until the third day.
And when you remove the stitches, rinse thoroughly with oil and water, then treat it with diacynicon ointment and basil ointment until it heals properly.
And if the abscesses and corrosion come to the wound, and blood congeals in the bladder, and is held back by this causing urine retention, which occurs in such a manner that without jumping along with the urine: then you must treat the wound, remove that blood, for if it stays there, it corrodes the bladder and deteriorates it;
Then cleanse the wound with water and oil and wine, and assist him in all ways that you see fit, until he is healed; and it must be that every time you cure his wounds, you tie his two legs together, and apply the remedies to his body.
And if the stone is small, and it's located where the penis leads out, and is stuck inside, causing urine to not be able to pass; when you treat him as I've instructed, cut his penis many times, and forgive the cuts resulting from this treatment. I have already found this effective.
Take one iron fork according to this form and have three pegs fixed into it:
Then take one thread and tie the ligature around the shaft of the penis so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then insert the fork into the shaft gently, until it reaches the stone; and twist the fork with your hand in the stone gradually, until you can pierce the stone from the other side; if urine starts to come out quickly, then press your hand on what is left of the stone inside the penis. If it breaks quickly, and the urine flows along with it, treat the patient;
And if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, tie one thread around the stone and another above it, then place the penis in contact with the stone between the two threads, then pull forceably, and remove the thread, and cleanse the frozen blood from the wound; and treat him until he is sound.
From the stone of women
It happens that stone is found within women, and if it occurs once, then it is treated carefully, and is forbidden for three reasons: one is perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that no one can find out a woman who is not aware of her condition even when she is pure.
And the third way is that perhaps one cannot find out a woman well versed in this art of medicine; and the fourth way is that the stone in women is more protruding than the stone in men, for which reason it requires deeper surgery, and great fear arises.
And if necessity requires this, you should seek out a midwife who is well informed, and find her path in the way; and if you do not find one, rather than two subtle pure women; and present one who knows about part of the art of medicine among women's lives, or a woman who knows some part of that craft, and command her to do what you instruct on the examination of stones.
And make sure to examine the woman very carefully: she must push with her shoulder or support point and aim at the stone; if she finds it, force it against her shoulder and guide it in that direction, and advise her to press on her shoulder when touching the illness, and squeeze her left hand onto the bladder.
If she finds it, she should move the stone gradually from the start of the bladder to just below it as far as possible until she reaches the thigh root; then press on the stone at the thigh root against the middle of her crotch, where its edges are felt and you sense the stone in that area. And do not move her shoulder above or under the stone, and make a small incision there first.
Then make the incision in her waist; if you feel the stone, enlarge the wound until the stone can be expelled with force, and know that there are many types of stones: small ones, large ones, hard or soft ones, round or irregularly shaped ones, and those that have various shapes. And understand their characteristics to know their exit points.
And if it does not heal quickly, place sulfur powder on it and keep it there for an hour until the sulfur is absorbed; then return to your work, as long as the stone remains intact, and have at hand the instruments I have instructed you about in the extraction of stones to help you with your task.
And if it does not heal quickly, and if the artery is cut, apply powder to the site and compress it with bandages for several days without repeating this process, and leave the stone alone without removing it, in case by chance it kills the patient; then treat the wound.
And when the heat of the blood has subsided and the limbs are resting, return to your work as long as the stone remains intact.
Of fatty hernia
Watery hernia is nothing else but a gathering of moisture or white pus, which resides in the skin of the kidneys, what contains the egg; and it's called 'pus', and it's not properly on the membrane of the egg if one thinks there could be another egg; and that's the skin under the kidney where we've said white pus resides; and this doesn't have a hole.
And the production of this watery hernia is due to weakness that affects the kidneys, and this substance spreads out.
And it never comes about due to impact on the kidneys, and this moisture has many colors: or it is declining in color to jaundice, or it is without redness, or black, or aqueous white, and this happens more often.
And these are the signs to recognize this assembly; for if it is or as white as we said, then the pus pockets will be present, that is, quite long like an egg's shape, and do not open to the heart, because it is moist throughout.
And if there's moisture in the proper skin, then the pus pockets will contain part of an egg, and because of this, we think it is another egg;
And if the moisture is between the skin of the heart and the white as we said, you can feel it well; therefore, when you know the color of the moisture, you test through all the internal square part, from which its form is as shown. As for those who come after the introduction, judge by what is within.
As for those who come after the introduction, judge by what is within. And when we cure them with iron, it is necessary that the patient be cleansed according to our ability and their body's restoration; then support them behind, on a thing somewhat elevated, and put underneath him pieces of cloth;
Then sit on their left side, and command the minister to sit on the right, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs near the heart;
Then take the spatula and cut the skin around it from long to below the knuckle, and make the incision straight up until reaching the white tissue, and gently burn through it according to one's ability.
Then puncture the eye completely full of water to one and a half inches wide, extract all the water, and then place your thimbles, making sure that the eye is up-stream; and don't touch the root of the ears, but only the eye. Carefully remove the costum (a type of fabric) from his body in whole or pieces as you see fit, for if it's removed poorly, water will return.
And if the egg jumps onto your work, reset it in its place when you have completed the work on the eye; then join the two halves of the ear's root with stitches, then treat it like other wounds until it heals completely.
And if you find that the egg has been affected by another disease, it is necessary that you tie the suspensory vessels, in anticipation of bleeding; then remove the scrotum down to the suspension point, and extract the egg, then treat it as we have said.
And if the wound is gathered in two joined parts, know that these are two twigs; if you process the other part just like you did with the first equally, then let out the blood, and place moistened wool in the wound dipped in rose oil;
and put another layer of damp wool in wine and oil, and place them on the two sides, and put cloths over them, and secure them with strips above to all the binding that follows this shape:
Then take two cloths, and fold them with stitched wool according to this pattern, sewn together along the waistband of the trousers, and one end of each shoulder reaches up to the back, and the other at the part near the elbow; and place both shoulders on the two corners, and let the rest of the tightening be around the loop of the braces.
And never is this rod of the cautery cured in the size of iron, and it's that you take one small surgical cautery tool, and prepare the skin of the animals, and heat them as we have said, so that the white liquid within which contains water is revealed;
if you take the cautery according to this shape, and puncture this white liquid as veins, and burn it with this fine cautery heated:
And the operation in all the ways that you can, as long as you have reached it entirely; and remember not to let the fire touch the egg; know that this work is more safe; and take care to prevent blood loss, and be aware of the size of your operations;
And if nothing opposes you, or if an abscess bursts or blood loss occurs or something else does, treat what opposes you according to what has been said before.
And if the disease is fearful and cannot wait for this operation due to its horror, then perform a puncture, as I have told you, and know that when you are well certain by the meanings that we have said that watery pus is there,
Let the patient sit on a raised seat; then puncture the abscess at the part under it to cover the entire pus-filled area, and make the incision along the length of the body; and let the incisions be wide enough so that all the liquid comes out.
Then place cotton on it, secure it and allow the removal of all liquid from here. Once done with this, treat until the wound is healed.
And if the white linen does not allow water to seep out of the wound's mouth, it is necessary for you to pour in a feather or the instrument used to treat the liquid from dropsy patients; this tool was described above. And make the incision approximately an inch deep into the wound, and know that the water will return after about 7 months, which is when it is assembled again, as before, and in such manner the patient will live their days with the disease.
from the pus of the testicles
Know that in this branch there are multiple positions for fear, so I think it's better to choose the one where you leave it;
and I will tell you about the work and appearances of the pus.
So then I say that many abscesses come from or around the scrotum, and even the testicles; and this happens through chance.
This is to know by excess of sourness and fever, which spreads among cattle or through striking;
and its color of the abscess according to the color of the blood; and there is no pain, it's an abscess with pus;
And by chance there's an abscess with pus and pebbles, and it has a reddish color, and it doesn't come from a vein or from swelling of a vein.
When it's due to blockage of an artery, one can tell by the position of pus at the incision site, when you press on it with your fingers; And it is not proper for you to touch it.
That which is made of blood-filled veins can be known by its position when the vein is expressed through touching with fingers,
And it can very well measure this likeness, and on other structures; And it is that you take hold of the neck of the chicken, then let the egg be placed upright, and support its belly white side up, and free all suspensory ligaments from the egg in every direction.
If the egg is already solid with these new chickens, then it follows that you should lift the egg, and hold onto its neck.
And if it's facing the white side up, or within the vessels, then you should free all that part, and hold onto its neck roundly.
And if the egg is at the rear of the womb, then you should hold onto it completely and extract the egg, as we have said.
And when your tasks are completed, if you dress the wound with wet wool in oil and wine, then continue other treatments until it heals.
of the abscess in the breasts
This is an abscess enveloped with an wrapping resembling one, with the softening of the breasts, and when it goes, it causes the glands to hurt significantly;
And the treatment for this illness is also quite meticulous like the one before it,
yet we will tell you about its work, according to what the old ones did.
It is necessary that you have the patient sit on an elevated chair, then put the head on the ring of support for the back of the neck with your hands, extend all the organs that are close to the penis, and have the assistants hold them in place, and spread them out.
Then cut to a broad deep incision through the vessels, until they are exposed.
and then sear from each side as we have said in their extraction which are in temples;
then I place one needle with two threads and tie it at the first location where the thread has come out, then tie the other end to the opposite end immediately. then cut straight through the middle, according to the length of the body, and remove the corrupted moisture;
Then treat the wound as with others or bind it up, so that no hair escapes until one of the ears grows.
because this causes no harm, and if all hairs are straight, then one must cut the ears on all the hairs. so that the hair does not lose its growth due to cutting of the hairs, and dries and cannot be helped.
from the rupture of the syphilitic sore. The occurrences of this case happen through the cut, when it leads to bleeding, or during stretching on the stomach in the area of the ribs, because the intestines descend from that opening into one of the kidneys;
And this opening is where it leads to bleeding, or during the stretching of him, and come these two ways from the cause: through impact, or by jumping, or by bellowing, or by lifting the weight with difficulty, and in similar manners;
And when it is due to stretching at the navel, if it happens gradually and in length over time, and does not come suddenly. And the abscesses are equal up until around the front part, because the navel presses on the intestine.
And the signs are when it's from abdominal section, that a sudden pain begins at the start, and various abscesses are visible, around the skin area, and this is due to the discharge of the intestine and body outside of the abdominal cavity.
And sometimes the loops descend with the intestine, and are held back, causing great pain for the patient, even when they are pressed.
And in these iron treatments involving fear, it is advisable to avoid them.
And the method of this treatment involves commanding or instructing the patient to insert their intestine into their hand within the wound, if it can be inserted. Then secure him by his neck,
Then stretch the knee upwards, Then insert fingers through the waistband,
Then strip the scrotum of all its skin,
Then point your thumb at the one who marks out the head, in the one between the white yolk that is under the egg skin, and between the second yolk.
and remove the one behind the egg, and between the second yolk; and then move to your right hand inside the pelvic cavity, and position the white yolk at your left hand top, and lift the egg towards all the yolks towards the waist; and command the minister to extend the egg upwards, and release the one behind the ligament.
and check with your thumbs if there is any intestines enveloped or white yolk hard, and if you find nothing, remove it inside the belly.
Then take a needle or it be made with ten threads and make the thread in the back part of the syph, which is after the skin of the thighs; after that cut, then pinch off the dents that appear from the threads until there are four threads left; Then join them one on top of the other in a manner of a cross and tie the syph, which we have said is under the skin of the thighs with a strong thread of two parts; Then wrap the dents from the threads and tie them firmly with two parts, so that none of the needles that pierce them can enter you, to prevent the formation of an abscess. And make the stitch straight according to the first long stitch of two inches in length. After these two stitches, leave a suture space which is on the kidney's place where it grows large as one inch;
And after all the rest according to the roundness it has taken; then cut in the area beneath the skin of the kidney, as long as the penis does not bend and the testicles are normal, just as we have explained earlier.
Then apply wet wool in oil, and place it on the wounds, and use the stitch as we have said. And once the white suture space that we mentioned has been cauteryed, after incision, due to fear of bleeding.
For this happens often, and let the bandage until it bleeds for him; and if he does not fall out, then use hot water, and place on it what we have said, until it bleeds.
Then treat the wound with other remedies, until it heals perfectly.
regarding fatty hernia
In this branch, I never see anyone who dares to undergo the treatment by iron.
And it was said by the old ones that it is made as if you were assembling a bundle of twigs, in such manner that you tie the vessels, after trimming them lightly on the outside.
Then cut me, and treat the abscess of the one who is working, as long as the vessels are intact; and treat it in the manner we have said, while keeping it clean.
None of the time comes rupture within the wounds, as we have said, and open their mouths; and do not let any intestines escape into them, and if they do escape, it's a little thing, and repair all times;
And still, if he stays too long at this point, the wound or gangrene is to be believed, as long as the intestines are escaping;
And this happens through the stretching of the syphilitic sore, as we have said, for it has been stretched, then softened and swollen in his limbs and opened.
And the treatment is done through a cautery, as we have previously mentioned; and any time it is treated in this manner with iron:
And when the patient lies on his back between your hands, then lift his body from the swollen area as wide as two inches according to its size;
Then remove the syphilis that is under the skin as you proceed, then take hold of it and place it in the protruding area of the syphilis.
And the person presses on the front of the belly, then cuts the two apparent veins under the jaw in the head of the rib, and cuts both of them;
Then removes the head of the rib, and does not cut under the jaw or extend the egg to any other thing, just as I have instructed you in the treatment for removing wind from the intestines;
Then treat it using wound healing methods. And when you cut the stitches, if they heal and the wound is clean, until it heals fully.
The stomach is constrained, and does not show any sign in the operation, and the cauterization burns nearby in this area, and closer to healing.
from the softening of the skin around the genitals
Many times the skin around the genitals becomes soft in some men, because the parts inside soften and it can be seen; when one wants to treat them, it's necessary to make the patient lie on their back with the softened skin on top of natural skin; then join the two halves together at a seam, and if you wish, sew off the excess softened skin at three seams or four securely; then cut between the seams, and treat the wound like any other, until it heals, and stitch the sutured skin.
about sexual abstinence
You should know that chastity is prohibited in our law, and for this reason it would please me not to discuss it in this book; and they are only necessary for two purposes: one is that a person knows how to respond when asked about it, and how to treat them; and the other, because we often need chastity of some animals to assist us, such as from goats and sheep and cattle and others. I say then that chastity is done in two ways: either by attraction or by opening. In the way we do by attraction, place the beast in hot water until their genitals soften and are submerged; then take them with your hands until they recover and you no longer feel them. As for tail whipping: it's necessary to mark the animal, press the genital skin on its left side with your left hand, then tie the scrotum, cut each testicle separately when they have been well scorched; and leave none of the thin fluid that is behind the testicles; this method of chastity is cruel compared to that done by attraction, because during attraction there may be a leftover from the genitals, so the beast craves lust; then treat the wound until it heals.
Of hermaphrodites
Hermaphrodites can be in two ways: one way is that between the two openings at their genitals, as per nature's figure of a woman, having hair and sometimes excreting urine. The other way is for females, having on their belly like a penis and two openings. And the treatment for males and hermaphrodites is that you treat all the joints together, and treat them like other wounds; in the second way, for those who urinate through the skin of their genitals, no treatment is needed.
Of the warts
Tentigine is a joint formed on the natural body part, to such an extent that it is too ugly to see. Some women also have one as large as their hand, and this is its treatment. It is necessary for you to color the excess of the tentigine with your finger or nail, then gently remove it; do not cut it too deeply so that bleeding does not occur, then treat it again until it heals. And on another joint that comes out at the mouth of a married woman, and she uses it, sometimes by chance, and resembles a cow in appearance, which is why they called this old illness "cow disease". It should be treated in the same way as we have said about tentigine, treating it until it heals.
Of cautery by fire command to the ill one that he leaves the hairs until they are long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Erratic is what comes from when the nature of the woman is not known or has been lost, or if it's due to small losses; and is natural by birth, or accidental by illness that came about; or it could be due to an injury received, or a subtle or thick foreign body, and this occurs in front during marriage, or in the chest, or underfoot, wherever it may happen; and one must consider when conceiving, during pregnancy, and occasionally when having flowers; and knowledge of this comes through observing a woman's gait. If the injuries are close and visible, feel them with your hands or on her backside. If it's due to a subtle foreign body, and if they're close around the two kidneys, you would handle as follows: place your two fingertips together, and have the woman lie down on her back, spreading out her legs; then form the two kidneys so that the subtle foreign bodies are completely burned and covered by them; then take ash, and the fatty parts of meat, and place it above her body, making sure she does not get a weld. And if the foreign body is hard and thick, you should cover with something resembling a laurel leaf. If the injuries came from an injury received in childhood, lift up to the navel and cover; and have restorative remedies for stopping blood such as garlic, dragon's blood, incense, all combined with plenty of eggs; then bring into use a large piece of poppy which prevents wound healing; and do this for a long time, and also have her covered in a linen tent; then continue other treatments until she is healed. And when there are injuries received during marriage, if you must cover as mentioned before, if they're not internal abscesses.
Of hemorrhoids
Bleeding is an opening of veins that occur without normal circumstances. And when the bleeding has aged, it becomes sticky; and we have described these in division, alongside their symptoms and signs, and I will describe those which require treatment here. I say that the bleeding and the sticky substance, when they come through mucus, do not show upon touch, except with iron treatment. Those found near the mouth of mucus can be felt, so are ones that can be treated. Therefore, it is necessary to place the woman in a cold house, then expose the sticky substance under forceps, and apply a paste in its roots, then dust with medicine that restrains blood such as comfrey and dragon's blood and incense, among similar things; then bind her feet for an hour at the site of bleeding, then immerse her in cold water; and if there is still bleeding from mucus, one should have it treated with a decoction made from sumac and peel of pomegranates and garlic and such like things, and then take barley flour, mix with honey and saffron, and apply as a plaster on their back. And if they stop bleeding, that's good. If not, if heat causes them to bleed again through their backs or breasts without injury; then take wool, and make it into the juice of plantain or elderberry with old wine, and let it warm her body.  And when the abscess settles down, she is then treated by ointment until fully recovered; and that which is called 'albathir' is red, resembling one large hard lump, and should be treated as described for the sticky substance; and then treat her again until fully recovered.
Dealing with abscesses of the mucus.
Various ways of abscesses occur in the mucus membrane; such as ulcers, stone abscesses, herpes, boils, fistulas and hemorrhoids, and other diseases that we have described in section. Therefore, it is necessary for me to describe here the abscess that occurs in the mucus membrane which does not get filled with pus; if you see the onset of iron work, observe whether the abscess is inflamed at the beginning, full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red then you can see it. Therefore, do not hasten to pierce immediately, but wait until the pain subsides; and then have the patient lie on one side for an hour, with two small pillows under their knees, supporting their back and ankles towards the outside of their leg; and spread their buttocks apart, place their arms under their knees, and tie them well with a bandage; then direct the urine towards the right side, and prepare the tool used to open the mucus membrane which comes after this form; and it should be that when you see to use this tool, you first make contact with its tip to determine the depth of the mucus membrane, so that whatever enters through the tool does not penetrate deeper than it should, and does not injure the patient; and if the instrument is too large, it is necessary to cover the depth of the mucus membrane with cloth so that the instrument does not weigh down on it; and it should be that the bellows of the instrument goes above, and it sharpens the tool. And when the abscess opens, and when you squeeze it by hand gently, then cover it at the top with a moistened linen cloth or turpentine oil; and place the cloth inside the wound up to the depth of the mucus membrane, and put clean wool outside on the mucus membrane and under the knife with another piece of clean linen in water that has been boiled; then treat it after two days with an ointment suitable for this, until it is healed; and never raise the mucus membrane and wound by urinating into hot water and honey, or water where lilies and long aristoloche have been cooked; then revive with ointment. And if the wound has recovered in the mucus membrane, you must avoid iron treatment but treat it as we have said in section.
Of childbirth
Profession is foremost in the art of midwifery, knowing the natural process of birth and its signs. When you see a woman's abdomen enlarge and desire to bear odor: then the child begins to exert force with its head coming forth; at that point, you know that this birth follows the natural figure and proceeds from the head, followed by the rest of the body; and when you notice these signs, gently pressing her belly is appropriate so the child emerges promptly. For when it descends through the head, it brings the rest with it, expelling its excesses into the world through proper expulsion. Any other manner does not occur naturally. It comes out once on its feet, or out of strength in the body or shoulders, and hands, or out from her belly or back, and can unexpectedly be turned around its neck by unfortunate figures; thus, it is for a midwife to be wise and subtle in these matters, aware of errors and deception, and I will show you all the forms on how she should assist.
When the child comes forth through its head by natural outlet, and the woman labors heavily in childbirth, and her strength is weak, make her sit on a stool or have women hold her; and from this nature where fenugreek has been cooked, then place the midwife between her hands with the small spoon that follows here in form: And cut the second part, and remove up to his moisture until it's completely out; and support the woman's belly as her child descends; if she does not descend, you should administer a catheter of fenugreek paste with poppyseed oil to her; then make her drink and cough condisi water; hold her mouth and nose for an hour: if the child comes out now. And when both hands come out, it is necessary that you gently guide them little by little; and if they cannot enter, put the woman on a stool, lift her feet up high; then remove the stool from under the ground, scrape the woman, so she doesn't leak during childbirth; and if her hands can't go in, and the child dies, cut the hands with the knife that was prepared beforehand, extract the child, and treat them equally.
from the birth of the child on its feet And when the child comes on its feet, it is necessary to lift it up. and then turn a little bit by little bit, until it becomes even;
then hold two pieces and extend them a little bit by little bit.
Can it jump up to the thighs, if one tries to grasp and hold onto it, causing it to emit an odor of suspicion; If it should jump away, may God will it.
And if it doesn't change like what we have said, if you turn it a little bit at a time, as long as it follows the natural shape. Therefore, handle it lightly.
And if it doesn't respond as we have described, take up a masticated almond, and oil of saffron, and dissolved gum, and grind all this in a mortar to the size of a grain. and place this balm inside and outside the woman's body. Then have them lie in tepid water up to their ribs;
And when she is moistened up to the waist, have her take one tablespoon of myrrh and place it there, leaving it for an hour; Then have her sit on a stool, then make her sneeze and keep her mouth and nose open, gently rub her stomach, for the child jumps now. From the birth of the child upwards to his knees When the child comes in this form, if you place their hands little by little;
from the birth that occurs when a hand comes out during delivery. It is necessary to engineer in order to bring back the hand: If one cannot bring it back, then make the woman lie down and walk away;
If she cannot walk, I advise making her lie on a bed and supporting her legs upright;
and administer the muscle relaxant I have described;
and if she doesn't give birth, make her sit on a stool, then try to guide the hand back in; And guide the child according to its natural form, and make it sneeze, and instruct her that she should remain in prayer until the baby comes out.
From the issue of the child at its neck, and spread its arms, and its face turned towards the back of its mother. It is necessary that you scratch his hand, then turn it little by little, and gently guide it;
And when they are equal, place them in the natural lifting and oiling motion of the hand as we have said, then instruct her to move them little by little;
And when you have done this, if she wants to sit on the one chair, and you command her that she should pray; and make her sneeze. In the same manner for all the second half
In the same manner for all the second half When it proceeds in this way through the second half, if the second half reaches up to your nail, as long as the moisture is drained;
And if it descends even to her face and her neck, when you reach the throat, let nothing be held back, so that the infant does not die;
Then place the child inside, until you have positioned it as it should be, and instruct the woman not to try again in any way.
from the passage of the twins You know that twins are born often, and sometimes three or four at a time; and this is not an unusual thing, it just happens. Two things are removed, and do not live anymore, if one does not name them;
I know this, for they multiply and are destroyed by the sweat which produces them, which is linked to the belly;
And they also do not come out naturally like all under us, as we have said.
And if they hurt intensely, apply the treatment as we have described, and take care of the subtle wounds, do it quickly and gently according to what she does. do so as is most beneficial for health. of multiple children
of multiple children They are not married for many times; one or two or three or four or five or seven or eleven, or even up to fifteen, and they are all made to resemble a child according to the beauty of their appearance.
And he must know all this because such things may happen to him; if done as it should be.
of the dead child
When you are treating a woman who has lost her dead child or is experiencing an abortion, as I've explained in the division section, if the fetus does not come out and you are forced to intervene by manual effort; If it is necessary that you know if she has healthy virtue, and does not have an accident or she fears death;
If it is necessary that the woman be strong on her back, and let her hips be inclined forward, and the legs raised;
and apply a hot iron to two inches, or if she is tied to the bed so that she is not treated during the childbirth of the child;
then rub the mouth of the midwife with moist olive oil and a mixture of coriander and fenugreek seeds, as well as linseed. Then anoint her hands with these oils and mixtures; Then press down gently on them, then you should know that when the fingers are placed under it,
and take care so that if the child is prone, it descends onto its head; if you insert the fingers into his eyes or neck or mouth or tongue or under the beard or in the armpit or near the ribs.
and if it descends to the feet, you should insert or grasp and at the middle of the back.
And it is necessary that he cuts the navel with his right hand, and puts the curve between his fingers of the left hand, and drives him gently with all his hand, and pierces the navel in none of these parts we have said, until he comes to the thing empty;
Then pierce against another navel, or use the third if you need to, so that the extractions are even;
And then extend them evenly by moving from one side to the other, so that they can exit smoothly, and make sure the navels are toothed to keep them in place, as this is their form:
And if any part remains, let some oil be applied to each of his nostrils, and insert it in that part, and extract the other part;
And if no part remains, place this salve or higher on him, and do this until it comes out completely.
And if one hand comes forward of the other, and cannot be brought back due to being restrained, If this happens, you should cover it with a bandage until it comes out completely;
Then press at the joint of the heel or at the cut, and thus you should do with the other hand, and on both feet.
And if the child's head is large and it is stuck at the exit, or if it has an assembled sharp head, Then you should push the sharp spinous bone between your fingers, and make the head and remove the sharp one; Or you will have it with the tool which is called "almidach", from which its shape comes with the tools or chapters that come after this one;
and so make them grow to large size naturally; and then pull the bones with tongs,
and if the shoulder pops out and is held by force, until it breaks, as much moisture or worse comes out;
and if it cannot come out, you should remove it piece by piece as you can.
And if it is swollen in the belly or around the ribs, it must be that you pierce him as long as the moisture flows.
And if the swelling is on his feet, it causes light pain, and the flow towards the mouth of the vein is light.
And if it is situated in the belly or under the breast, it must be drawn out to about an inch wrapped on the hand; and apply until the belly or chest area where moisture flows cease.
and if another bone is fractured, and the shoulder remains, if they bind his hand up to the tip of the maris bone, and guide it until it reaches the mouth of the maris; then I pour in an ounce or two, and I push forcefully;
and if the mouth of the maris has narrowed due to an abscess that was present, it should not be operated on; Then it's necessary to administer wet and greasy things; and the treatments include plastering, and also soaking in a warm, moisturizing bath.
And if the child is under their ribs, and you can put them level, then apply what we have said about live infant care;
And if you cannot do so, split the treatment into parts, and do not leave anything for later.
And when you have done this, let those who we have described as coming to the wound clots that come in the menstrual period handle it;
And if there is a bleed coming out, so that water or cold restraint may be applied, and it receive other treatments.
And I saw a woman in whom there had been an abortion of a fetus, then examined another on that spot, and found it also to be abortive. After a long time he developed an abscess in his mouth, and it inflamed so much that when opened, it began to cause severe pain.
I was summoned for the treatment, and I thought for a long time, and couldn't find a way to heal the wound.
I placed on a strong plaster, and out came a bone, and after some days another one. I was very surprised because the belly should not have any bones.
If I thought they were bones from a dead child.
I sought the wound and handled bones as long as the woman was in better condition; And I tended to the woman for a long while like this, and there was just a little blood coming from her.
and I remember this chapter being useful only for those times when masters find an unfamiliar thing and need to know how to provide aid.
To return the arm to its place
Following is the form of the presser, which the books refer to; and in two turns for each shoulder at four joints. Always, let the horns be more subtle than the restrainer, and make them of ebony or boxwood;
and let the mouth of the pipe be one hand in width, and the rim of the trees half a palm long; And when both these ligaments are two adjustments of the same wood which should be firm in one and the other, half a palm long or slightly more.
And these two adjustments are fixed in the mouth of the artery to open when one turns the two horns.
Another form, similar yet more subtle and lighter, can be made of wood like ebony or boxwood, according to the shape of forceps; and have two heads with two adjustments each, as you see, one palm long, and two fingers wide;
And when you see the wound open to its entirety with all the instrument, then make the woman lie down on one bed, her hands hanging and her legs spread apart, then join the two joints together in the wound, and hold the head of the instrument under her armpits; work your hand with all the instrument, just like you would with pincers equally, according to how much you see opening in the wound of the animal, until the bone performs what it wants.
All this instrument is well mounted and has multiple similar counterparts; and when you have them all set up, the work progresses more quickly, and they are higher for their size when compared to others.
If you do not breathe with the tool when you have equipped it, because your need is unacceptable.
When the second part is retained during childbirth, if it should be that you command the patient to hold her breath, and then make her sneeze through consideration, and force your hands against her mouth and nose; And if she jumps because of this, well done.
If this does not work, take one spoonful, and make another spoon or cover, and place herbs that can open the woman's mouth, such as chamomile, rue, fennel, matricaria, bitter almond leaf, and hyssop;
All these herbs, or any of them, be cooked or boiled in water on the fire; then take a cane or the other end of the pot, and the other head into the mouth of the patient.
and hold it until the vapors come from within the patient; then make them inhale, as we have said. If you jump to the next one quickly. And if it remains after this treatment and is not better, then command her to moisten her left hand with oil of sesame or musk paste, and then apply the bottle to the body.
And she seeks the second one; and when she finds it, if you grasp her gently and extend her gradually straight, so that no hindrance is present during extraction; but she must be moved lightly to the right and to the left, and then pull; if it will come and become loose.
And if there is a constriction in the throat of the patient, as we have said, treatment for coughing and herb fumigation will be necessary.
and if she doesn't respond to all of what we've said, remember not to force the treatment;
but it is necessary that the one at the entrance of the vagina ties him to the belly of the woman, then anoints her with tetrapharmaceutical ointment;
if the urine flows and returns, it will come out forcefully; but if she does produce urine improperly, there is a bad smell coming from stomach and head, and harms the patient.
Therefore, the use of suitable fumigations is necessary: none of the old ones have proven the efficacy of fumigation with sowthorn and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument used to fumigate a woman during retention of flowers and secondine is as follows:
And it resembles the appearance of a stick, and you place the delicate head into the fire, and the joints widely at the flame.
And let there be fumigation over the coals, and the application until it is emptied out, then start another one.
of piercing the foundation
And in infants who are born without having their foundation pierced, rather it is weakened by a subtle sickness: Therefore, when it comes to the operation, she should puncture where it is necessary for her duty, and do not puncture midway in her anger, but guard the incision so that it does not touch.
Then apply a wet paste of wine and oil, then do the balm treatment until there is no blood.
And if you doubt it won't re-attach, then apply a piece of treacle, and let the area heal for days, and remove it when the child starts walking in the chambers.
And always remember the sudden healing of wounds or abscesses; if it is necessary to treat this suddenly, then do as we have instructed with treacle.
From the fistula from its base Fistulas originating from the base are congealed and grow larger than those coming out of the bottom inward, or in the space between the two parts,
If there is one fistula or multiple; and when that congealed mass is old, it works, and eventually brings out moisture in white or fine grains,
And these fistulas are internal; and they are known by the person experiencing an expulsion or windiness when the patient expels, and sometimes a sensation in one direction.
And if the fistulas penetrate up to the bladder, and halfway down the penis; and reach up to the knee joint, and up to the root of the scrotum.
And thus one knows that the fistula penetrates to the bottom completely, and not at all. And it is such that you pinch your index finger or base, and insert a fine needle or spider's leg or iron into the fistula when there is no twisting.
And if it has twists and turns, then you should insert a fine tentacle or one of a horse's hairs, as long as you feel the tentacle or hair on your index finger;
And if you do not feel it, and there is no discharge of pus or wind, as we have said: You know that the wound does not open up; so hurry to treat.
And when the fistula is nearly to the bladder or nearly conducted by urine, if the urine jumps out of it and cannot be united with medicine.
If it is pierced up to the junction of the thigh, then the veins coming up reach up to the knee; If there is no tortuosity and the origin of the pain is internal, then it means that it occurs internally, and does not benefit from medicine or a simple application.
And for these Persian fistulas, there is no cure other than effort and the vanity of those who interfere.
In cases that are neither Persian nor old, there is hope for healing through iron, as I have experienced.
And it happens that the sick lies between your hands on his back; and lift his legs up to his hips, and keep his hips inclined towards his abdomen. Then use an araneus pot, or a spider's web if there are twists, until you know where the tent comes from.
If the patient feels it through their foundation, then it is necessary for you to press your index finger onto it.
Then you will sense that the tent has pierced it; and if you feel between your index finger the yolk or the heart, then you know it is vertical. If there's no confusion about which one it is, then you can't determine its nature.
One can indeed properly heal most things, but this happens rarely.
and the help that one provides, if it involves heating the delicate cautery according to the width of the fistula, as was explained previously; and hold the flame inside the fistula until it escapes from the base; and do this twice or three times, as long as you can tell that these burnt particles resemble a bird's feather;
and then cleanse with wet cloths smeared in grease, until those burnt particles come out, then apply the ointment to bind and seal it.
If he is healthy like this, it's good. If this, then otherwise cannot be healed;
And if it is tested inside and doesn't pierce up to the root which is the foundation, and between your thumb and the tent you find a thick covering of flesh or fat, and when you see the fistula at that spot where there's no covering under the skin; If it covers from the beginning of the fistula and sticks right before the tent, then apply the cautery after that, until it reaches to the tip of the tent.
And the tent will be freed and fall out; then remove those fat lumps that resemble a bird's feather, leaving none behind.
And if it doesn't affect you, and there is a cut between you and the wound, then apply either a fire cautery or a medicated ointment.
For fire cauterizations consist of two main things: these include the brandishing of these heated rods, and bleeding the wound and drying out moisture;
Then perform the treatment on wet cloths that have been dipped in grease or ground substances, as long as the limbs are bleeding, and let the heated rods burn inside them;
Then treat the wound with tourniquets made of thick leather, and apply dry medicines.
For when it is restored, if it heals and does not return again.
And if a fistula comes just up to the edge of the foundation, and is removed from the body, then cut at its base or foundation, and inquire about it.
And if you feel the tent, and there is two of it or something similar, or it is about to pierce, but only has a way of faltering and hope left, through the administration of one of the three ways:
or you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut until the bottom, or if you can use two tents and treatment in the first manner;
And do not go too far inward, that you might damage the structure holding the foundation, and allow the discharges to come through freely of their own accord; then apply the cure, as we have said;
then apply the cure, as we have said; By chance if it is clean, or you remove that covering and cleanse it then where it was removed from the foundation, either by trial or with another tool directed towards it; then cleanse that flesh which is in the wound as much as you can;
Then study to restore the wound, and to prolong the fistula in the lower part of the foundation: if it is lighter matter for the patient.
And always make the tubercles in this manner: and when you press into the fistula and it is on or near the foundation beneath the skin above, take a tent peg through the head according to this form: And I pierce two threads intertwined together, and push the tent peg along the entire length of the thread in the fistula until it reaches the head.
If it's purely within the margin beneath the foundation inside, then extract the thread from that torn one, just as you bend your finger or foundation.
and pull the head of the thread, and unite the two heads together, then hold one to the other, and let it rest for one or two days;
and hold it in place each time until the threads have grown into those grooves that are between the two sides, and stick together.
then treat the wound until it is healed and clean.
If there is a fistula that does not pierce, make it pierce through all the ways you can, as long as it's not too deep.
For there should be no need to make the insertion too deep beyond what is necessary, and then treat it, as we have said, until it heals properly.
The shape of the spinous spur from which the fistula is made is firm and small, and cutting into it; And on another side, because there's no need to cut what shouldn't be cutted, as you see here:
Bleeding injuries can occur in two ways: either they are within the body's foundation, like a bit of resin, and there may be small or large ones, causing blood to flow out. Or if they are one or more, and extend beyond the body's foundation and to its head at that foundation; but those that extend so far have little moisture,
Or they are accompanied by a bit of yellow water or a bit of blood, and have the color of purple;
And the treatment for those who have them within the foundation, so you instruct the patient to let them grow until they reach chambers, as long as the foundations pass through them, and their filaments are visible. if you hurry, or you hold it with pincers, or you keep it by your nail, then remove it from its roots.
and if the thorn cannot be held by its moisture alone, take it with two fingers, or with cotton, or from a piece of leather. and pull them out with your fingers, then remove them, and apply some warm powders that are used in cauterization. When you cauterize them as it is said or as per the chapter on cauterization, then treat with other treatments until they are clean.
And if the roots cannot come out, then cauterize the bladder cutting and grinding to wash what is or the roots, so that it may come out freely;
If the bladder doesn't swell and if the threads are strong at the root, then the treatment is gentle; And you should take them with your nail or tweezers and pull them out, then treat them as we have said, until they are clean, and when there's fear of cutting by iron.
If it is necessary that you stitch according to this method: take half a twist of thread and attach it to a needle, then guide the thread from above and pierce the needle from another side, and loop the two pieces of thread around the needle. and if you want it wider; and tighten the thread neatly, then tie the thread in a knot, and remove the needle, and do this for all of them, and leave one to drain off excess blood;
then place on the wound one moist cloth in oil rose or plaster, and place it on the wound, and instruct the patient to rest;
And let it grow as long as it is scarce, and when they settle, if you treat with oil and other remedies, until it heals.
do drying through sweat or foundation Many times, there is a drying in the intestines and due to the nature's compulsion, and when the disease is old and medication does not help.
It is necessary that you clean up to the tip of a thorn or around your nail with the outer skin, which should not be left wet; Then the cure until it becomes firm as it should;
and if it cannot become firm, then restart the shaving with more force than before, until some heal, and be burned; Then continue the cure until it heals.
with shaking Antennae are a small false appearance on the body, and they go forward;
And whenever it touches skin, one feels a sensation like death due to tremors, and it spreads throughout the body, and more in the hands than elsewhere.
And the treatment involves taking a stick made of goose feather or a strong vulture's feather, and placing this stick on the tremors until the purple circle stops all the tremors; Then twist your hand over the entire stick until you cover all around the tremors and place it forward, thereby eradicating the tremors from their roots.
And if you see it, do this to a spider's hair or iron according to this form, and let them be slender underneath and piercing above:
Don't pierce it, for you will hold onto both ends and squeeze it firmly. And if you see the twitching (of the wound), so like it is in front or chapter of the cautery.
in the shape of a bladder Never make a bladder of silver or tin, or melted spider; and never make these small and large instruments according to their intended uses.
Those then are treated in the care of children and those who are weak and painful, being small.
The form of the bladder is small on top and large below, or the belly is arranged in this way:
and there is an opening where the belly might be squeezed, as you see, and the head might penetrate; and there are two small projections on one side, and one on the other.
and have the belly or place where we put medicine in a beast's bladder or parchment, and it should be pierced all through with small projections,
And place between each piece one and a half inches of space, then insert in these pieces one thick thread made from woven linen for ten or fifteen times, and stitch the belly as if it were a goat. And when the medicine is inside, tie it to the tool with a strong thread first, then seal; and this forms like a circle:
And let the medicine neither be too hot nor too cold, and smear the opening of the curet with oil or yolk of egg butter, or something similar, then insert it gently;
Then, with the doctor's two hands joined together, pull until you can see everything clearly, then remove the curet, and lift the patient's legs up to their chest.
And if the medicine is to come out, it should be pushed as much as possible; and if he sleeps all night, that brings more aid.
And if you have diarrhea due to a bowel obstruction disease, and the medicine hastens to come out, then repeat it until it is healed.
And if there are hemorrhoids or a fistula, or an abscess, then use a catheter as thin as a child's finger;
and it is the form of a thin catheter on which the skin is constrained:
from injuries
We have discussed the treatment of wounds in the previous section; now we will discuss hand care and medicine according to their completion.
I state that wounds are various depending on how they were caused, and where they were inflicted, as well as the reason for their occurrence.
The causes of wounds include impact from a stone, the strike of a sword or dagger, or by a spear, staff or cudgel, or similar things.
The instructions are made according to the body's joints, for instance a wound that occurs on the neck, or head, or breast, or belly, or liver, and similar body parts.
And I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and begin with head wounds since memory will come to his chapter.
I say that when a single wound comes or to the head, and if no bone is broken, be careful whether it's due to stone or similar things, and if the skin has been torn completely and the wound is large, and you slightly doubt about an abscess there: if it heals quickly after a scalp surgeon, even if there is little blood from the wound, and it gets healed in contrast to the necrotic part;
And the organs fill with wine and large meats.
And if it does not wish to improve, then reduce its meat intake, and do not drink wine, nor eat any flesh.
And in the wound, if pus is present and comes out, use damp cotton soaked in rose oil or only in vinegar;
And if there is no pus present and the wound is fresh with all its blood, and it's not being disturbed by the air, then apply powder, which I will describe a bit later;
And if the wound has healed, then apply certain ointments, until it is sound.
And if the wound is large, like that of a tailor's cut and such, and the edges cannot be brought together with stitches, then join them by suture, as I would say about wounds in the belly, through suturing.
If the wound exposes bone and muscle, and only holds together slightly when held in place, if it is closed. Then treat the wound with medicine, and replace hard flesh instead of skin. And instruct the patient to consume large meats, such as brains and cooked wheat, as well as chickens, and similar items.
And if you find or leather corruption, and it does not reach to the bone, then cut out the whole corruption, and pour in some water, then clean it;
And if it have been an artery in the wound or vein, which cannot be stopped by medicine, then cut out the artery, and if you find that it is dislocated, tie it with a thread; And if this does not benefit at all, then apply cautery.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and you should put this powder on which bonds together like when the heat of it has spread.
And here is how the powder is made: take some incense; dragon's blood .ii parts; powdered basil .iii parts, and finely ground it. And apply the powder to the wound, then press it firmly until the wound is well aerated and joins with all its blood.
And then cover it properly, leaving it to heal without any swelling; for the medicine is not removed until she is healed.
And this is done only once with charcoal alone, when one does not have the incense or the blood of a dragon, but that the surgeon has cleansed the wound.
And if the surgeon has cleansed the wound, even afterwards, one does not apply this powder at all;
but instead applies some preparations as ointments, or oats flour made with water and honey, until it starts to heal; then continues other treatments until it heals completely.
And if there is bone breakage with the wound, and it's small, then use fine needles to mend it.
and I will tell you about fractures of the head later.
from the wound on the neck
This wound comes from the neck and it is simple, if there is no difference between this and that on the head, but if the vein or artery in the neck is cut.
If it's the nose, if there is no other instrument than to let the cure alone, and not to put any restraining thing, because it harms the nose and makes it recede; And do not place anything cold on the wound, for the substance of noses is cold, and its extension to the head goes with the brain, which is the highest part of the body;
but let it be warm medicine instead, such as charcoal washed in soft water and mixed with rose oil, and also wash the lettuce in the same soft water, And other stones of the mine according to this manner, and moist ointments.
And if the wound is large, so that it needs to be bound tightly, then treat until it is clean.
And if the wounds are deep and full of pus, then pierce them or even deeper;
And if the artery is cut and bleeding ensues, then open it and stop the bleeding; if necessary, perform cauterization as well;
And if it's cut from the throat or the knees, or if the guide is kept, by which the flesh goes, if you stitch the knee above the string of the throat, and do not touch the throat but set it according to its natural shape; and then stitch the addition, and leave it for a few days, then treat with withering ointments until it heals properly;
and if the wound has formed in the bone, you should treat it; And if there are bone fragments, remove them thoroughly if you can, and leave those that you cannot retrieve until the wound heals. And evacuate it and strengthen its exit.
And if the wound is fresh, use the powder I've mentioned on it. And if there's bone in the wound and there's a sinus, treat it as I have said in this chapter.
from the wound of a spear or a knife
If it is a wound from a spear or a knife, and the wound goes deep inside, then look at the condition of the wound to determine if there's any wind escaping: knowing this means that the wound is mortal;
And if it is not deep and its blood flows fully fresh, should one not apply the powder or bind it up in the first hour after, because the blood would not stop flowing from inside. and warm him to the heart, and rest the patient; but I apply an attractive ointment, and fasten it twice a day;
and if you do not have an ointment, place old cotton in the wound to absorb moisture.
have the patient rest on the wound for three days, or four, or longer; if no spasms, lack of heartbeat rhythm, or singular movements occur. And when you see good conditions, know that the wound has been saved. Therefore treat it with various remedies and other treatments, until they are healed;
and if it cannot heal and fester, then know that there is a fistula; treat it as one should.
And if the wound is from an incision made by a sword or knife, and it is simple or worse, or on the back, treat it as the one in front would.
If it's large, stitch it up; and if it's small, powder it; and if it's compressed in the bone, and has cut into fragments, clean the wound and remove any foreign bodies if they are present. And if they aren't removed, let the wound heal by itself, ease out the extrusions;
And for other wounds on other limbs, judge them as we have said.
Regarding the protrusion of the belly
The belly's protrusions are large, medium-sized, and small;
From a major wound, it might cut the intestine, or its nerves, by which the organ invades;
And the suture is more complicated, and nothing beats a smaller wound compared to a larger one,
Because in this case, we don't put the intestines back into place as easily, unless they are returned gradually; Because when the intestines swell up just as they feel cold, they go back inside further.
And because of this, one must drain the infected wound, for if we move the intestines back to their place that the others do, it is good.
Know that the rupture of the belly occurs in four ways:
The two common incisions occur at the abdominal seam,
And the suturing of other wounds from the body, along with two other types of wound-specific suturings, are common for other wounds;
And nonetheless, they are more precise when done on the abdomen, and I will describe each one and clarify them.
I say that if the wound is small and there's nothing of the intestine exposed, And when dealing with such injuries, this can be managed in one of two ways: because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen due to cold.
And when he is cold, warm him up in this manner: dampen a sponge or use one third of a cloth dipped only in water, When you cook with boiling water that splashes and contains myrrh and thorns, And let the intestine expand as long as the inner lining is perforated;
And do not make this wine stop steaming, and when it becomes mature to relieve swelling.
And when you see the swelling depart, moisten the intestine with water that is hot or has been boiled and seasoned. For with this there is very little room for error;
and if it cannot enter, they make a slight incision with the tool used to remove the maggots;
And the first treatment is to dry out the wound, that we should not cut it without great necessity, nor allow it;
And this is the instrument to split it:
if you cut through the curve inwardly but not outwardly, and see this shape:
And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines jump out, if you put it back according to its natural form within its proper place, then do so if you can, for this helps with movement.
When the wound is wide and it's on the belly area, if necessary, make the patient lie on their back. and raise his legs higher than his head; and if it's located on the abdominal area,
and also if there is a rupture in the belly located in one of the two parts. If you understand this, let the part that is removed be higher than the other;
And thus it should administer what I say in large and medium wounds.
Small wounds require this which is adapted to you,
Then have in your hands a minister of plasters that heals the whole wound with his hand, And gather the lips; and this is the common way of stitches,
and this is the common way of stitches, and you should take one or more needles according to the width of the wound's quantity, then leave at the start of the wound one inch in space, and I insert one needle with one good strong thread; And pierces both shoulder bones through the skin with both ends of the siphon wire,
then tighten a double thread around one needle for two parts, then gather together both ends of the injury appendage,
and then leave one finger's width space, and insert another needle; then weave the thread in the same way you did with the first needle, and continue doing this according to how you are skilled with needles, until all the wound is contained;
and are of needles that range from fine to thick, because the thin needles cut all the flesh well, and the too thick ones do not enter properly: thus they should be of medium thickness;
And it is not proper to leave the needles too deep within the flesh and the skin.
And they do not cut and spread the wound before the healing;
and then remove the heads of the needles, so they do not irritate the patient at night; and I place tents or cloths over the heads of the needles to keep them in place; And let them grow until the wound has healed;
and this kind of suture with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because it requires only one needle or two.
The second type of stitching is common, And it is that you assemble the two pieces of skin and the two ends of the flesh together onto one needle where there is a strong thread in the middle; And when you have pierced all these pieces four times,
And when you have pierced all these pieces four times, then remove the needle from where you began, in the manner one sews with threads;
and place a space between each stitch the size of one-third of a coin;
this stitch tightens the skin,
and I sew a wound that had opened in someone's belly,
who was cut by a knife, and the wound was larger than a palm in width, and if they are of good length, two palms in fact,
and it was located in the middle of the belly. I returned the intestine to its place, and by that time, it had been twenty-four hours since it happened.
and the wound healed up until fifteen days, and I treated it, and it became healthy.
And when the patient was thought to die, it became a wonder;
and did not cure it with ointment, for I was in one place where none could be found, nor any remedies; and changed the old cloth on the wound twice a day, and washed it in honey water until it healed.
I will tell you the two proper methods of stitching:
Take the needle, and start the thread from the outer part up to inside here;
when it has pierced straight through to the bone, if it's at the siphon or costal area where you have inserted the needle,
and make it pierce from the inner part outwards to that external point;
and for this seam, do as the marten does with furs, by sewing it in such a way; And you must allow once the stitch on one side, and take it from another, until the suture is entirely completed.
The second method of sewing, as Galen correctly states,
If it is like what everyone does, who join the two parts naturally together, And they press one end of the thread to the other end, in this manner:
Stab with a needle or pierce near Mirach's heart, and make sure to only pierce the left side. and leave the two shoulders free at the neck; then turn the needle and pierce it from below up to this depth inside. as the two shoulders at the neck;
Then pierce both from below at the outer part up to that inside, in two other shoulder joints which are opposite each other;
and this is the way it is sewn and the most common method.
Galien says this word, and no one affirms it,
One should stitch the belly with two needles, or where there is thread in each;
And it requires one to push a needle out from one side, and the other from the other side, in the manner of those who sew wounds.
Know that when the rupture is within the belly, The stitches are more dangerous than those of other wounds in the belly.
The judgment of the wound is as follows, just like the judgments of other wounds:
And know that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, as soon as the art has spread it, if it is inside the intestine, and the cut; then put on the powder that makes it inflame,
if it is inside the intestine, and the cut; then put on the powder that makes it inflame, and if the art has spread it, apply no ointment until the wound heals over; And stretch out the thread, and stitch up the skin, and bind with a bandage; then treat the wound as usual until it is clean;
and if you don't have medicine, apply old cotton, as soon as it starts to ooze pus. and stir it twice a day until it is healed.
For you need no other medicine besides when there are simple wounds;
and if you doubt that the wound will cause infection in major body parts, then it is fitting for you to soak a light wool cloth in lukewarm oil, or in rose oil, and place it inside the armpits, and under the arse;
And if there is pain or rotting in the belly, and many times it happens. If black wine enemas are given, and similarly when such rot comes up to the intestine;
And if it penetrates deeply inside, know that when it's regarding the large intestine, it is easier to cure than the smaller ones.
The intestine called "juvenile" cannot be cured once it is injured, And it is due to the presence of veins that are present, and through the subtlety of all the body, and the approach of its nature to the nerves.
And if the pus jumps out of the wound, then put it back behind in the same way as the intestines, while it is still fresh;
and if it has become old and turned red or black, then you should tie the part that is black, so that no bleeding comes thereafter, because there are veins and arteries;
Then take the one between the ligament, and place both shoulders up to just beyond the wound area until they facilitate extraction when the ribs are pulled out, and when the wound is made.
from the rupture of the bladder
When the intestines are intact, and the wound is small, if it can be restored in any houses,
for I see that some nobles were pierced or wounded by a spear;
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became inflamed and turned into a fistula, causing discharge and wind issues;
I applied a cure according to what I knew, and didn't stop refining it until it was effective, and the patient was healed.
And when I saw it healing, I wondered if the patient might have pain in their abdomen; There was no harm, but it improved and ate and drank.
And they would tell any experimenter that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be treated in this manner: Take large thistles, then join the edges of the wound, And when the thistle has opened its mouth, place it between the two edges,
Then after that shaking comes another one in this way as before, until the wound is fully taken care of;
and till the wound. Those who are so hard in the intestine, and do not cause any harm to the patient,
And one can tie the intestine with a thin thread cut from the intestine of an animal,
in this manner: Take the head of this thread of intestine that should be much shriveled, and then tie to the head of this thread with a thin linen thread. Then thread the thread onto the needle, stitch the intestine, and set it during surgery;
And this method of stitching wounds is done solely according to the path of faith and hope;
And if the wound is large and broad, especially when it's in one of the intestines, if there is no obstruction or healing, ensure that it's due to the subtlety.
from a fistula, or if it is Know that every wound or abscess, as it matures, is universally called "fistula", And similarly when it is sealed and begins to heal.
Fistula refers to a condition where there's a firm, hard, white swelling around the wound that doesn't cause pain, And it also grows like feathers from a bird;
And no single time in a clear jump, and another time thick; Neither time faintly, and another time sufficiently;
and I have spoken about the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healed, and there is no flesh, this is only due to one of the eight causes:
This means: or because of its wickedness; or because there is hard flesh inside and on the lips that prevents new growth. or because there is too much blood; The ears are inflamed, and the substance is of poor quality; the treatment lacks good medicine; or because the corruption takes on a manner of pestilence; or due to the property in the region being late for digestion, and delayed healing, and escaping naturally. where there are veins or bones:
and I have shown all these causes, and the signs, and the remedies with medicines in this section.
So it is necessary for me to inform you about the treatment of fistulas which is performed through manual work.
Know that fistulas can occur in all limbs and their joints; for there are fistulas that come from large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or at the stomach, or in the intestines, or in the bladder, or in any of the ribs, or in the spine of the back, or in any joint of the hands or feet;
And all sores of this manner are difficult to heal, there being no exception but labor and lack of knowledge;
and if there is no sore that reaches the one I have mentioned, and you are engaged in its treatment, and you should know how to do it; take an arachnid tent or a iron tent, if the sore is straight, then use it.
and if the sore is twisted, search for a delicate plunger's tent, for when they bend they move in the complexity;
and if they make a hole at the ends and you can't find it well by trial, if you try to use a syringe through one of them,
for moisture can flow from one end to another and cleanses the area;
Then carefully use your skill, to know if there is bone or nerve, and whether it has hair present,
and ask carefully from the patient about the pain they feel when pressed by your hand, and locate where it is felt;
and once you truly know the location of her (indicating a patient's discomfort or pain), and if it is far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery or vein, or in any of the locations I've mentioned, check according to what I have told you,
or in any of the locations I've mentioned, check according to what I have told you, And the bone has need of the surgeon's hand and the chemicals that are within; and then the treatment until it is healed,
and if the fistula has been well excavated in a straight line, you should fill it up completely as far as you can reach, then I will wet bandages with a quenching medicine and place them until they cover the entire length of the fistula.
then I will wet bandages with a quenching medicine and place them until they cover the entire length of the fistula. As long as the medicine dissolves what has remained deep inside;
And then I place healing ointments that nourish new flesh, until it heals properly;
And if it doesn't heal with this method, then I will cauterize it as we have said,
And if the bone is rotten due to pus, then I will treat it accordingly. If a vein or nerves are injured or members are affected significantly,
And if the bone is exposed, and there's decay and darkness, then you should operate until all decay has been removed. then cleanse everything that can be cleaned until it becomes healthy;
and if it doesn't become healthy, then continue treating as before. You are to let the hairs grow until they are long and uniform; and if they pierce at their base, hold them steady so they do not move until they fully grow.
if you uncover and want until you reach the bottom, and remove all the decay, then put back into place;
And if it stays thus healthy, it's indeed well. But if not, know that corruption is too deep, that you cannot reverse it; if there is no other way except leaving to nature;
and if there's even a small rotten bone, and you can pull it with tongs, if you extract with an instrument suitable for this,
and if there are many bones, if you remove them all, do not leave any;
and should moisture oppose this and there is no doubt or fear, if you combine heat, moisture, and flesh, and release the bones.
And if you cannot remove them within an hour, place something on the wound that prevents gangrene, and leave it until the flesh around the bones rots away.
then they will have the bones more lightly afterwards;
and if it's a large bone, such as in the thigh or leg, if you merely remove the corruption as long as the blackness is entirely removed, then heal the wound;
and if there's a large part of corruption, and it reaches up to the bone; if it is necessary to clean and cover up until the corruption ends, and then treat until it has healed;
And I will tell you of a case of an abscess that occurred in one's leg. so that you may take it as an example and gain aid in your work.
It was a young person of around thirty years old who experienced pain in their leg due to an internal source within the body.
The materials moved towards the leg and resulted in a large abscess formation; there was no apparent external cause for this opening.
But due to their lack of understanding, they would open up as much as needed for abscesses to drain. and they chewed away some materials, and formed a fistula, and much harm ensued that caused great pain and moisture from the body.
And many surgeons took care of it for two years, and there was no wise man in the art of surgery.
until I came to be called, and saw his leg and the remedies with which he was being treated, And that which moves through the narrow passages with great force; And it would turn red on their cheeks of youth, and had a golden hue.
I dug a tent in one of these passages, and then sought all the passages,
and found that some came against each other from all parts of the leg.
I hurriedly did so, and dug in one of the cavities until I discovered a part of the bone, and found it putrid and perforated, and the corruption had reached to the inside of the bone;
I was the one appearing to me from the putrid bone, and I thought there was no other corruption, only that which I removed;
and began to heal the wound with medicine over a long period, but could not stitch it together;
And then continued, uncovering the bone just as before,
I found the continuous corruption in the bone, and I cleaned it out, then removed it, and bent to solder back together the place;
but I could not do that until I copied inside half the thickness of the bone, and then I set it to its full extent, Then I treated it with medicines; and it was healed and united quickly.
And could no longer resume the work except for due to the weakness of the patient, who cannot endure, and out of fear of death that I have for him. For the evacuation of blood often occurred, but it was completely cured,
For the evacuation of blood often occurred, but it was completely cured, and a hard flesh formed inside the bone, and it was well arranged and had no harm or opposite effect at all in every way, neither inside nor outside.
and let the head, so that you can pull the rotten flesh away. and expose the flesh on the bone where you see skin, making sure not to hurt the flesh; and place a piece of charcoal or a board over the bone so as to cover the rotten flesh; And always strive as much as you can see and feel the decay, and strive again.
And if the bone is decayed and does not open, and decay exists inside or in a part of it, then reveal all the flesh; then place one coal over it,
and then continue to apply heat from one part to another of the decay, and keep the iron hot for as long as the decay lasts, just like we have explained;
And if the corruption is within the joint, if it cuts the corrupted joint, and whether there is bone on either side;
And if the corruption is in the continuity of those two joints, if there's no other angle to cut through it;
And if the corruption is at the base of the hand or near the ankle, if that thing is very strong, But nonetheless, you must inquire about that corrosion, how it opened to you; And cleanse it in all ways that you can, but that the vein or the nerve do not oppose this.
And know that the saw and the needles for coping these bones are many, according to the setting of the bones and the shape of the bones, and their size and their fineness, and their largeness and their smallness, and their hardness; and for this, it must be equipped with each form of work its tool;
And know that this work will show you the instrument you shall need, according to knowledge of this art. and it will testify about the ways diseases happen; so consider the tool you need according to what is appropriate.
by fire The head moves either by cause within, or by cause without;
And when you have treated that corrosion with the remedy of medicines, and if they do not benefit at all, Then it is necessary to cut off that limb up to its joint where the corrosion occurs, so that the disease escapes through this way of death, or through the evil, which is greater, of the fault of the limb;
so that the disease escapes through this way of death, or through the evil, which is greater, of the fault of the limb; And the signs are such that the limb turns black, as if it has been burned by fire, and after the darkness, then comes this member-corrosion to and from the limb, and spreads throughout the body; if you hurry with copper treatment,
And if it's due to the impact of some venomous beasts, such as sea spiders and vipers and alike,
If the corrosion is at the neck up to the second joint, if you cut it, and do not give it space to come up to the hand.
And if it comes up to the hand, if you cut at the joint, so that the corrosion does not extend up to the arm;
And if it extends to the arm, when you cut it; and if it goes beyond the cut, that is where death occurs, and there's no cure other than its potency amount.
And so you do this whenever corrosion appears or a piece of metal does: if it appears in the first joint, then you take out after another joint;
and if it appears on a piece or metal, if you remove all the metal; and if it rises to the leg, you remove it at the knee joint;
and if it comes from above the knee, there is no other way than to let the patient die.
And the method of covering or sewing the limb is such that you tie it above and below, extend one surgeon's hand along this ligament from below, and another surgeon his hand for the other ligament upwards, and you expose the flesh that is between the two threads up to a depth of one finger wide, until the bone becomes visible;
then sew or suture it, and place a piece of linen on each side, so that the stitch does not touch the healthy limb, And brings another injury and abscess to the patient.
And when blood loss occurs during surgery, if you quickly cauterize the wound, or you put some止血 powders on; then return to your medicine until its completion,
then bind the unaffected limb with a reliable bandage, and treat it until it heals;
And I will tell you about what happened at one house on a certain day:
He had a blackness that seemed like an assured fire,
And this corruption came first to his foot of the right leg, until it encompassed all the leg;
When the patient saw the corruption, he sought to cover the leg, and was made well;
And long after this, there came back the burning or soreness of the hand, and it came to me,
and I placed things that would resonate after the cleansing of the body, and could not stop the burnings;
yet he insisted that I touch his hand, and I refused, hoping to reflect the substance afterwards; I also feared that if I cut off his hand, he would die. For the strength of the ox was weak; and it completely lost hope, and returned to its land, and it would cover its hand up, and became calm;
and I have only included this for those who need to do something else with it.
No abscess occurs in the inner flesh, and stays so long as to cause a large gathering of pus; And then pierce and drill, and in this way does the bone, and remains the patient's vision, just like some vessels. And the skin above is as fine as a single piece of cloth. And does not extend up to the bone or nerve, and such diseases are called "simple" in this manner.
But if it is so long that it reaches up to the bone completely, this is called a "fistula".
And for cooking, if you have to peel the skin all over completely, and similarly when it's very thin, like a piece of cloth; and doesn't rot due to its corruption.
And if you have ensured that the skin burns and there is no corruption. And the skin is thick with flesh, if you perform lithotripsy like this:
Look if his breasts are large, and the belly that contains them has a stinking smell, Then perform lithotripsy using an Egyptian medicine as described here: Take anise, oil, and stibium, in equal parts, and cook them together in a pot on the fire for one hour, As long as the medicine is red, and thickened also like honey;
and then take of this according to your need, and make it with water and honey, and instill it into the womb, and keep it compressed; leave the medicine in for two hours, then remove by rubbing;
Perform this method repeatedly, until both breasts are freed and the milk is drawn out;
and in no instance is it treated with water from ashes; when this medication isn't available, and you need to use vine wood ashes, then pour water over them,
then drain it off, and administer an enema, until you know that the breasts are well emptied;
And if the patient cannot bear it, neither can the Egyptian medicine nor the ashes' water help. if he uses a enema of water and honey or has a bit of mercury to apply; or you use an enema made of honey and mixed wine, where the honey has properties to purify and cleanse, and the wine makes one feel well;
And when you have done this, and have ensured that the chest is well cleaned, if you prepare with what helps to bring forth the flesh in it,
and that you prepare plaster of quicklime, and make it with rosin oil and wine; or you prepare the suppository with various medicines and applications, about which I have described the properties or treated of the applications;
And if his breasts are small near the chest, and his nipples cannot enter the anus, If someone is large like a metal rod somewhat, and one places an Egyptian ointment tent on them, Or the basilikon balm, as long as it is made large;
And if the wound is too large, let it heal until only enough for a single orifice of the chest or anus can enter.
And if the broken part of your body is above where you want it to be, then lift or move it up higher than its current position. And when the bone is in place, do not let any excess flesh interfere; and if you cannot cover the chest area as you see fit, then arrange it in such a way that the bone is at the lowest point where it should be,
and if you cannot cover the breast properly as you see, so align in this manner: have the body move smoothly downwards, and do not leave any part of the body unattended; and take restorative medicines to place inside the chest,
And there are patches of one cloth of linen covering all the chest; then add padding to the area that overlaps slightly on the first quarter of the chest, where it is about an inch wider than the first. Then apply a layer of grease made from fat on another piece of linen according to the size of the overlap. And place it on the overlap on the chest to relieve the wound, but do not remove the large cloth except after several days once.
And the one who is near the tip of the breast bone, often breaks the rib to remove the lung, Know whether it comes from the lung, if it's poison or pus or enough, or digested, or undigested;
And take care if the patient feels pain or no, and whether there is an abscess or not,
And when your medicine has spread in this manner and you see the nature that jumps towards the tip of the breast bone, If you know that the breasts have grown already, come close with your care;
and then release it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you release the wound, if you change another dressing, and renew the ointment.
And if the breasts discharge undigested matter after several days, know that they have not grown yet. And if subtle veins are cut after a long time, do not lose hope for recovery of health,
yet health approaches. For there are people who delay the healing in their wounds, and for those who do the opposite;
and if one feels indigestion starting soon after several days inside the chest, know that the chest is not healing;
and if the lungs are slow to breathe and seem distant, then adjust medicines of dried substances in form and dry ones for their effectiveness, As with the transparent ointment, because there is a large part of vitriol, and this is the last medicine;
Take the transparent ointment, and mix it with rose oil, and rub in old wine that has an equal consistency;
Then cook it and use it; and do the same thing using cooked honey thickened with it. When there is no transparent ointment available,
You take myrrh and alemond, and incense, and grind them, and mix the powder with honey once it's burned; and then in glue one part of a cloth, and place it on the chest, and each time administer to an arbitrator for a long period; And the roots of celestial lilies, which is also like flour with cents and catmint;
And the roots of celestial lilies, which is also like flour with cents and catmint; And in using simple or compound remedies: grind them, make into powder, and put on the honey I have said, and use it; And if the treatment takes a long time, and is not treated by this cure,
And if the treatment takes a long time, and is not treated by this cure, So know that corruption spreads outward, and makes an impression in the bone, or on hard limbs, or at joints; If the treatment for the pus-wound, as we have said before.
From the incision of the nail.
Panarice is an abscess that forms under the nail of the hand pouch. or on the foot, or accidentally forms in other parts;
and when it has aged, and if no care is taken, so comes one shoe abscess,. and they run and spread until they reach the root of the nail, and by chance they might reach it completely;
And comes the corrosion up to the bone, until it causes painful stench, and the shoulder joints become wide, and the color becomes sallow.
When you treat it as we have instructed in the division, and the treatment does not benefit. It is necessary that you remove all the excess that has remained of the nail, Then cauterize the wound afterwards. The fire cautery is very effective if the bone is healthy, and the joint is healthy;
and if the joint presses on the flesh and begins to pierce it, and irritates; it is necessary that you place the heat under the joint so that it does not burn the flesh. and apply the flame at the top, and gently scrape off this delicate flesh. And place on the wound, for healing purposes, hot and corrosive medicines to remove everything;
And if the corrosion extends into the bone, then cut and remove it forcefully, for as long as the bone is rotten, it cannot heal.
And if you see that the joint has rotted, then cut and remove it in one piece as we have discussed before, Then treat him as long as he remains healthy;
and if he is fevered and has pus, and feels intense pain, it should be that you first heal him; then cut the nail near the source of infection across its surface,
and be careful that the cut does not go all the way to the flesh under the nail, for it would cause too much pain;
And if it happens, place something above which calms.
You must adjust what is born in the hands of some people by chance and are thick, and sometimes it has bone or lacks an angle,
And none are born at the root of the joint, or birth occurs in some places where we must not. Those that are born at no spot on the joint do not move, And those that are born at the joint of the bone, by chance might move;
The size of the one who is muscular becomes so light in this manner: Cut it down to its root with a broad spur.
Those that start at the root of the joint are issues to cure: if you hold onto copper, it is effective.
In those that start or should be at the back end, it's necessary to first cauterize until you reach the bone. Then cauterize the bone with a suitable copper rod, then treat it until it is clean.
The decisions that come together at the shoulder joint arise from birth, or due to injury, or through burning by fire, or through similar occurrences.
If it is necessary that you cope with this welding, so that it should repair according to its natural forms; Then place between two wet tents or cloths in oil, so they do not weld together. Or you should place between two pieces of fine lead, until the ends are welded, as it should be.
If we are to weld it with the palm side towards its edge, then perform this welding as would be fitting.
Of low quality
Vices are thick veins wrapped around the body filled with melancholic superfluities, that come from multiple members of the core;
And more occur in legs of those who walk and work and carry, than in others.
It follows that you must administer one purging of bile to him, and then heal him with basilica.
The iron treatment has two methods: one involves cutting the wound and letting out black blood; And the other method is that you open the vein and let it bleed completely.
The bathing ritual proceeds as follows: immerse the first leg in hot water very strongly until the large veins become fine. Then hold the leg against the ailment from above the knee up to the part under the knee; Then cut the vein at one, two, or three units, depending on its width,
Then raise and drain the black blood to your hand from one end to the other, until as much blood comes out as the healing virtues of the ailment can bear;
And then place it (the wound), and instruct that it be oiled with black-cooked meat juices.
And start evacuation and cleaning whenever the veins are filled up, and it harms the patient.
The method of treatment is as follows: raise the leg from the patient, if there's hair; Then immerse it in water, and raise the leg in hot water until it turns red, and the veins swell;
And if you don't have water, heat it on the fire, and then apply the heated area along the length of the leg from thigh to ankle, or in the part below at the ankle;
Then cut the skin with a razor, and scrape the vein from each side, until you see it when you touch it;
and you will see red and black, and when it enters the skin as well seems like a white thread;
then cut with a knife until it rises above the skin, and then cut into it with a razor lightly.
then make another incision one-third above three inches; then scrape the skin over the vein until you can see it. Then raise it on the rod as you did before, and proceed to another inch as you did at first.
Then take a different size or multiple if needed, then lift it and shape it on the thumb tip,
Then guide and lift until you reach the second size; then gradually increase in size as much as it can withstand strength, then shape it.
And if you cannot guide and lift it, insert a needle at the end with two thick threads, And you will find it and pull it out, and push it off at a distance of one arm's length, and turn your hand from side to side until something comes out; And make sure it doesn't get stuck, because if it gets stuck, one cannot pull or lift it, and it causes harm to the patient;
And when you have pulled it all out, place wet wool in wine and rose oil over the wound area; and treat it until it is clean.
And if the limb is twisted and bent together as one, and it isn't straight, just like we have said, If it is necessary for you to break it forcibly, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have said before.
If it is necessary for you to break it forcibly, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have said before. The shape of the iron with which you use the screw is bent, and does not cut, so as not to pierce the vein;
And it has a large curve, for if it were thin, it would pierce the vein, but make it thick as we have said, and this is its shape:
From the civil vein
This vein is found in legs, in warm areas where no herbs or trees grow, and in soil without moisture.
and may also arise elsewhere than on legs, and this happens due to the corruption that comes from below the skin,
likewise, if it originates within the body like snakes and worms, it manifests between the skin and flesh.
And if there are signs at the beginning of this vein's condition such as a severe inflammation in the leg, Then change his limbs, and soon enough blood begins to flow out, like a root from a plant.
When the shoulder is opened, it must be enveloped internally with a piece of plaster as long as half three and up to six inches, and then bind it,
let the plaster hang down on the leg and every time there is any shortage, cover it internally with plaster again and bind it. if it's too long, cut a part of it off and redo the plastering making sure not to cover its root until it's fully out. For if you handle it, it enters into the body, causing pus and decay or disease.
By that thing, it is necessary to treat it carefully and cautiously until recovery, and leave nothing behind or injuries;
And there should never be a time when this vein is treated for as long as five palms, or for ten; And I have experienced that when it is treated for ten palms, and when you handle it, if it lasts for one or more days after, and cuts it until the bottom,
If everything proceeds as planned; and let the substance inside be drained, and apply remedies that combat putrefaction daily, then treat it like abscesses thereafter.
And never use wet hands for this, and likewise when the leg opens at its joint with the foot, or the foot itself, And most of the injuries come from jumps and where they are wet; thus treat them as we have instructed before.
Worms that emerge between skin and flesh
This disease is called in our land "beef illness", because it often affects cattle,
and a small worm is born between hide and flesh, and it travels throughout the body going up and down, and it is felt all over the body member by member, until it reaches the skin where it was going, and leaps out;
And it is infested with corruption from certain fluids, if snakes and worms and roundworms or maggots are entering the belly;
And there is doubt about his disease, for when it travels through the body, and ascends to the head, and reaches the eye; By chance it enters, and destroys the eye; this happens often.
When you see him being treated and drained, one can only wonder that when it was:
Therefore, it is necessary for you to bind it above and below with a strong bandage tightly.
Then cut upwards and pull straight, and if it is properly inside the flesh, you won't find it. If you apply the hot cautery to it, until it heals;
And the most severe injuries that it causes, if they go into the eye, as we have said.
And if you see it coming or the head close to the eye, then restrain over him the eyelid, then lift upwards, and pull forcefully;
And it is necessary to use the application of purifying oils from medicinal waters for the maladies caused by internal imbalances,
and if there are complaints about meats causing putrefaction.
Of the pain that comes from wind. This illness is called in our land "vakirir", and it is a pain that comes to any limbs, and spreads from member to member; and I have seen what I told you.
I was summoned to attend a sick woman, and she uncovered her arms for me, and I saw a small swelling in the arm vein;
and just an hour later, it rose as if by a worm to my shoulder, Sooner than anything else, like quick silver when it is cut off from another;
The pain leaves that limb and penetrates into the shoulder,
And then a little later spread throughout the body, until it reached the other arm;
Then I saw that it was spreading internally within the body as well.
I was amazed at how she moved member by member in such a way, for I had never seen this illness done in this manner. In any case, I have wanted to establish many that well wanted to move the pain of their own to another's. but I did not want it like this, as I see in the woman;
and I thought that was because the woman had a soft body and her veins exposed, And because of this, a constraining wind appears;
and do not appear according to this reason among those who are delicate, and have damp bodies and responsive veins.
And when you see the cure of this illness, and if the patient feels pain, if it appears to you like we said, if it increases upwards and downwards quickly, and then treat with remedies until that constraining wind leaves the body. And apply a cautery to the wound; and if you cannot see it at your eyes,
if one treats the dislocations of winds, such as stinking pills, pills made from rattlesnake venom, and similar others.
From arrows
The arrows are various, according to their appearance and according to the nature of the animal they come from.
The variety of them is such that there are those with large tips, and small ones, some are hairy, and some are soldered; and there are those with two angles, and among them are those that have tongues, and of those where there are pieces; and the one that defecates in no member does so according to two ways: or in the primary member it is hairy,
just like the brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar organs. When she gives birth though, then not at any part of this body, and the sign of death, which I will tell you later, becomes apparent: It is necessary that you prepare for the extraction of this arrow, because death comes after in various stages; And when that bad sign does not appear and the arrow is not fully extracted, you should extract it and treat the wound.
The symptom of brain injury occurs when the arrow hits and pierces the bone, causing damage to the structure above the brain. When there is blindness and numbness and swelling in the eyes, as well as inflammation and redness of the tongue, or perhaps affects the nose or ears; and by chance it deprives one of speech and voice; there is a white moist discharge resembling pus from the wound, and in this also like burned flesh from meat;
and if you notice these signs, take care of the treatment, and pull out the arrow if it's there.
The sign of the arrow when it strikes or penetrates, is that it is near the left breast, and also feels as if it were stuck in something hard, not empty. And by chance the arrow also stops moving like the hair, and causes black blood to come out, and coldness, and cold sweat, and fainting. Therefore, with no doubt, know that the person is dying.
And the sign of the arrow that doesn't leave the body is that it bubbles up from the wound without much foam, and the throat swells, and the patient's face changes color, and they sigh loudly with their breath.
And if an arrow stops within the buttock's covering, it penetrates below the small ribs; and causes great pain and much agony, along with sighing; and all parts of the body from the shoulders move.
And if an arrow stops in or near the stomach, by chance it may spill any undigested meat from the wound.
And if an arrow stops in or near the belly, and it does not pass through the intestines on impact, there is no hope for treatment, nor in removing the arrow.
And if an arrow stops inside the bladder, and the urine flow is interrupted and spills out, causing great pain to the patient; know that this wound is fatal.
The other limbs, such as the arms and shoulders and neck and spine and ribs and hip and pelvis, and all similar limbs, are safe according to various positions. When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it's not poisonous, as I will tell you what happened to me, because you did something else.
It happened at two thirds of the distance that an arrow struck him in the armpit at the root of the nose: I tested it, and tried to extract it from there across the fat behind the ear, and was left without any serious injury.
And take an arrow to play with, let it fall into the oil grease underneath the paper over, And the arrow was returned, yet one could only touch its tip towards the shaft, And the arrow was large as a Turkish bow, weighing only one pound without feathers; the game was successful, and no ill events befell him.
And take an arrow from the throat to a Christian, and this is the Arab's arrow with feathers:
I shaved them, and trimmed as much as I could during my treatment, until they were healthy for Christian people.
And then extracted an arrow at one's body or stomach, and thought it was fatal;
and after it had passed thirty days, if it did not change its position; I cut into the arrow, I set it in motion, and pulled it out, without any bad incident.
And if you wish for one arrow that has fallen or stuck either at front or back, and found the wound healed up above;
and stays the arrow inside, without disturbing its natural positions, nor finds any harm in any of its natural works.
And for another person, who got an arrow wound in their face, and found the wound healed;
And he must endure such great pain; and there are no other similar phenomena.
And draw out an arrow at one stroke for the king's princes, where it was stuck in his side. and it was slightly leaning towards the right side; and the arrow was entirely out.
I was called for treatment after it had been stuck for three days. I found the wound extremely narrow.
I sought out all with a subtle test, and did not feel it at all; and there was pain and hurt throughout her right ear. I thought it was from the tip of the arrow.
I put on a healing plaster for the arm, because the arms did not swell; And appeared to me the head of the arrow.
And appeared to me the head of the arrow. I applied the plaster for days and resolved the wound immediately, then the patient suffered long thereafter,
Until he felt the arrow within his nose; and he told me this. I applied an aqua regia medicament to the wound for days until it was opened,
And I tried it, and felt the tip of the arrow which was penetrating towards its place. then I adjusted it by opening the wound with this arrow-wounding method, until the head of the arrow became visibly apparent;
and punctured deeply to the inner ends for four months,
then I stretched it so that the wound opened wide enough for me to insert my tongs, and I did this on both sides, but could not force them through.
Therefore, never stop refining and inventing ways to create tools, until I got possession of one day with very well made tongs, according to what its shape will be at the end of this chapter, until I try it, and will repair the wound.
And they judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: So I would repair it, and then the wound was sealed, and the patient recovered completely.
And I told you about the nature of extracting arrows, so that you apply your treatment to what I do not say, because books cannot encompass everything;
but the wise masters will agree on a small amount of good, and on what is current and lacking, find nine works, and the ninth tool, for the removal of things that occur in this art.
I say that arrows do not emerge from the limbs where they are embedded, rather than in two ways: or at the point where they enter the body, or from another direction;
And if it jumps when entering by itself or at the point of entry, that is the arrow entering the flesh, and it will jump not once but multiple times.
And if it doesn't jump now, let her go as long as the body is raw inside and well drained of its juices;
And also if it is embedded into the bone, and cannot be removed, if you leave it like this for several days, and remove it each day;
And then she jumps out, and if it doesn't jump out, if you pierce through all with a small bore (foret), as long as the bone inside is widened, and then treat it.
And if an arrow is placed back into its socket within the body where it cannot be seen, one should search thoroughly for it. And if you feel it, try to pull it with any suitable tool;
And if you cannot do so because of the tightness of the wound, or due to the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein, then widen it as much as making the wound large; and when you can pull out the arrow, if it has ears attached to which it is holding,
and when you can pull out the arrow, if it has ears attached to which it is holding, if the bone that is stuck in at two places, at the place where you can reach, and then break or bend the ears of the arrow as long as you can pull it out;
and then break or bend the ears of the arrow as long as you can pull it out; And make it subtle so that you do not break the arrow, but pull it more firmly.
And if you cannot remove it in one go, when the shaft is already deep into your arm, then proceed with its removal, because the extraction is painful. And if bleeding while you're working against it, apply what we have instructed in its treatment within this chapter;
and be cautious about the incision near nerves and veins, and do it in such a way that you can remove the arrow without risk.
whether hot or cold, firmly or gently; and place the patient according to the shape they were in when the arrow hit them, for it is the greatest help for you if you can, and if you cannot, place them according to what the signs show you.
The arrow that comes from another side, or if there is any sign of it, or if the skin is swollen in that place where we can see or feel it obviously:
Therefore cut upwards, as long as the forceps can take hold, and then pull: if it jumps now.
And if it is held in the bone, rotate your hand around, until it enters into the bone, and widen the bone, then pull it.
And if it cannot come out, let it still, and then start extracting again until it comes out forcefully;
and if there is an arrow in him, once he has it, push the shaft all the way out.
And if it's a vein and you see to administer pressure, do so with one of your instruments. if the tip of the arrow enters the hair of the tool; and then force it out,
and if the arrow is stuck, I force the tool with pointed end entering in order to facilitate extraction.
And if the arrow is bent, it is necessary that you take all the flesh around or where I am, if you can. then treat the wound as it should be done.
And if an arrow enters or wounds or is in the belly or bladder or ribs, and it's close by, then you should cover up, if you can cover.
And guard against covering the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then sew up the wound; this is a task for a skillful person. And treat the wound until it heals.
The shape of the forceps used for arrows resembles that of an eagle's beak, and here is its form:
And there are of many kinds: large, medium-sized, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
of the veins of the common body Of the veins through which one is purified are thirty-one, from which there are sixteen in number.
This means: Two small ones after the ears, which are called 'the two herbs'; And the two arteries in the two temples that can be seen; And two veins that are within two eyelashes, which are called "suckers"; And the vein that is within the forehead; and the vein that is on the head near the nose; and the two jugulars which are at or around the collarbone; and the two veins that are in the cheeks above the mouth, and these are the veins that are called 'bubbling'; And two veins that are under the tongue.
The veins which we commonly cure are five in each arm:
One is the cephalic vein, and it is under the left rib, and they call this vein "the arm vein"; and the middle one is called "fasting", and it is made up of the cephalic and basilica veins, And they call this group of people "the vein from the heart"; and the basilica is either on the right side or under the rib. And they refer to this as 'the vein of the belly', and it's located above the kidney. And that is the one which is treated, whose opening becomes apparent through the scrotum.
And the salve well is the vein that's between the index finger and the ring finger, and it has two parts;
And along the leg and at the foot are three veins: one is located in the bend of the pocket on the left side of the body, and the second one is at the ankle on the right side of the body; and the vein that is called "nasce", which is in the ankle on the other side.
And in the other leg are three veins next to these.
The health of the veins that are behind the ears helps with colds and headaches, and migraines; And the qualities of a healthy person, as I have told you, and that your head of the hair behaves well,
And the qualities of a healthy person, as I have told you, and that your head of the hair behaves well, And rub the area where the veins are with a coarse cloth; then pinch the neck of the wound with a needle, until you can see both veins behind the ears in each earlobe over the head: Search for this then on your chest, and where you feel the pulse under your chest, if sir it's in need;
Then take the scalpel, and make an incision down to the bone along the vein, then lift your hand all up to the vein upstream, Cut and remove the skin and the vein well two inches deep, and let out blood until you see it flowing;
Then tighten and hold, until it is healed;
And I have already spoken about incision and cautery, or in the first book.
The bleeding from the two arteries that are in the two temples, if it goes to ancient inflammation, and also, and habitual conjunctivitis, and within the body of feverish tears are their eyes;
And the quality of the surgeon is such as I say: And it happens that the patient strains their throat until both veins clearly appear; And they feel the pulse at both wrists, and then judge from there.
Then lift the hand over the vein at your wrist on top of your index finger, and hold the scalpel nearby, Then lift the vein at the top, and pinch it, just like you did with other veins, and drain the blood according to your need;
Then release the patient, place your finger on the vein for an hour, then put cotton there;
and then reapply the bandage and keep it in place until it heals; and we have discussed about this as well as their treatment and extraction, or beginning of the book.
The treatment for the vein in the forehead is as important as the treatment for the cephalic diseases of old, and it includes migraines, and hotness.
And its quality is such that the patient twists his neck, until the vein appears; Then take the tool which is called "cautery", whose form is as follows:
And place the tip on the vein, and pierce with your hand or something else, and let out the blood in accordance to the quantity you see; Then loosen the collar for the patient, and bind the vein until it is clean and without any trace of blood;
All the same, it is not right for the flames to be too strong; and treat them from across, because the bone is close by, and by chance the flame could break when they are fine.
The treatment for the two veins that are in the two arteries helps the eyes, and at the pulse, and the heat, and in the ear with the ear, and diseases of the face;
And the quality of their treatment is that the patient tightens his neck by twisting around some ligament, as previously described.
Then the treatment proceeds, and the treatment should be smooth through, slightly longer than the flame a little wide, for there is no flesh.
And if the flames are subtle and might break by chance; then make it correspond to the blood flow until you have the need for it, and then bind it with cotton, and bind well.
The treatment of a neck ailment involves cutting through the jugular vein near the nose, and surgery for disorders, and diseases of the face, Similarly to migraines and redness that appear in the face, as well as when it is old;
And the quality of this treatment involves constricting the neck of the patient and then pressing their nose with your left hand; And take the slender flame, and insert it inside the mouth at the space between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open well there, and the wound will now begin to drain;
and do not burn too much below it, and bleed the wound gently according to your need, then rest it for a night, as it recovers very quickly;
The healing of the two glands helps with squeezing out pus and at the beginning of mixing illnesses, and in the occurrence of diseases, and in congestion, and corrosion, and in herpes, and swelling;
And the quality of healing is that the glands are tightened around both ends, just as we have said; and let the master be above the neck of the gland, and the gland lie on one seat,
then heal the vein so that it is slightly wider along its length, then drain the blood moderately, or as much as necessary;
Then redo the operation on the other vein, then release the knot, and gently constrain the veins in the middle. Let the patient rest until morning, so that the wound heals; and if it does not heal, then one should cut out the diseased tissue.
Regarding the treatment of wounds The treatment of veins in the mouth helps with cleaning the mouth and prevents gum decay, lip cracks, nosebleeds, and internal bleeding.
And the quality of health is to make the sick person stand before you, and restrain their neck in the way I have said; then turn the lip, and look at those two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left; and know them by what they are black, and because inside them there are thin black veins: then feel both of them, and if you do not recognize them and are in doubt,
then feel both of them, and if you do not recognize them and are in doubt, If you cut out the largest of each part, and do the same for both upper and lower veins, because it's the same method.
From the cure near the tongue The cure of the veins near the tongue assists after the treatment for head ailments, and this is done at the constriction of the throat, and it deals with eye diseases, and with mouth illnesses;
And the quality of the surgeon is that when a patient's illness manifests before your hands under the sun, and you raise their tongue, and look at each side revealing a black vein:
Therefore, treat both healthily, and do not go too far with them, because they are near the arteries.
The veins of the arm that we commonly heal are treated in two ways:
or they may be heated with just one flaming firestick, or with a fine olive stick if the sticks are narrow like that of an arm, and it's called 'anesil'; and they should be wide or fine according to the size and tightness of the veins. The shape of fire cautery is quite famous and is wide as you see:
And it requires opening the large veins filled with obvious blood clots, and containing substantial blood and disorder; and this is the form of the olive oil cautery:
and it is more refined and pointed, intended for cleaning out subtle veins, or for the presence of subtle yellow blood.
The treatment of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that affect the throat, and in the neck, and around the chest, and in the belly;
And it is fitting for the surgeon to treat carefully, and to guard against the artery that is there. And if he hits the artery, and bleeding ensues, it is necessary to staunch the bleeding, as I have said; And it should not be clamped with fire, but cut like a hare.
And if the basilica does not open clearly, it is necessary for you to extract it, and change another one; or you want no pain from it, or you pierce through its place with the vein into the arm: it opens clearly; and cover the flame area beforehand, as we have said.
And if you know the location of the operation, it is necessary that when you remove the arm, you touch the area until you feel the pulse; Then mark the point of insertion, and then tie the arm, and close the vein before it heals.
And make sure you do not cut into the artery when you see the area inflame, for that is part of the artery: then listen there.
And if you see it bulge up as high as a child's urine, and the veins are red and fine, know that they are veins from the artery: be aware of this. Then hurry up quickly, place your finger for a long time, then remove your finger when the vein is no longer bleeding, as has often happened.
The patient must hold their arm, and let it stay like this, without moving the limb. Do so with caution, and don't move it until it is healed.
And if the wound is not cleaned, and you need to, and the medicine is not available, if you can, stop the bleeding by pressing on an artery if it's accessible, because the head of the body retreats; clean the wound once done.
Take a piece of elm bark and cut it, then take one half and bind it well up to the other side;
If the wound stops bleeding, that's good; if not, clean it as we have instructed, using powders that stop blood flow.
And the dressings are not made wet in many arrangements because of the small size of the wound and the strength of the connection of the arm.
The healing of the vein midway assists so that it treats blood from above, and from below, because it consists of the basilica and cephalic parts, as we have said;
And for the surgeon it is necessary to be cautious about the nerve which is below, and if he doesn't go far enough, and he finds the nerve, And it inflates and health is harmed, and by chance cannot heal;
And this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any places due to its intricacy, then you must sharpen the surgical instrument beforehand; and feel for the nerve with your hand.
And if there is a vein between the two nerves, cut it long.
The healing of the forehead helps, as it brings blood to the head, and aids in the eyes;
And it is advised to use the olive oil flame or the myrtle flame, for this is the safest of all veins, because there is neither nerve nor artery nearby.
Always, it's necessary to seek the lightest weight, and one should not be upset if it fails the first time, and one should attempt again; And by chance swells some limbs at certain points, even if it fails the first time, but there is no cause for concern. The quality of cleanliness is according to your thought.
The first thing you must know about surgery is that it is practiced solely for maintaining health,
and to avoid future illnesses; and have surgery performed in one of the three veins that are or cut: this means, the cephalic, the femoral, and the basilic; and surgery should be done at the beginning of prayers while kneeling, and in autumn and after winter following meals, when the signs of fullness are evident;
And whether one should heal on the first day or the third, after two hours or three days and one night.
The treatment of diseases does not have a set time limit, but only when the need is for one day or for food, at all hours and in every situation;
And it is not appropriate to treat children up until 13 years old, nor pregnant women only during the first quarter of their pregnancy up until seven months. And one should not treat the elderly who have passed sixty years of age.
And when someone seeks to heal himself, no matter how, it is necessary for him to purge his intestines with a gentle laxative. If he has much of wind retained, so that the veins draw off the excesses causing nuisances to the principal limbs;
Nor will he be healed who is too full of meats, or drunk, so long as they have strength, or are those with dropsy.
And if one undertakes to heal after colic pain, vomiting, and stomach discomfort, or frequent urination, pregnancy work, staying awake, sexual intercourse, or anything that weakens the body, as from weapon injury or injuries to oneself.
Then refine the fluids, if it's excessive, through meats and drinks and medications, should you have that means;
Then in a bath or immersion, if nothing defends it, to refine the blood,
and cleanse you from the vein down to three quarters of the inner part of your back, as we have said;
and protect yourself from that day of labor, and of pain, and of excess, and from similar things.
And bind and fasten them, and let the bandages be higher than where one is treated, and rub the arm twice or three times.
then gradually adjust the tie, because when it's too tight or too loose, one can't correct the limb without it.
and then rub the arm with your hands until the veins swell and are felt.
then wet the bandages with a little old oil, then place your left hand's finger on that vein below the arm a bit where you want to apply pressure. If the vein does not exist and fails to be cut by the sword. For there are veins that flee like strings on a violin, and some of them are full of windiness. such that when one places them over the flame, they retreat to the flame and cannot open the vein, and thus one is of those;
and if it opens the vein, the wound is too narrow, for which reason one should have surgeons acquainted with such matters.
And if their veins work the first time, it's good; but if not, you may start again a bit near where they were or under quickly, if the area is swollen.
And if the limb is swollen and the body feels itchy, you should let it rest for one or two days, and do not bind the arm: In case it comes to an abscess near the skin; don't go into water baths, then try starting the cleansing again if she likes it;
And if the wound is small or the opening in the skin is subtle and you doubt that not enough blood is coming out as you see, instead pierce it right into the center of the wound straight to the end;
And do it a bit hastily, so that the ears are swollen; for this happens many times, when the wound is small.
If you see that the ear is inflamed, do not repeat the cure and place a bit of oil on it instead; for it lightens the body from blood, and heals in this area where the oil is applied.
And apply the oil when you perform each cure on veins, to stop the flow of blood;
And when you apply it on the ear, this thyme and honey works well; the oil is too fine if it's in excess, but if it's too large, it disperses and avoids being too heavy.
And if it comes about that there is a large abscess, which happens often, just as when the strength of the wound only allows for such an occurrence on that single occasion or when the opening of the vein is small, if you are in haste, and place on the wound a sponge moistened with water and wine, let it be warm for just a little while, and then apply it for an hour;
it is necessary that you perform this after the bleeding from the vein has subsided, and if it remains on the wound for several days without turning black or green, it does not harm it at all; and if you see that [the wound], place on it something of myrrh or balsam made into a paste, or similar.
And many times pus and appearance occurred in the health of the basilica: therefore put your hand there, and if you find the place soft to the pressure of the hand, then this is the bad appearance. Listen then that you do not apply to any matter what we have said, for it could be done accidentally on the artery; but let him wear one bandage dry to harden the place, then treat with another method of care until he is healed.
And take each according to their strength in their virtue, and the nature of the blood.
And if the blood is black, let it bleed until it turns red. If you see that it's large, let it continue to flow until it becomes subtle. And if it's too hot, let it cool down.
And it is suitable for one who is clean and strong, needing extraction of blood, that you make him larger wounds, and let the flames be wide;
And for the one who is weak, do the opposite, and it is suitable for a physician to be careful and often, and when you need to treat him, cut diagonally rather than straight;
And this method of treatment saves from the spreading of blood and compression of nerves, and it is better than a long cut rather than a wide one.
And for the one whose body requires treatment, it is suitable to give them porridge in juice from green apples; if they are heated, cool them down with blood three or four times.
And if the individual has a cold disposition, they should consume before the holy meal a broth with moist ingredients in a syrup mixed with honey or in an aromatic syrup containing spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, along with a well-smelling syrup.
And if they faint during the meal, after the release of blood, it is necessary for them to inhale a broth of flesh and a subtle-smelling syrup,
and use the other things that we have said in the section or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of veins.
And if they wish to sweat in their arm and again later on, when they are weakened by a great meal, it is necessary that they sweat gradually and according to the amount of its virtue continuously.
And if one wishes to pump out their arm after the first cleaning, and they have strong pulses, should they do so seven hours after the first cleaning, or after the new hour.
And if one wishes to be cleansed another way, then it should be done on the second day or the third.
For there is much blood within the body that has already heated up, and causes fever; so it should be drained in large quantities, and widen the vein until pus emerges. Then when you have fulfilled all the conditions of cleansing, and place your hand on their pulse when they are healing, so that the disease does not remain in its place. And this happens many times, when the surgeons are negligent;
and it is not right when you see a dislocated arm and make blood come out the second time, and when the wound has healed, that you press forcefully; nor if it is set straightened, should you quickly extend the arm, for this would be badly done;
but let it until the second healing; or you apply to the tip of the flame, until the blood that was frozen at the wound flows out. And place on one part of it a small piece of sulfur set alight, and gently press on it.
And if the vein is bleeding, let it be, do not compress it, until the abscess subsides.
And if the need is to drain blood a second time, do so in their own place or another vein, or on the other arm.
The vein under the arm is cleansed from the side of the main vein because it is composed differently.
And the method of healing is such that the patient holds their hand in hot water, until the fingers turn red;
then bind them moderately, so that the vein appears well, then heal now through it, not too wide nor too long;
and make them narrow at the ends, and heal well near the wrist joint, and if it cannot come out, then put your hand in hot water, and let the blood flow in the water, until you have enough.
and if it is like that, do not put your hand in hot water instead, because you would freeze it more than heat it;
And the healing of this vein is safer than all others, for it contains neither artery nor nerve.
The cure for saving the right hand from diseases of the liver is akin to all illnesses, and this is how it is done:
Stretch the hand, and soak it in hot water, until the vein becomes visible; and if you heal it from side to side, and if you press on it completely all around, without causing any pain;
and do not overheat too much at the beginning, because all nerves are entirely stripped of flesh,
and then immerse your hand in warm water, because if it's frozen in the wound and cannot escape.
And when you have treated the blood as much as necessary, place on the vein where and seal until it heals quickly, and do this with each case.
The health in the left hand is against the disease of the mouse (or smallpox), and do everything as I have told you for the right.
The healing of the soul is valued for all diseases that are within the body, just as diseases of the liver, and obstruction of flowers, and disease of the kidneys, and of old arms and legs, and similar diseases.
And the quality of this healing is such that patients are healed by being rubbed with hot water, and they are treated on the vein until it heals. and above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above it goes through much of the kidneys;
Let then the wound heal, or more widely spread outwards, or at the ankle joint, where movement suits.
And if you heal it on the leg bone, watch for the nerves that are nearby, and also treat the artery in the same way as cutting; may the flames stop there.
And if it cannot be removed, then place the leg in water, and let it well drain the vein.
And if it needs healing the first time, then try again the second time above a little bit, because the leg is salty; Do not doubt about nerves, as we have said, and do the same for the other leg equally.
The muscles of the sciatic vein are at the knee of strength, and its health is valued for the pain in the hip, when it's due to fresh blood.
And the quality of its health is such that the patient sweats or bathes, and tightens above the ankle by扭ing for four inches,
because otherwise the vein does not open; and if it does open, it benefits in all ways that you can, and even when crossing over; And value to move it when you have it in your hands, for the head is there, and it is very responsive to human touch.
And value to move it when you have it in your hands, for the head is there, and it is very responsive to human touch. And if you cannot find it, if there's no opening or protrusion in front or behind the foot, and towards the small toe, be careful of the nerves;
And make sure there is such an amount of blood that you see, and then untie the knot, put on cotton and tighten it; she is now cured.
Cure with suction cups
Pessaries are made from horns, or spiders, or snakes; and suction therapy is done in two ways: either by piercing and drawing blood, or without piercing.
And this suction therapy that involves piercing follows two methods: it can be done with any heat, or without heat;
And two others on two ribs under the collarbone; and the suction cup over the chin; and the suction cup on the two shoulders; and the suction cup above the pustules; and the suction cups on the two arms; and the suction cups on the two legs; and the suction cups at the ankles; and the suction does not remove blood, but only minor veins that are scattered in the flesh,
And because this does not weaken one, as is done with bleeding of veins; And it should not be administered, nor with any fire or sense of heat, in any disease that comes from overfullness, until all the bodies are emptied.
And if by necessity of diseases one must breathe air or due to habits, then we administer it each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and during and in every period;
because there are those who, when they need to breathe air, have difficulty with their head;
And if someone experiences fullness and heat within their face, and on their head, and around the neck, and dimness in their eyes;
And those who notice a drop of blood in their mouth, have swollen tongues, and are coughing up blood; And if there are people who think, see through nosebleeds and vomiting, and similar things.
And when we see these signs, especially during the first month, we instruct to take a breath for three hours after each day.
The hygiene of the nose aids in relieving the headache ... that comes from the eyes, and it should not be after the evacuation of all through the body;
And this suction is part of the hygiene of the cranial area,
And it should not be used by those who have a cold constitution, or who are catarrhal, because it causes great harm.
And for this reason, those with cold ailments should not use it, nor those whose head has ill diseases.
And he who often gets healed from it, becomes forgetful, due to this one should place the suction cup slightly further down by the doubt of forgetfulness.
Suction at the neck is in the vicinity of the healing of the throat and the basilica; hence it's effective for narrowing towards the anus. and through the canal of the intestine, and everywhere else, and with replenishment;
And it should be done without applying too much pressure, for if she holds too tightly, it could cause dislocation or indigestion or heart problems.
The ventilation of two ribs under the neck can cause pains in the head, and eye pain and toothache, and in strangulation, and pain at the roots of teeth.
And is in the place of the health of the basilica; and it should be that you instruct the surgeon to move his hand when he places it, not to touch the artery, and not to allow repeated bleeding.
Ventilation around the chin can cause oral diseases, and gum decay, and similar illnesses that are in the mouth; and is in the place of the health of the two lips.
Ventilation around the shoulders can cause illness due to heat and congestion.
The ventilation of the lungs is as valuable as two-thirds of the veins of the arms, because it draws blood from these large veins;
and commands the soldier not to cut too close, for the arm is naked of flesh and it runs over veins and arteries.
The suction cup on the back is as useful for bleeding from the ground and diseases below it, and it's necessary that the suction cup be large and made of iron, so she can bleed well. And by chance, if it were thin, it would break; I cause great wounds.
The suction cups on the legs are applied straightforwardly because they draw blood from all over the body and alleviate old pains in the joints, bladder, and kidneys, as well as bloating; and they are located at the knees and ankles, and throughout their use weaken the body over time, leading to debility in various conditions.
The method of placing the suction cup is as follows: you place it first while empty and suck continuously, then quickly apply it and move it evenly without stopping. Continue this until you see the skin turning red and inflating, then stop noticing a slight bloodiness; afterwards remove them, and take care with how your body is positioned because there are those who have tough skin and open pores: one should pierce only once in such cases, making broad cuts that are slightly deep; and suck gently.
And if the lump is large, it should be pricked twice: the first time to clear the way for the passage of larger blood.
And if the hair is very thick, it must be pricked three times; and when we wish to draw out a little blood at a time, we should only prick once.
And if we wish for some blood, we often repeat the process; and if the hair is thick, we burn until the roots are fully penetrated, and the ends so that the hairs are pierced suddenly.
It is appropriate for those with thick and hard skin, and who have prominent pores, that you grease the spots of the suction cups where the stimulative and dissolving substances are applied: if it is in a purple oil, or an almond oil, or a seed oil of the cucumber;
And if it's in the spring, from plants such as garlic, or onion, or chamomile, or any similar type.
And if the excess is large and cold, take turpentine oil, or balsam oil, or oil from anise, and similar types.
And if what one wants to heal is tender flesh and large pores, there should be no oil applied at all,
But it is suitable to wash after suction with pink water, or cold water, or water from a rose, or water from a cucumber plant, or water from porcelain, or any similar type.
And he who has some moisture, if he rises from rest or water of myrtle, and of sumac, and of similar things.
And he who has large excesses rises from old wine, or water of the sea, or a decoction of thyme or chamomile, or other similar things.
and there is no sanatorium treatment with suction cups before or during the bath, but after the bath an hour or two; and do not sleep afterwards.
and it should be noted when he is to be suctioned and when he has been suctioned. And watch over him who is recovering from illness and is choleric, and if he gets too hot and inflamed; It is necessary for him to eat cold things, such as pomegranates, endive and lettuce with oil, and similar items;
And he should consume small game meat, and pork meat, and moist meats.
And for those with cold complexions, they should consume honey syrup and moderately aromatic wine that is between old and new vintage. They should eat a little food, small game meat, and young birds such as pigeons.
And on the day he is suctioned, then must he drink more than eat;
And it should be given to some people no three times or muscat before suctioning, or after, to strengthen the main limbs; And season the broth well, but it should not be that those who are hot drink it.
The suction cups that are put to pierce are those placed on the liver, and on the lungs, and in gout, and on the belly and stomach and kidneys and hip, for this limb does not bear being pierced over wounds,
And such action should only be performed to draw blood from one part of the body to another, in the same way as we treat in childbirth when it proceeds smoothly; to thin out the viscosity in a limb, just like we use suction cups on the belly and buttocks to reduce its size;
and relieve pain when there's an obstruction or stone, if it can expel the obstruction by its attractive power, or evacuate the stone from its place;
and in this manner it works when applied to the liver and stomach if there's retained congestion,
And these suction cups are administered empty only for suctions; and they are never administered together with fire, and they are not filled with cold water.
Similarly to illnesses due to coldness, and in such a way that one fills the suction cup with hot water, or with water in which herbs useful for this purpose have been boiled.
The shape of the suction cup administered with fire is like this:
And it has two and a half palm widths in length, and at its center there is a small notch, like how you would place a pin,
And if it's from a thorn, wait until it doesn't hurt the patient when placing it on the limb;
And have in the middle a crossbar of a thorn or iron, to insert a candle until it's held.
And let them be large and small according to the diseases and age of those who take them;
because the suction cups for children are different from those of the old, and the thin ones are different from the fat ones.
And we must place this suction cup thus on the limb:
Take the wax candle or one line long, and put it in the suction cup through the penis which is inside the suction cup, so that the heat is at the bottom of the suction cup and does not burn the skin;
and then place it on the limb, and hold it at the part as we have said, so that when one wishes, if the vapor goes away, remove the suction cup;
And apply the thread as before, and repeat often, if you need to.
In the suction cup, which is used in the illness of pleurisy, for all severe cases, there should be neither a tube nor a cork, and it is administered only when it's full of water, and placed just on the limb.
and this is its shape:
Only suction cups are used for members where one cannot place suction cups due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar parts; And during their unclothed state, like two or four, and others similar;
And the quality of the water is that when you find veins in sweet clear waters without pus, if you take them;
and put the animal in sweet water until they become accustomed to it, and do not have anything in their stomachs. and then bleed and cup the blood, then rub the limb until it turns red, and place the veins on it.
And when they are full and emit, whether it's possible to place a suction cup, then put one, for this is very useful afterwards.
If not, lift the limb with ease and water, quite well, then the wound;
And if the limb heals too quickly during the course of surgery, wet it with one liter of cold water and place it on, until the artery is cooled;
And if there are multiple arteries, put on powdered vitriol or garlic, and similar items, until it is cooled;
When you put half of peeled peas on the shoulder, and let them dry at this spot, they will now stop bleeding.
And if you need more, take others without waiting.
And if the veins are not willing to be taken, rub the shoulder with fresh blood, or you stick a needle into it until the vein starts flowing. and then place them, and as soon as they feel the blood, let them dry;
And when you see that they are discharging, if you powder some aloes and flour together, or ash, they will soon improve now.
This begins the book on fractures
These chapters are often necessary in the art of medicine, and are for restoring breaks and recovery.
Know this, dear child, that the leaves of this chapter are filled with content that was never found in any of the old books, nor did anyone ever read a letter from it;
And because of this reason, the knowledge has been lost in our land, for I have never found anyone good;
And I know nothing of it, for through the knowledge of old books, which I have studied so much that I have dealt with this subject, and through experimentation, and by habit from my life;
And in this chapter I have described what is contained here, summarized it at the end, and clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are used, as I did in the two chapters before this.
Therefore, it is necessary for us to outline or introduce the essence of this book and its chapters where wisdom places her understanding, remaining truthful, so that those who have been proven competent may know and learn this noble craft, and teach it to others.
I say that when fractures or dislocations or twists or bruises occur anywhere, it is necessary to quickly heal the patient from one side and another; without any damage to them, if things are too delicate like weakness in the body, or children, or old people;
Or if the place is too tight, or too cold; and eat cold dishes, this means cold meats, and fat meat and parsley, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and do not fill your body with foods that fill the veins of blood, until you are sure of an abscess to heat up, or a spreading of matter in the limb; if recover the patient according to their first regimen as they have used it.
And when broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary to nourish the patient with foods that promote strong healing, or have a thick consistency, such as cooked wheat in water, and onions, and garlic, and liver, and kidneys, and cow stomachs, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things. For at any time of rupture it is necessary to let the parts move more quickly and soon the breaking.
And know that bones broken in the old and the decrepit cannot be properly healed or sutured according to their nature due to the dryness of limbs, nor those also which are too tender, such as the bones of young children;
But do not hesitate, set the bone that is broken. i.e. press and unite the limb together, until it strengthens as before; and do not finish his work immediately, and for this you must feed with large meats, as we have said.
And know that fractures can occur in many ways.
For breaking of the head is different from breaking at the ankle or leg, and I will tell you all methods of breaking in this chapter. For there are breaks that go to the tip, and others at the joints, such as the size of a feather for writing.
For there are breaks that go to the tip, and others at the joints, such as the size of a feather for writing. And if it's a broken bone with an injury, or a break resulting in a small crack.
And for each method there is its own tool and instrument suitable for repair, according to what memory brings to mind;
And it is recognized that breaking of the bone occurs when the leg twists and opens clearly outward, and its compression under the hand;
And if there is no twisting or compression of the leg, and the patient does not feel much pain, then there is no breaking of the bone;
But it can well have twisting, or a crack, or a small break. But do not move it with your hand yourself, but apply the remedies that follow, and then gently constrain it now.
And know that when the breaking occurred in the artery, and its two parts were separated, it is necessary now to place them evenly, so that abscesses are neither too far nor too close.
And if the abscesses have come out, then leave no days until the abscesses are calmed; Then place them evenly as you can lightly and wisely do, knowing that the restoration of this one is lighter than that of one with fragments. Then tighten it, as it should be done according to what follows.
And if in the bone there are pieces broken, if it is divided into two parts, whether it's hands or feet, or under your hand if it's one smaller limb, or at two strings, or at one string and your hand;
And place the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the broken parts of the member are evacuated, you reset it with all your means by moving them as much as you can. And remember not to cause injury or pain through your work to the patient.
And adjust well both ends of the bones according to the best forms.
And feel it well with your hand if you think it's not properly set: if it is set beautifully, and don't over-tighten, or apply pressure as those do who extract abscesses by their own method of contraction in the limb, as we have done many times.
And when the member is set properly, ensure to keep it still, neither by day nor night, when turning or in any other way; And ensure well that the limb is so secure that it feels no pain. For when it feels no pain, it's not quite right, and it needs to be put in such position that it doesn't feel any pain;
For when it feels no pain, it's not quite right, and it needs to be put in such position that it doesn't feel any pain; and see to it that it is placed correctly, so no awkwardness occurs when it's being set back in place;
and the quality of the broken member should correspond to what I am telling you.
Know that limbs broken are varied by size and extent and shape.
For there are smaller limbs like arms and legs etc., so it is necessary to envelop them with soft and fine linen cloths;
And those that are larger like thighs and legs: it is necessary to envelop them with a broad and hard bandage; for the wide bands wrap around the whole large limb and restrict equally in all directions, so there is no unevenness.
Then tie on light wraps around the torso, 3 or 4 times depending on the limb, and hold your hand slightly on every part of the bandage, then go above the fracture and restrain less, so that the fracture can move a bit away from the injury.
And soften that bond little by little, until you seize a large part of the healthy side, then take another ligament and return to the broken arm;
then go back to the part right of the break, and hold it moderately, neither too tightly nor too loosely, as we said in the first lesson above.
then place between the heated linen or cloth bands until they are evenly done, then tie everything above with two bandages, and then put your well-made pins on top; if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or an abscess, place something soothing on it for the abscess to cool and relieve the swelling, leaving it that way for a few days;
Then stretch over them, and have them half the size of a medium-sized reed, or from a staff made of split wood, or from palm leaves, and make them as follows:
But it must be that the stick placed on the break is slightly larger and wider than the others;
and make it as long as necessary for the smallness or largeness of the limb;
Then stretch over the sticks in the same manner as you did with the first piece, and then tie on an additional thread above them, similar to what was done at the first instance for the break;
The treatment for dislocation requires that it not occur too far from its original position; and it is necessary that the thread be just right in size, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of soft linen.
For if the thread is thick, such as in works of those who bind the strings of linen ropes and cause errors, this is significant; because the binding cannot be uniform if it is too subtle, and it is not suitable for there to be less than half a do of space between each pitch.
And if the patients are irritated by the shoulder blades after tightening during their recovery, place linen or raveled wool underneath them, so that they do not blister.
When the wound is accompanied by bruising, and the knees are broken, I will tell you the treatment below.
And know that it is not right to constrain all broken limbs with bandages on the first day. For when the limbs are large, it is not advisable to place bandages on them immediately; rather, wait for 5 days or 7, or more depending on your judgment each time an abscess occurs.
And here is the method of old plastering to restore breaks, dislocations, and twists: take flour that stays on mill walls, mix it with plenty of eggs, prepare this mixture neither too thin nor too thick, and use it. This is the common way of restoring breaks in various positions, just as for adults and children alike, as it's neither too expensive nor too cold.
Another way of plastering to restore fractures and dislocations and twists: take 3 parts each of garlic, dandelion leaves, rue, and asafetida, along with 9 parts gum arabic and myrrh; also include .v. (5) parts of aloes; add vinegar seven times its volume. Mix this powder well with plenty of egg whites; if the mixture is warm, use this plaster since it has a good composition and heals broken bones quickly, and is effective for many people.
Another method for plastering that suits twisting: take mugwort and sweet marjoram, add nine parts; myrrh and aloes, add eight parts; carageenan six parts; boric armeniac ten parts, grind well, mix with water or enough egg, then apply.
Another method for plastering injuries and fractures, soothing the pain that comes about, and working with bone: take new wool, and cook it in grease and oil, then put it on your body. This plaster does not heal, but it is better to soothe abscesses quickly, and properly relieves pains associated with bones.
Another method for plastering that heals broken bones: take dry fig leaves and terrestrial poplar leaves, grind them together, and make the plaster.
Another method for plastering during the restoration of bone fracture and improving the removal of pus. Take root of marjoram, chamomile, violet flowers, flour from beeswax; each of one part; grind it down and mix with wine, then if your limbs are warmed up, mix it further with coriander water or just water, and use it.
Another method of plastering more effectively than the first when pus is hardening during member restoration. Take roots of marjoram and linseed, balsam, mint, winter savory, violet flowers and chamomile; all in one part each; grind it down and mix with salt water or sweet water, or wine depending on the warmth of the limb and its rest period.
In his book, Ippocras instructs not to place anything on a broken limb for restoration except cerate made of wax and oil, and nothing else more, stating that it should be neither too soft nor too hard between two.
And it seems to Galen that one should place upon the broken member for restoration, dry things a bit heated, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another way to plaster for injury and pain: take mussels and goatskin grease or bird feathers, and vinegar, and oil equally, and grind them, and make a plaster from this mixture.
And then expose it a little after that, and take care so the patient doesn't feel any pain or the bone moves in its place; if not, then remove the plaster by hand.
And if pain comes to the limb, or itchiness, no rest or swelling occurs, then hurry and remove it, apply the plaster now; take a lightweight cloth and a sea sponge moistened, dip it in water, and rinse the affected area until the itch stops and the pain is relieved. Then allow the limb to rest for an hour, then place it on dry wool, moistened in water or rose oil, and secure it with a bandage until you are sure of removing the pus.
And allow the inflammation to subside in the limb, and relieve the pain, then resume gently treating it, using a little plaster, and do not restrain it as tightly as before; treat it with subtlety until it is healed.
And if you notice that pus has changed to a reddish color and pain along with swelling are subsiding, indicating healing throughout, then you will need to apply plaster and bandages again, proceeding in the same manner as before.
And if nothing of what we have discussed happens to the limb, or if it doesn't start healing until after three days, four days, five days, or seven days; and each time let it rest for twenty days according to this method, as long as the wound heals and the alignment approaches from within;
Then you must hold the restraint more than in the beginning, and strengthen their flesh as I have said before. And if you notice that the limb is drying out more than necessary, understand that no surgery can occur; Apply hot water then, every time you release it, and do this once every day, and gently wash the wound.
Through this method, cut off the gangrene from the limb, and expedite its healing until it no longer resembles what a person would do in pain by forcefully restoring the bent limb: that is wrong, and it has negative effects; I can only see benefits from letting it heal naturally and opening it properly.
Through various methods of breaking up Many methods of fractures exist, and various shapes can occur; their causes are distinct.
Because there are fractures caused by the impact of a sword, and the collarbone breaks up to the symphysis which is below the bone, just like the head or shaft would do. For this reason, it is called this type of fracture "hatchet break".
Or the sword hits the bone from above without piercing it, and this type of fracture is called "absolute"; and both large and small injuries result from these two types of fractures.
And if there is sequential impact, or a crack or collarbone fracture caused by stone, or on stone, or other similar conditions.
And if it has fracture all the way to the membrane which is around the bone, or on top of the bone, and this wound can be large or small.
And if there is a wound that penetrates the bone as thin as a hair, and this crack is small, and it is called this kind of fracture "cerebral";
And if the wound is made by striking with stone or falling or by any other thing causing a piece of bone to be pushed in, and it results in the limb being broken as they break candlesticks on the candelabras; if the stone enters within the bone.
This happens more often with those whose bones are softer due to moisture, such as in children's bones;
And it occurs through all these ways of breaking, that small fragments are lost as with stones; and I will speak about them in their place.
And let us know all the ways of breakage by detachment from them, and the examination with forceps, and due to corrupted flesh that is present.
The appearance of hair is known by this: when one has exposed the bone and rubs it inwards, if there is an opening for black breakage.
In the treatment of breakage, be vigilant against bad occurrences due to infection, and if you do not see any harmful adverse events, such as vomiting bile, loss of understanding, extension, fainting, ague fever, or if the eyes come out forcefully and turn red, and other similar signs in various dispositions, then cannot be healed without doubt.
And if you do not see a serious emergency, yet still hope for salvation, start treatment immediately.
And when the birth comes to you first, and it is in winter, it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day after the month when you can.
And if it's in winter, you should hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the flesh around the bone becomes rotten, and accidents occur as we have said.
And if the bone breaks just below the membrane covering the brain, it is necessary that you split the broken part like this: and take hold of the head with your hand from where the birth came out, and expose as much bone as you can in all ways on the surface of the bone, and as much as possible according to the shape of the wound.
And if blood flow comes to uncover the bone, or in the case of pus, you should assist with what is necessary, and then you should fill the wound with moist cloths soaked in rose oil; And have the wound rest until the pus subsides and there is assurance of blood flow; then begin to excavate towards the bone, and this can be done in two ways: one way is that you cut precisely from front to back, which forms a line: the other way consists in removing flesh on both sides of the wound before cutting down to the bone, thus creating an L-shape.
And then make another cut larger than the first one.
And the second method involves having several different cuts, some narrow and others wide, all with points made of iron. And work them gently to avoid injuring the head.
And if the bone is hard and protruding, it is necessary that you pierce through it internally, so that cuts are performed with needles, not straight cuts so they do not penetrate further than the bone under the testicle, and there should be a margin or a circle of about .i. (which could mean one inch) above the point that does not allow the point to pass beyond the bone; and you must have more than this, so that each comes in its place by the thickness of the bone, so that you have needles for all tests; and this is how the three kinds of needles are formed.
The quality of piercing through the broken bone is such that you place one needle on the bone, and turn with your fingers until you know that the bone has been pierced. Then move another needle slightly after this point; then do so all around internally. Cut out the space between the parts of the bone where the punctures are, doing this more subtly and gently than possible, as we have said, until you bring the bone to your hand or any tool you might use such as forceps, tweezers; and make sure not to touch the brain or the spinal cord.
And when you have pierced and removed the bone, it is necessary that you refine what remains of the bone with another tool resembling an incisor tooth, but it must be more robust and finer than the other incisors;
And if there remains no small bones or scales at all, if you lightly manipulate them with one and a half instruments; then treat the wound using dressings and treatments that we have said.
And another way of working is this, as Galien stated, which is more careful; and the needle should be very strong, for it's his word. It is necessary first to expose a part of the bone, where the fracture opens and moves, so that once you have exposed that part, you will place under the tip of this lens-shaped incision, from which the form is as follows:
And do not cut from one side alone, and make the cut halfway through two ribs, so that you are cutting towards the bone; then strike with a small mallet above, so that you gently scrape all around the entire bone, and be very careful of the cloth that is underneath;
If it's pulled out to the bone, do so gently because you'll feel some discomfort, and there will be fear.
And if the bone fracture doesn't go through to the membrane, and the bone is cut only above, and there are small pieces remaining, then you should clean up afterwards with a sharp blade, using various sizes so that each can be used most appropriately according to the manual instructions and the shape of the fracture.
If you're using large剃刀, and then finer ones, and continue this process until it's done properly.
For each of the finer hair trimming and subtle fractures, you must adjust your approach according to its direction; this is a matter that cannot be handled by someone who has dedicated their study to this craft.
And if it is discovered that the wound is large, you should take one or two yards of linen according to the size of the wound, soak it in rose oil, and place it on the wound; Then take another layer of linen doubled up to two or three times, and soak it in wine and rose oil, then place it over the first piece of linen; do this as gently as possible so you don't weigh down the wound dressing, then apply a second bandage from above, and pull it tight enough only to moisten the wound.
And leave it like this for one or two days until the abscess has subsided, then remove the dressing and apply medications such as lily roots, ground rue, incense powder, and arnica, among other things; from these ingredients make a powder and put it on the wound, and continue to administer antiseptic medicines without causing irritation.
And ensure that the wound is promptly clean, do not leave pus behind, nor allow it to coagulate. Because when coagulation occurs upon the brain's meshwork, it flows and spreads, causing great harm to the patient; for when something sharp is placed on this spot, it can penetrate upwards.
Therefore, take care, should anything undesirable happen to the patient, as we have said, it leaves room for doubt without doubt.
And if only this misfortune comes not because of the medicine that we've applied, should it possess such a virtue, then you must take one part of honey and three parts of rose oil and add them to a dish, and place it on this spot; Then follow the method of curing until it is healed.
Know that neither of the two parts below the nose are broken, or just one by itself, because they are two bones; and this lower one is cartilaginous, it does not break, nor can force cause it to be bent or twisted, then heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, you must bend your little finger or at the nose, and place that break inside your index finger, and outward from the nose, until the nose regains its natural shape. Do this gently, and watch so that the patient does not feel pain through your operation.
And if the break is in the part above the nose, and cannot come to the nostril, it is necessary that you place it level with the top of a stick somewhat thick.
And if the break is in two parts, redo the operation, and hurry to restore it on the first day, if you can;
But if not, after the seventh or eighth day when the wound is calm and healed, then apply a cloth bandage to the top of the nose, if the break is in one part.
Or you apply another bandage from the other side, if the break is on that side as well; and make them large enough to cover the depressions around the nose.
And they say that for any restorative, one should moisten the tents in butter and change them each day. I do not think this is correct, but it seems they should be moistened during the preparation of a mixture from an egg and powder from mill; then leave the tent until the bone is firm and the cartilage hardened.
And always use goose feathers instead of tents, and if you have two raw eggs to cover them, and keep the bandage in place, then let the wound be exposed, letting air through it; do whatever you can see.
And if the pus comes out to the nose as you work on it, then put on a poultice or wet cotton in rose oil, or in a pinch of hydrazine.
And if pus does not come out, then apply a plaster externally, made of sawdust flour and incense powder mixed with yolk butter. Place it on light wicks and do not bind them too tightly.
And if the bone breaks inside the nose and is broken into small pieces, then use tools suitable for this task to extract them. Then cut along the break and clean out any debris or fragments, and glue them back together, using plasters and remedies that are suitable for this situation;
And if there is no injury within the nose, then perform the extraction procedure, and place garlic inside until it heals.
Regarding the rupture of the jawbone
When the jawbone is ruptured internally and there's no wound outside,
It should be done as follows: If the breakage occurs in the right part of the jawbone,
And if there's a breakage in both halves of the mandible,
And if the tooth movements occur, or a rupture, hold them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then place on the broken jaw plaster, and place one double cloth; and place on the cloth a large ramp well made, or a piece of leather equal in size to the jaw, long and wide according to the jaw, and fasten it where you can, command the patient to rest, and eat light meats.
And if you notice that the figure changes, let it loose on the third day, and then set what has changed back to its original position; apply plaster, mixing powder from a mill with plenty of egg or flour from almond meal, after you have removed the plaster; place wool lightly on top of the plaster. If the plaster hardens and the patient's positioning does not change, leave it until he is healed; many times are healed in three weeks.
And if pus comes out of the wound, then treat as we have said many times.
And if there is a breakage and wound together, remove any piece of bone that has been extracted; this requires the use of suitable instruments for such tasks.
And if the wound is narrow, widen it with fire according to your need.
And when you have removed all these pieces and there is nothing left, if the wound is wide, place one plaster suitable for this purpose on it to promote healing, until it heals properly.
by strength The force breaks many times before reaching the shoulder, and the breakage happens in three ways: it breaks and separates into two parts with fragments, which is easier to restore; or there is a break accompanied by injury.
And when the operation is for a breakage accompanied by injury, if you have two helpers, so that one marks the shoulder where the force has broken; and the other extends their arm towards the injured part; then make the break equal with your hands, so that the shape is as it should be, and there are no signs or movements.
And if you need to extend further, place a round sponge or cloth under the shoulder blade, and make it as large as needed; stretch out and secure the broken force with your hand, so that you can make the break equal, as it should be.
And if you cannot draw the head of the neck due to resistance, because it comes from behind, it is necessary for the patient to lie on their back, and place a cushion under one shoulder, and guide the shoulder blade downwards, until the bone of the neck is elevated.
And then apply pressure with your fingers, and if you find debris inside, it is necessary to cut downwards; and pull the pieces gently. If the bones cannot join under any force, cut near one of the incisions you have made; but place this tool on the neck instrument to avoid injury there:
It should resemble a spoon, not be too thick, and be as wide as it needs to be according to the size of the bone and strength of the operation; it must have two points, like this, with one being wider and the other thinner, similar to how you made the incision when you treated the bones.
And when you are assured of the incision being clean, you should suture it up and if there is a small rupture or if you doubt about the cleanliness of the incision, you should cover the wound with bandages and tents according to its quantity.
And if there are discharges from them, then moisten with oil roseate and honey and wine, and place it on top.
The process of sharpening bone, when it is with wounds and with tailoring, is to place on the bone a plaster made from the powder from the mill and from egg yolk, and set light wafers on top, and put a sphere under the heel, if you need to; Then take a very long band one palm wide, then place two layers of cloth on top of the wafers and plaster it. Then take a fine staff about three inches wide and long, and wrap it around this band, making sure that the head of the band hangs down; And set the candle near the wound, and turn the bandage around the neck, and over the clean area, and over the diseased area; and adjust it from each part, and when you see that the healing is advancing towards the wound, and clearly see that the candle does not move above the broken bone, then reward it each day, and when he cleanses him, then restrain him;
And let the disease heal on its back, and when he sleeps put him a small pillow under his elbow for lifting the shoulder up; this will relieve the breaking of the force through the alignment of the shoulder blade. If you tie his arm around the neck, do not untie it to prevent bad accidents, until twenty days;
Then continue with the plastering if you see that it's necessary, and bind and leave him like this until he recovers. And she is recovered to the most by twenty-eight days, and in some cases within fewer days, in no one man.
On the breaking of the shoulder
Sometimes the shoulder breaks or splits from its place or in the middle, not just at one end but also further inward, solely through contact; if you deal with it according to the shape of the break and its natural form, using all possible methods. Then apply powder from the mill with plenty of eggs, gently pressing them on, and cover with two layers of cloth; then place a large and delicate table somewhat wider than the shoulder, slightly more so than the shoulder's width, ensuring there are no gaps under any part of the shoulder. Fill these gaps lightly with linseed wads, making sure the table fits evenly; and then tighten it all into one large, tight band, ensuring the table doesn't move from its place, observe each day; and every time it loosens, you should tighten again, adjust the table if necessary, and place the patient on their side; and the shoulder will be healed after twenty days or twenty-five. And when this number is completed, remove the bandage, being sure, for it isn't bone that settles easily.
And if a bone fragment protrudes and is not covered by the flesh, cut it open, and expose the wound; then follow what we have said about healing after muscle rupture to clean out any pus.
From the breaking of the heel
The heel is broken only once in the middle, but this happens rarely; it often breaks at the front. And when it's broken inside, it leans away from the heel, causing great pain to the patient and lack of agility, and they may vomit blood, and open movements occur in the broken bone, and one can well feel this.
And in restoration, if the patient lies on their back, and you place them one and a half cubits between their shoulders, then press the shoulders together, and join the two ribbones with your hands, and apply gentle pressure to make it equal in all ways that you can, until the bone figure is as it should be; then place plaster casts over this subtle salt outline, or another light object, cover them with a piece of cloth, and bind them tightly around the broken bone, so they don't move. Then turn the bandage back towards the spine, apply pressure to fit the bone properly, reward each hour for the treatment, and if the swelling subsides, tighten it; and if it seems suitable to release tension or due to itchiness that comes with restlessness, pain or abscess, do so immediately, then loosen them up, remove the plaster casts, and treat as needed according to the prescribed cures. Then replace the bandage, pressuring it until it's healed.
Of bone fracture
Know that bone fractures only occur in the larger parts of the back and within the head, and they happen due to their fragility; and one feels this well during examination at the hospital.
And in terms of treatment, if it is to equalize the fracture, just like it should. Then put on the plaster and apply pressure with one hand, if you need to.
And if the fracture of the ribs is occurring internally, the patient feels great pain and stabbing, like crying, because the bone punctures the tissue; there are also swellings, chills, sudden vomiting of large amounts of blood, and this causes severe illness, and the old ones used to apply a lot of bandages.
And if some say it's necessary to administer meat that inflates the belly, because it pushes away the windiness outside.
We do not follow this advice; we only use chalk if it has come to that. And when it comes to that, then heal it.
And let no one among us apply suction cups to the body, because of the sucking sensation and it seems reasonable; nonetheless, there is doubt that the suction cup draws excesses to the body due to its weakness.
And they say that when you cover the body with moist wool in oil heated up, and set wadding between the ribs to make the swelling even everywhere, then proceed with the treatment of pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
And if the patient feels intense pain that cannot be borne by the bone piercing the skin, doubt comes to the patient as to whether they should cut into their body where the broken rib is, and it is necessary to place a tool under the swelling; then one must cut through the bone gently, drain it lightly, and stitch together the two edges of the wound if it's large, and treat with plaster until it heals. And if abscesses come about, place moist cloths soaked in rose oil on them, and put these on their body; and treat continuously where it is necessary for abscess treatment, and remain vigilant on that side of the rib where it should be treated, until it heals.
from the cracking of the neck
No breakage ever occurs to the bones of the neck, and it does not bend; similarly with the spine in the back. And when this happens to no one, and you wish to determine whether it will heal or not, if you notice that his hands are softened, swollen, and dead, and he cannot move or stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, if you do not feel anything. You know that it is in multiple fatal conditions, and if the hands remain unfeeling even when being held still and not moved, you know that the joint of the bone has been saved, and that the patient's condition can be cured, assuming proper treatment is applied.
And when this kind of situation comes to the spine in the back, and you wish to determine whether it will heal or not, be careful if its joints are softened, and if there is an accident akin to hands and on the back causing wind movement and loss of appetite; and when it has been soothed on its belly, if there's still no wind movement. And when it has been treated on its back and it wants to lie upright, it cannot. You know that this is fatal: if it doesn't respond to its treatment at all.
And if such incidents do not happen to him, then it becomes a less serious matter.
And the treatment is that if there's pus coming out, you need to handle it carefully, put on oil at the point of pus or on the spine until it calms down; then apply a supportive and drying plaster and bind it with a bandage. And instruct the patient to rest. Don't sleep on that part where they feel pain until they recover. And if any bone is exposed, you must cover it with a poultice; and set the bone, then unite the two edges of the wound if they are large, with stitches, then treat with an ointment that heals and nourishes until it heals. And if the bone chip at the elbow is broken, which is called 'the elbow chip', take your left hand pouch, and place it evenly against your right hand power; then apply the plaster and elevation above you, should you need to use them. Then compress it, and if there's an exposed bone fragment, cut it up, set the bone, and treat the wound until it heals.
from the breaking of the bone in the hip
Sometimes the hip bone is broken, and if it happens, there might be a little pain in the head; and it extends long, declines towards the knee, brings pain to the leg, and bruising, and inflames what is broken.
And the restoration is that you extend your hand upwards, as long as you are over the fracture; and know where the break is and its shape. And if the break is only in the head, then make it equal to this break, until it has its natural shape.
And if the break is along the length or it declines towards the inside, then direct the patient to lie on their stomach, as long as you can achieve the restoration of this break. And when you have placed it evenly, put it on the plaster. Then place a charcoal or earthenware stick under it and hold the wound steady, so that it does not move. And apply heat to the area of the back until the wound is even.
And instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or on his back.
And if the abscesses drain out, do not disturb them until the discharge stops, as long as the abscesses remain drained, and apply what we have just mentioned; then return to the treatment and restrain it according to how it should be, provided there is no bad incident. This is the method.
Of the breaking of the shoulder
The shoulder is that which is between the arm and the head of the shoulder; if it is broken, you should restore it according to one of the two methods: one way is for you to take a rod half an inch thick, like this shape:
And join with two shoulder blades two pieces of string and lay them up high, and place the patient's back up on one seat; then pour their broken arm onto the rod until it reaches the armpit, and is midway along the length of the rod, then lay this against any heavy object or let the helpers hold it downwards; then place the joints in a position equal to their hands together, until the broken bone returns as it should.
And the other way is that you place the patient on their back, and tie their hand to their neck, then command two attendants that one should cut at the broken bone from his hands, and the other cuts down right in half an inch lengthwise, and each extends themselves to their respective part.
And if you see that the extraction is more forceful, then tie a knot halfway over the wound, and above it, spread each minister to their part. And when the wound is near filled at the head of the shoulder, it should be that you place half a string midway between the ridge, and another towards the edge, midway over the wound; and similarly if the wound is near the edge, it should be that you put a light knot without effort until the wound is even on the ridge and edge; then make the cut evenly as needed, and tighten it, so long as no pus comes.
And if pus comes out, do not tighten it for more than seven days, and apply greased wool in a quiet place and oil of roses until the pus is soothed; then tighten it, and do it with care so that you place plaster on the wound. Afterwards join the arm to the shoulder support, and put your hand on the shoulder or breast; and place the cloth, then tighten it on the shoulder support and the arm, ensuring that the arm is straightened without being hindered, or if the bone is not deformed.
And if you suspect the bone is not moving, use braces and place a larger and stronger brace under the cut than the others, leaving one inch of space between each brace. Ensure that each brace is wide enough to pass through the wound by about three inches from both sides; then tighten on these braces as I have explained at the beginning of this chapter on the wound, with more force but less distance apart.
And if you see the base of the pins and the constriction, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken member, and you doubt about the pus pocket, if you leave it to be bound for seven days, as we have said; then observe each three days the tie, making sure itch does not cause swelling or anything comes from the wound because it is too tight. If it is difficult, as we have said.
And if no such events occur, nor the dislocation takes place only after three days or more, and let the patient lie on his back, with his hands on his stomach; and place under the shoulder one cotton cushion filled evenly with wool, and observe every hour of the day or night that the figure of the broken limb does not move, or the threads are softened; if it is treated by the virtue of medicine, and the meat should be prepared as we have put before you, in such a way that the meat would be at its first refinement; and when it starts to recover, if it is large. And it is customary for the shoulder and leg to be recovered within forty days altogether; and then one must dislocate and apply baths and medicines of ointments for the skin to heal. If the constriction is ugly and tangled, then let the dislocation take place again for three days or two months.
of the fracture of the arm
The arm is made up of two bones, which are called the 'fosciles'. One bone is small and it creates the socket. The other one is larger and it is located under the small head; sometimes only the large foscile breaks or even both the small and large ones might break.
When the small bones are broken, restoration is lighter and healing; when the larger ones break, healing is worse and more painful than when they were broken together. If it's only the small bone that breaks, then a gentle stretch should suffice, and to make it even.
And if it's the large bone, you need to pull harder; place them on one cushion and pinch the hand socket higher than the others, and have the little fingers lower than the other fingers, and ensure that the skin is crossed over itself, and one cushion in front of him that is higher than the skin so that it does not suffer any strain. Then stretch your assistant's arm to the part under his elbow, or at one knuckle, and another assistant above it. And then place the mirrors evenly according to its best form.
And if in the breaking into pieces, you place each one in its place, and if there is none that grabs the key, and you cannot restore it to its place, then do work upon the bone, as we said before.
And if during the healing of the wound, I have spoken about it in the singular chapter; take the treatment.
And if during the beginning of the restoration, abscesses occur, then use this: apply a dressing composed of a plaster made from rosin and white beeswax, ensuring it's neither too hard nor too soft; place one strip of plaster gently over it so that when the abscesses are relieved. Then remove the wax, and apply a poultice mixed with powder ground in the mill along with enough egg; then place the bandage, making sure the poultice is as close to the wound as possible but slightly larger than other areas; and remember that there should be seven or eight bandages arranged differently: if the healing process is inside one bone, perhaps two bones, or more prominently near the wound rather than elsewhere; and each day decrease its application further outwards, just as I explained at the start of this chapter; ensure the bandages covering the wound are soft and moist but neither too hard nor abrasive; use threads made from linen that are not too thick nor too thin, as we have discussed. And after several days, treat the limb and the wound. And if any bad incidents occur to the limb, such as itchiness coming to the limb, it is necessary that you immerse the limb in hot water until the itchness disappears; and leave the limb not to be allowed to rest. And then start tightening again, and once the bandage has been removed and the bone is exposed, and assuming something like this, if you adjust.
And if care is taken so that no injuries can come to the limb due to it being too tight, it is necessary that you soften it a bit., and leave like this for some days, until the pain subsides, and then start tightening again.
And if none of these things that we have spoken about come to the patient, or if he is not relieved for up to 20 days, then allow him to lift his hands to his neck, and ensure they are level, and be careful with movement and stimulation, and sleep on his back; and know that this treatment has been restored in 30 days or 35 days, and sometimes in 20 days, depending on the compositions and qualities of the remedies.
of the breaking of the hand
Know that on the back of the hand and in us, there are few breaks, and it doesn't happen much, but it does get bent many times.
And when the heel of the hand is broken or bent, it should be bound in a crossed manner and placed straight before him equally; then place his hand on an extended surface, extend the fingers of the broken bones, and place them evenly with the eyes, until they are well joined; apply bandages and splints, if no abscesses occur, then place one splint according to its size; it should be wrapped in a single layer of linen.
And if the break is in the heel near the belly of the hand sole, then make a ring from cloths, and instruct the patient to place their broken heel inside it; then apply a long piece of cloth, and place one splint according to its size as big as the hand's sole, and secure it properly.
And if the fracture is at the front, you should place one splint above and another under it on the foot, so that your hand is open and straight, then tie them all around the hand together, and seal the connection between the fingers.
And if the break affects neither of your hands nor feet, it's likely a sprain; handle it evenly as needed; compress with the foot, and should you see fit to place a small straight splint to lift the sprain, so that it doesn't move; and if the break is in one of your hands or fingers, like in the index finger or any other, handle it evenly, then tie with the healthy finger following behind; or tie them all together while holding firmly, or place on a splint as you would for a sprain; be careful about the restoration and position of each wound, and take care when someone comes to help, just as I have said.
of the broken thigh
The bone in the arm is broken many times, and one can see it when it turns forward and backward; and the restoration is like this: i.e., to bind above the breakage, and i.e., another underneath. And the muscles lie above their face, then extend each minister's tendon to their equal part; and this is when the break lies within the bone.
And if the break is close to the base of the arm, let one tendon be towards the hand and the other away from the break. Similarly, if it's near the elbow, then place the ligament over the elbow and its extension below. Then set the eye so that the bone matches both hands equally, as per its natural figure, and then apply plaster and bind it up; should pus come out, do not worry.
And if there is an abscess to heal, let it heal and then return to your work and treatment; the wound is treated in this manner. It is necessary that you wrap around the wound. That is, a bandage of two layers thick, either three or four times, and retain the excess, then bend the leg until the ankles reach the base of the knee, and insert one long thread between the calf and leg, underneath at the thigh, and guide the thread upwards through the loop; then wrap around the leg and calf with the bandage, then place a wick over the wound, and set a wick on the bone of the leg; then fill the middle eight inches of space between the leg and calf with wet cloth for equal compression. Then begin to bind in three or four turns around the wound; and as you go beyond the wound, bind less tightly; then tie off two threads that you have inserted between the leg and calf, and set three wicks above them, then return down under the thread loop until you reach beneath the foot; and tighten if it doesn't move from its place, then leave it like this, so long as no other sign of an abscess or swelling appears.
And if it happens, release and guide what comes, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that catch hold, it should be removed if possible; and if it cannot, it is necessary to cut through the wound and drain out force; and treat it as we have said, until it becomes healthy.
And no part of the flesh is broken when such needles are inserted, as in the shoulder and arm; nevertheless, in such a restoration done there is no complaint from the patient.
Know that the flesh is restored within one day or possibly slightly more, or less, depending on the individual's complexion variations.
from the alley of the liver
Know that in the alley of the liver there is little fracture, but it bends many times. And if it does break, it's only a crack, or one or two parts broken off, and it happens to all injuries, and even without injury, and this can be felt well.
And for the restoration, one should place the long ones evenly at their ends until everything is assembled and moving. Then apply plaster, and place a round support if needed, then adjust as necessary. Afterwards, revise all preparations that we have discussed in other injuries such as abscesses or similar conditions; apply what is suitable to each situation until it is healed.
Of the breaking of the leg
Know that there are two bones in the leg, from which one is named straight by right as 'ham' and the other is called 'tibia'; and all injuries occur just like they do on the arm, and for this reason the restoration is similar to that of an arm equally, and the procedures are exactly the same.
And if the two bones are broken together, then turn the leg from all directions.
And if the delicate bones are broken, then turn in front.
And if the large bones are broken, then one feels great pain and sees it clearly; turn to one side. Then apply extension, make them equal, and tie them equally; but still, if the break is ugly and there are multiple pieces, that the extension should be lesser and more gentle; and adjust according to your skill.
And when you have completed your work, take two fathom lengths of hemp rope that support the leg on both sides, and each should be as long as the leg from the knee to just below. Then wrap them with two strips of leather around the legs from top to bottom, tie them in the middle too, so the leg cannot move either to the right or left. And thus it is well; no one administers a single rod of hemp that’s as long as the leg and made of hemp, they set the leg straight for warding off movement, and properly do you perform this when there's injury; and move the leg every day, to see if there is an abscess or any other incident; treat it until it becomes healthy.
Of bone fracture from the chest
An ankle injury does not come from a fracture, but each time there is a bone breakage and in the foot bones, it only means being hurt in various positions.
And if there is a bone breakage in the foot bones, and you see these bones pushing each other upwards, place your heel on the ground just like they would want to go. Then put your foot right under them at the point where the bones are raised; press it so much that blood returns to their veins. Then apply plaster and bandages over this area. Put a small wooden table with two filled foot holes under the belly of the foot, then pull it up to the heel extension, then wrap cloths around it or do other things you need.
And when three or four days have passed, if you find the tie undone, because you will find the bones equal, whether broken or healed.
And if any of the ribs are broken, you should restore them as we have said about the ribs of a hand; then place one on each broken rib according to its length, and make it somewhat wider, then set the foot of this table that I mentioned under the patient's body, and tighten in the fitting. And if there are two or three or more, you should break them, putting one under each rib according to their quantity, wrapped in a single piece of linen, and tighten the table underneath the body; and while being at the front of the table over the abdomen below the foot, so that it pinches well.
And you should not forget the other things I've said about other injuries, just like we have discussed; and address each situation according to how it should be.
regarding the breaking of the hand bone
When the bone of the womb is broken, so that it becomes swollen, then place it in a spread out position on the back part and support it from behind. Then fill the cavity nature creates with cotton, also putting an amount as big as one's fist into this opening. Next, make the woman stand up and lift her back little by little. At this point, the cotton will be released until it reaches the entrance of nature, at which point the bone returns along with the swelling. And when she wishes to urinate, remove the cotton; upon urination, let her get back in position, repeating this process for seven days or more: thus, the brokenness will be restored. If you see fit, take a bladder from a ram, tie it onto one end of a stick, and fill all the bladder inside nature. Then blow into the stick forcefully until the bladder is inflated internally; nature will return to restore the breakage. After that, fill with cotton and let her stay in this position for several days until she is healed.
And when the bone of the hand in an animal is broken, or that of a person, if it is restored in this manner as we have said for the hip bone; and these broken bones should not go unnoticed by the one who devotes their study and usage to them, and who reads my book. For brokenness signifies many expressions for the right way of restoration: thus understand it.
In the case of a broken penis, take an opossum's throat and fill it with the penis; then wrap it in bandages around the area, and let it be for three days or as long as needed; it will heal quickly.
Of breaking with wound
It is necessary for the person who has a broken bone with a wound, even if it's large, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder or something similar, that they should be treated now, so that the treatments we have said show their effectiveness.
And if the wound is healthy, treat it with vitriol, if you don't have anything else, then try again to heal the break at the same time or that day, or if no pus appears.
And if pus appears, let the healing continue until the next day, as long as the pus is soothing, and don't touch it on the third or fourth day, for you would cause harmful incidents.
And if you see bone broken out above the knee exposed, it is necessary that you place your hands on it lightly, in a small extension.
And if the extensions have not been prepared to be equal in your hands, then use this iron tool that is made of iron, which should be between seven or six inches long, and its width is according to the size of the wound; for this, you must know how to apply three or four, depending on what it requires in each treatment for fractures; and they should be round and somewhat thick so they do not bend under compression against your body when working on the limb, and they should have a pointed tip at the front and be thick toward the middle in the front.
And it is called "palainche" for that reason; so the curved ends should be placed on top of the exposed part of the bone. And hit once or twice until it returns and stays level with each other. And if the fracture is fine and the tools can't properly grasp the bone, then you need to hold onto the tip of the bone as long as the tool can reach it.
And if you cannot return the bone to its place as we have said, if you have access to a suitable tool for this purpose, such as an incisor or scalpel, by your own strength; then remove what is remaining inside the hard and minor scrapes of the bone.
And when the bone is returned and the patient feels intense pain afterwards, you should know it isn't in its natural place. If you must have it there, then moisten it with one drachm of black, stinking wine, and properly if it's external; and do not put anything like ointment or other substance that has caused an irritation on the wound, which could lead to infection and decay; instead ensure the wound remains free from infection. Give this care when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound exposed, applying a covering suitable for its size, and be very cautious so as not to tighten it with bruising; many times people did this wrong, causing death or corrosion at the wound site; and make sure that the compresses are softer and more soothing than other injuries.
And if the wound is deep or large, and you doubt that harmful incidents may have occurred, as we've said, and you find pain in the limb, it doesn't suit to apply bandages; but wrap around tightly instead of bandages with hard cloths and secure them. And when after one day or two days you see a healing sign at the wound, then remove what you've placed over it completely with wine, and put on a healing ointment for wounds, such as the tetracycline ointment and similar ones.
And it is necessary for you to dislocate the limb two times a day, in the morning and at dusk, until it is healed and restored.
And it must be that the limb is treated in such a way that the joint moves freely with light force.
And if this happens for several days, and it cannot heal anymore at all from the joint movement, know that there are small fragments of bone causing this, so you must treat the wound with caution, and remove all these dead bone fragments that cause pain.
And if a fistula occurs at the joint or through any other form of corruption, it must be treated according to what was explained in his previous chapter. And when bone is broken and open within the limb, such as bones of the knee or shoulder, or other parts of large limbs, do not remove them; many times death results from this action but leave it until it heals. By chance, it may heal after 20 days or 30 days, then treat the wound if you can; if you cannot, leave it as is.
The blows that come from sweat
They often come after the healing of the bruising, even when it's close to the joint, and this is something to see in the form of the limb; and by chance cannot do its natural works.
Therefore, be vigilant when it comes to this fresh condition: if you administer any of the stictching medicines such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, along with sarccocolle, senna, or similar things; as you would take any of these items, or all together, mix them with stictching wine, or plenty of egg whites, or honey; then place them on the spot in poultices, firmly apply, don't remove it by hand for days; and after that dislocate it, start anew until the swellings are removed; or you can apply this to a well-made piece of plaster; because the properties of the plaster is such that it removes all swellings from the limbs; and if the swelling has turned into hardness like stone and needs removal, cut through it from above, reveal the excessness clearly; or remove it with no barber's tools until it is removed, then treat until it heals.
When the breaking of bone is restored, and after it remains, if the limbs are weak and fine, this happens for various reasons: due to these conditions:
And the treatment is as follows: you must feed the patient with meat and make their body tender until they multiply within him. Then, administer baths and provide them joy and relief. Afterwards, apply grease to the limb, so that the grease draws towards the main bleeding point, and washes it frequently with tepid water, until the bleeding matches up with the limb; and restore its natural shape.
If the member is bent after recovery
When the limb is twisted after restoration, and if the bone breaks open, even though the form of the limb is ugly, it does not lose its natural function: nor should one believe those who say that you must break the entire member anew; many people have done this in our land; these practices are criticized, causing large harms, and even death. However, if the swelling and pain are fresh, they should be treated with hot water or with heated softening herbs like mint leaves, roots, and melilot. And one makes a plaster for softening, such as well-made dyaquilon, taking the mint paste and mixing it with linseed oil or safflower oil, then applying this plaster on top; alternatively you take greased figs, grind them with clove powder, and similar medicines that alleviate heat.
And never stop rubbing the dislocated joint with wet hands continuously and for a long time. And allow some movement in the limb every hour.
And if the dislocation has aged and hardened, like bone, and requires being treated with iron, if it suits to cover up to the bone, do so with a gentle incision. And apply pressure and study in the treatment.
This begins the book of dislocations
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing great pain and injury to the patient.
When dislocation happens without any reason, if it corresponds now to be brought back without hesitation.
For if one delays, the limbs swell up, and by chance, if it is put back with points on the joint; because it's not proper to move him at the time when they are swollen: many times bring pus and other pains;
When this happens, if you find a patient, let the person lie until all the pus is subsided; then immerse the limb in hot water and oil, then gently move it, and cure each member according to how they appear in their usual place.
And I have arranged the chapters on shoulder dislocations up to this point.
of the jaws
Sometimes the jaws are dislocated downward, and the dislocations of both occur in two ways: either they are slightly osteoarticular at their joints, and somewhat softened; or they are completely dislocated and hang towards the bottom, causing them to not be able to hold saliva in their mouth, nor can they close their mouth, and wrap their tongue with speech.
When the dislocation is small, it returns through several positions.
And if it's complete and accomplished, you must reset it quickly, without causing any harm;
And in such a way that the ministers cut the head of the patient with care, and press one of their thumbs into the root of the jaw dislocation inside the mouth; if the dislocation is at two inches; and the other hand should be free to ensure balance; and instruct the patient to soften, his jaws, and move them in all directions.
And press the thumb equally, until it regains its position in place.
And if returning it causes pain, even if these are the two jaws combined, if they arise from hot water and oil, do so lightly when resetting; neither should you force the return, as we have said.
And when they are returned equally, and the mouth of the diseased person closes well with mollification, then place wet cloths as bandages in a paste made of rose oil and beeswax, then bind them lightly with moist strips.
And let the patient sleep on their back, and have their shoulders resting between two cushions, so they do not move to either side or force themselves to twist, but procure them light food, until the pains are relieved, and ensure that the jaws are closed.
And then taste it lightly, and do not allow difficulty in opening the mouth for eating or drinking until the mandible is well healed and recovered.
And if the two mandibles cannot be properly reunited in an hour and are not returned to their original positions, fever and chronic discomfort ensue, along with sudden stomach pain or vomiting of undigested food.
And when you see this, then know that it is a loss; and many times, death has befallen the one who encounters it within eight days.
of the lever
The strength cannot relieve within the continuity of it and beneath the waist, and is dislocated every time at the back, and well we feel it.
And the relief is that the patient lies supine on their back and extends their arms; then press onto their chest forming to your palm, and it will return. Then place them on the plaster bed and the bandage, and apply pressure;
And the head that faces the knife cannot be relieved; if not, and if it dislocates even once, then you must reset it to its place as we have said; then place them on the plaster bed and the bandage, and apply pressure, and command the patient to rest until they are sane.
And similarly, the head of the spine is brought back when it is removed from its place.
Of the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder is dislocated in three ways: by which one happens when it dislocates to the part of the scapula below; and the second occurs at the part underfoot; and sometimes dislocates at the top part, and this rarely happens;
And it never dislocates behind the shoulder, nor within the nerves; and many times dislocates towards the scapula, even in those with little flesh, because when they leap they happen quickly; for those who have enough flesh, they jump by points and return by points.
And it happens to some men by accident or through bruising, and the shoulder swells from an abscess that forms quickly, and they believe it is dislocated because of this.
It is necessary then that you try it out, as long as you are certain; and only then start the treatment.
And when you recognize dislocations as they move towards the shoulder blade, and make a distinction between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, you will find their distinct manifestation between them. You will find a hollow at the head of the shoulder, and along the spine to the neck, it is like having an elbow; and the patient cannot bring their hand to their nose, nor move with any movements.
And also, if it is dislocated above, even if it's not completely hidden, you will find it clearly at the neck.
This method of dislocation can only be resolved through repositioning, especially when it is new or involves the shoulder bone.
And this method involves the ministers lifting their hand from under the flesh up high, then placing their thumbs on the shoulder blade and lifting the joint forcefully up towards its normal position; and the ministers lift the hand and extend it upwards, putting it back down in place; if it moves quickly.
And if it does not move as we have described within days, then the patient should be bathed in warm water; and the attendant should apply soothing treatments, such as decoctions of sage, fenugreek, and hollyhock in water, and administer them.
Then wrap the patient's back with a cloth, and place a cushion of even thickness under their shoulder blade, neither too soft nor too hard. Then put the heel on the cushion, and lift the shoulder joint gently, and pull the hand from beneath the flesh.
And another physician cuts the neck of the patient, so that it does not move forward; this shoulder has just returned now, and if you see if you reset it in this manner:
And you should have the patient present at home, who is larger than the patient; and keep them upright towards the side, and support their shoulder on the back of the neck, and lift the back upwards, so that the patient hangs in a recumbent position. And another physician pulls the hand of the patient towards his body from behind. And if the patient is too light, then even with nothing heavy pushing against him, and the dislocation returns immediately.
And you also reset it in another way: and one sticks a long stick into the ground, such that the shoulder is placed as with a pistol, and it should neither be too big nor too thick; Then have it placed near the patient's body, but make sure there is a shield of flesh above and below, and let the limb stay as long as the length of the stick. Then extend your hand from the other side downwards in formation, and the joint will return to its place quickly.
and if it doesn't return through all the things we have said, then perform this cure: take one arm stick of two big ones and four large sticks, which has its head rounded to fit in smoothly on the inside at an angle, according to this shape:
then tie at the head of the stick that is covered with flesh so it doesn't injure the patient, then place the stick under the limb; and extend your arm along the stick as long as possible, and tie the shoulder support onto the stick, and your arm at the elbow joint, then put your arm on one of the handles of the bed on its wide side, and let your hand hang downwards from the other side: the joint will return in this position now.
And when it has been done, in whatever way it is, so that you should place upon the surface of the bone an equal needle, then apply the plastered preparation with powdered from the mill, along with incense and egg oil, all over the shoulder blade and around it, then remove from under the bone addition, and tie again to the plastering, and embrace the hand at its neck, and let the hands remain like that.
And it must be chewed a little, until the limbs are strengthened, because it will heal faster; and then chew more after five days or seven, and move it; and if it is firm and not softened, it is healed.
And if the joint is loose due to moisture that has caused it, or for some other reason, you should apply three successive cauteries to it, as was described earlier in the section on cautery.
And if you do all of this, and it dislocates after seven days, and the joint doesn't hold, and cannot lift your arm upwards, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder has been stretched or weakened; and know that the joint would never have been placed in its right position.
Dislocation near the buttocks, and breasts, or behind, is caused by pushing and stretching of hands, and it's administered elsewhere; and treatment should be given while it is still clean.
And if after the healing comes itching on the limb, and slowly with movements, then bathe the patient several times until this itch is alleviated, and returns to its original state.
From the dislocation of the shoulder bone
Know that the shoulder joint is dislocated at its points and returns to them; it has been dislocated from all sides, as well as in front and behind, and dislocations are not restored because you see and feel it clearly; and it gets dislocated according to each position. And when you join the shoulder bone with the healthy one, if you can see it clearly. Because the joint is bony and cannot bend the arm or touch his shoulder in any way.
And it is necessary that you reset it in this way so that the abscesses are on each side when they swell, because if they were on one side and came out, there would be a complaint about bringing them back; and by chance, it cannot be brought back completely, even when it's behind; it is worse than other dislocations, and causes greater pain, and by chance, death comes from it.
And for its restoration when it can be brought to that position, you extend their hand with both of yours; and their arms are spread out, and the hands face towards the center according to the length of the arm, forward and backward, and push the joint onto the bones together, or at the base of their palm, until they return to its place.
And if it is a dislocation at the front, then it returns when they double their hand to their hand, and push from the base of the palm with the bone that has moved out.
And if it doesn't want to return to its place, then apply strong extension; and when both of them extend their arm, and each holds the bone, so that it does not move during extension. Then turn the arm from every side, then once you have wrapped a double long and wide cloth around it;
And when you hold the joint together with your hand, if you rub some oil to soften the joint, then press the joint firmly until it heals;
And when it is at its place, place it with a plaster and egg white, hold it firmly, and allow the arm to be bent close to the side, then leave it for some days, then release it.
And if the joint is firmly in its place, release the tie, and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not fit well, reapply the plaster and the tie, and leave it like this for some days, until it is firmly set; then release it.
And if it feels painful after returning the joint to its place and it moves again, bathe and rub it well, press until it is relieved; or you can apply a lamb's fat on the joint, then leave it for one day and one night, then remove the bandage and let it bathe in water. And when they sweat, rub the joint gently then put it back in its place and then into water; and do this twice or three times until you see improvement. If possible, apply moist cow's fat heated with butter on top and leave it there; if done correctly, it will return to its proper position.
the dislocation of the hand
The hand's dislocation subsides and the recovery is quick, more so than other joints. One should immediately bring it back to its place while it is still dislocated, in this same moment when it has subsided, so that the limbs swell or an abscess forms.
And the realignment is as follows: you place your hand on a table and extend the minister's hand, and then observe them being made equal, so that their palm touches the appearance of the joint, and hold it until she regains her position.
Always, it must be that you check if it is properly in place; then have the patient put the back of their hand on a table during extension and realignment. And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand, then have the patient place the back of their hand on the table, and observe them putting their hand on the appearance of the joint. If it returns now, it is well done.
If that doesn't work, then the application of plaster to alleviate abscesses might help, and leave it like this without needing to start over.
And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back into place after some days, then the joint will remain twisted.
And it does no harm to the patient as long as the hands are immersed, and cannot tighten anything completely: thus you know that the nerve is cut, or the artery; if there is no other way than to apply pressure with a cautery in such cases, and by chance there is no other option.
And when the hands are in place, place on the plaster as we have said, then apply pressure and leave it for five days, then release and let it be like that.
And if he cannot move it well and there is no stiffness, then use warm water, and rub until it becomes clean.
From the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Neither are the fingers of the hand ever dislocated on each side, nor at the back of the palm or belly;
Therefore keep the fingers, and prevent the dislocation in your pockets until they recover, then support the head of the finger, and bend it towards the part where it is dislocated;
and leave it for two days, and then put it back on that day; and don't let it move, as we have said, and the dislocation of the day, and make it move, and fasten it again at night; and do this often, until it is snug.
And do the same, if it dislocates in the shoulder socket, and do it as you did before until it is properly aligned; and do the same, when it dislocates on the other side.
For dislocation of the ankle, for dislocation of the back.
When the ankle or the back (or neck) is dislocated, or when there are multiple dislocations, if no treatment is given, because death rushes to the patient.
And the signs are that the discharges jump without will, and cannot be held back, and often all body parts, or both legs, or both arms, or one of them become softened.
And many times it shrinks to quarters; that one which shrinks at the back is called 'gibbousness':
The treatment is that you should reward if the gibbousness has come from childhood: if there is no treatment or healing at all.
And the one that comes from falling, impacts, or similar things, according to old methods of treatment by grand words, they do not bring any full benefit;
but I have summarized it according to my intention, and formed tools in various ways.
I say that in the condition of childbirth coming to the front of the womb, there is no harm or danger for either mother or child.
And also this is true when it goes straight down to both sides, and one can only cure what comes directly towards the back, as I say.
And it happens that the body extends up to its waist in one equal length, and has strain over itself, so as not to be hurt;
Then stick a thorn in the middle of the body into the ground and form it into a shape, and another at the elbows, and tie one string under the armpits of the body, and another at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles;
And two doctors know how to tie them, one at the head and others at joints, among these two sticks;
And make sure they are well closed, the stick as we have said, and set her palms on the spine points, until she regains consciousness.
And if this treatment does not work, take a board of three arms long, and place it under her body, and if the patient is on their side, position the head of the board under her body, then place the middle part of the board at the spine. And have her place her feet on the other end of the board, press well, until she regains consciousness at the head; and if you can, do it at the wrist that turns towards the hand.
And you should stick two needles into the middle of one arm's bad side, and towards the elbows two others, with each needle between them, immediately above and below, a handspan long;
And place one or two threads at each needle, or in the bend of the arm, and ensure that each needle is firmly stuck into the ground so they do not move; between every two needles, place another twisted needle corresponding to where its joint bends, and have two small needles between the bent ones, a handspan long, for turning the elbow.
And then tie the thread that is among the elbows at the elbow towards the head, and the other thread towards the elbows at the other elbow, and each of the servants turns his elbow to all the thread, and the masters make the spine even as we have said.
And when they are even, place them under drying plaster with abundant egg whites, and then apply oil, and afterwards rub in a tablet of one and three-quarters inches long, which purges the area around the boil and the healthy part of the spine, then bind it with a bandage as we have said, and use the patient's subtle itching until it heals;
And if anything comes at the end of healing, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the application that we have said before; and whenever it is administered there should be one piece of paste.
And if there appears behind the lower spine in the back, take care that it is dislocation; and this bone opens up, so one should not have any assumption about it: by chance it could bring death.
Dislocations of the hip
Know that the joints of the hip and the shoulder only cause dislocations, not in any other way like others. And the hip joint is dislocated according to four parts: inside and outside, front and back; and more inside than outside, a little dislocated in front and back.
And the knowledge of internal dislocation is that when one joins the diseased leg with the healthy one, it becomes longer, and the diseased knee opens more than the healthy one. The diseased knee cannot bend under fire. And it is when the limbs are swollen from abscesses, because of where the joints come into play.
And the sign of him who approaches death is that this event is contrary to these before.
And the signs of him who approaches beforehand, are that his leg is well in accordance with completion; yet, he does not double even a step without pain, and if one tries to make him walk, he cannot move forward, and retains his urine, and swells the belly, and when he walks, he goes on the heel.
And the signs of him who approaches behind, are that he cannot spread his step, nor double it, and this leg is more curved than the other, and the belly is flattened, and the shoulders come down to the back under the ribs.
The process of this sign indicating dislocation is that you should confirm if the dislocation is old and remains in its position, without any treatment; and there should be no assumption made about it.
And for those whose dislocation is fresh, and there are four ways of dislocation, if you quickly restore the joint, and stretch it inside and outwards, and move it to the right and left; if it returns, no other treatment is needed.
And if it does not return this way, you should apply one strong remedy, and hold the leg very strongly with two hands, or to the point where one is bound above the knee; And apply other remedies by extending his hand like this so that he pushes his hands out from under the armpits, then pulls him with a strong effort to the thigh; and hold his head against the rope.
And stretch up and down at once throughout, until the patient is lifted from the ground in one go, and stays suspended.
This stretching method applies to four similar cases, and if the dislocation returns, just like we have explained, it is correct.
But if not, the treatment should match its appearance. When dislocations are in the chest, it is necessary to have the patient lie on their healthy side, then place the bandage at the base of the arm, and above the armpit, then pull the bandage up towards the armpit, and towards the back;
Then have another attendant hold the patient's arms, and encircle the large part of the diseased arm with your hands, and stretch it upwards in this formation: if it returns to its position now; and this type of dislocation is lighter than others.
And if you cannot enclose it in this manner as we have said, then it is necessary that you tie the two feet together with a strong cord at their heels and at their knees, and let the ill-affected leg extend more than two feet compared to the other one.
Then have it hung from the head of a pole, and two feet above the ground; then command that one minister embrace the head of the thigh bone, and let other ministers hang with the ill-affected side, embracing to form the thigh bone, for now the joint returns quickly.
And when the dislocation is at the front, if it lies on the ill-affected side, as we have said in the case of someone who has a limp, and holds one cord properly on the ill-affected leg and also on the foot.
Then take two needles, one at the head and one elsewhere on the body, then stick a needle between the legs of the patient in the form; and have wet cloths placed inside, so that it does not blister the patient, then stretch each minister towards him, and place an equal distance from his hand for the dislocation.
If it returns, that's good. If not, place him on a table and press him in such a way as we have said for the gripostitis, and lie the patient on the healthy side.
And when the dislocation is in front, it must be stretched quickly, and according to what I said; and place the patient's pain on the diseased side, then press with the other hand, and pull down from the waist towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is at the back, it does not require extending the patient's head, nor lifting from the ground. Instead, it should be like when the hip was dislocated behind, as we said about lying on both hips; and if it's at the waist, and the head is stretched in the way we previously mentioned, and one should apply pressure to the joint on the bed;
and it will be right when the limb extends its legs, and they are equal; then adjust the thighs, apply plaster, and bind tightly with a bandage, so that the hip does not move.
and let it rest for three or four days, then release it and place the plaster; and if you see that they are equal, tie them again as before, and leave it like this for three more days; then release it, and allow it to move properly, until the limb is strengthened.
From shoulder dislocation due to arthritis
The knees can be dislocated in three ways: that is to say, from within and without, and behind; and do not dislocate forward.
And the signs for this are that you instruct the patient to bend their leg at their knee. If they cannot bend it at their knee, know that they are dislocated;
And the restoration of all this is that you make the patient sit straight, and extend their leg if they can, and place your back on their hip, and put their foot on your feet;
Then take his knee in your palms, and draw it between your fingers, then bend the two knees gently. And some other attendants extend his foot as far as the knee returns to its place, until the signs show that he has easily put his leg under his thigh.
Then place the dressing there, and let his leg rest against his thigh, and unite them firmly for three or four days, then release him; and do not move the limbs excessively until the wounds are healed.
And if the limbs are not fully recovered, administer strong exercises as we have described in the treatment of the hip, until they improve.
From the dislocation of the heel
The heels are never fully set and always partially dislocated, both inside and outside.
And the signs of this are that the ankle is swollen, and tends forward to the part where it is dislocated:
The reduction is easy; one should gently extend it with their hands when only properly set.
And when it is dislocated completely, you should have the patient sit straight, and hold them up with two assistants from behind using their leg, above the ankle;
then pull the leg towards you with your right hand, and then also with your left hand twice, then stretch it up, and firmly hold the leg up high;
and do this two times, just as we have said, by holding and pulling the leg; if it returns, that is well; if not, start the procedure again, for it will return.
and if it cannot return like that, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and place two sticks firmly in the earth between their buttocks, and bind them with cloths so as not to bruise the leg.
Then the surgeons prepare the leg, and some other surgeons extend his feet up to his hands or halfway down his body, as they tie it around his neck. Then extend each surgeon evenly, and place the patients' legs so they are between the surgeon's thighs to hold the patient when they extend.
Then align each joint evenly with their hands, and some other surgeons cut the healthy leg at that location, and the dislocated joint will return quickly.
And when it's in the right position, place the plaster and bandage on top, then firmly tighten, bind the foot to the leg, and guard the nerves that are above the anklebone, making sure the bandages aren't too tight.
Then let it for two or three days and if the wound heals, then strain it; then release it on the third day or quarter of a day, and encourage the patient with four days; And if it progresses beyond this termination, it's not safe to assume that it will no longer dislocate again.
And if the pus comes out and goes away, then you should soothe it, as we have said elsewhere, while it is still healing.
The text seems to be cut off at "des dois". Without more context or surrounding sentences, it's difficult to provide an accurate translation for this phrase alone. However, based on the preceding lines and considering the style of Old French medical treatises from medieval times, this might translate roughly as:
When both shoulders are dislocated, if they need to be beautifully stretched for manual work, and this is a simple task.
And if the dislocations are in neither the neck nor the back, then it is necessary that you make the patient lie on his full length or on a table completely straight, and place your foot where the joints open, then press with your foot firmly until he comes to his senses;
And when he is level and there's nothing opening, then place under the foot a table with two shoulders, then press firmly, and leave him for three days, then reset it; and let him rest until he recovers.
regarding wounds and dislocations together
When injury accompanies dislocation, and one seeks to restore it, many times the patient dies:
if you are not presumptuous in the treatment, if you lack skill in the art and have not practiced it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful but rather hesitant, do not be reckless;
and begin with calming things like abscess removal, and leave the patient in God's hand, if you do not see hope of recovery; and when you see hope, immediately reset the limb to its original place, so that the abscesses drain and heal;
And when the limbs are at their proper places, administer things that alleviate abscesses and cuts from the cautery, and treat the wound accordingly, with the use of dried remedies.
And if there's fracture along with dislocation, and small bones are broken, set the bones, do as we have advised for simple diseases.
And guard against entering into a state of fear according to what I have said, for you must act as per your Creator, and through knowledge arm yourself and protect your body. Amen.
