He said, and the author of this book, after I have completed for you, my sons, this book which is a part of medicine with its perfection and having reached its utmost clarity and explanation, I saw that I should complete it for you with this chapter which is a part of manual practice.
For the practice of manual skills has been neglected in our country and in our time, almost to the point that its science is forgotten and its traces are lost. What remained of it were mere illustrations in the books of the ancients, which have been smeared by hands and marred by errors to such an extent that their meanings are obscured and their benefits lost.
Therefore, I saw fit to revive it and compile this chapter in the manner of explanation, clarification, and conciseness, and to provide illustrations of the shapes of tools and other instruments of practice, for this adds to the clarity and meets the needs of those who require it.
And the reason why there is no skilled craftsman in our time is that the art of medicine is lengthy, and it is appropriate for one who practices it to first excel in the science of anatomy, as described by Galen. Until he is proficient in the benefits, nature, and mixtures of the limbs, their connections and separations, knowledge of the bones, nerves, muscles, their number, exits, pulsating and calm vessels, and the locations of their exits.
Abqarat said, "Medical practitioners are numerous in name but few in reality, especially in the art of surgery. We have mentioned this at the beginning of this book.
Because those who are not knowledgeable about what we have mentioned regarding dissection will inevitably fall into errors that kill people, as I have often witnessed among those who pretend to be learned in this field without any knowledge or understanding.
I once saw an ignorant physician cut into a worm-like swelling on the neck of a woman, and he severed some of the blood vessels of the neck, causing the woman to bleed until she died in front of him.
I saw another physician who, in removing a large stone from a man's tooth, made a mistake and removed part of the jawbone with it. The man died after about three days, and I was called to remove it. When I saw the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, I did not think he could survive it.
I also saw another physician who was famous among some of the leaders in our country for his medical expertise.
So he told a certain black slave of his, who had a fracture near the ankle along with a wound. The physician, in his ignorance, hurried and secured the fracture over the wound using tight bandages and splints, leaving no space for the wound to breathe.
Then let him loose to his desires, and leave him for days, and command him not to wear the bandage until his shin and foot swell up, and observe the destruction.
I called him, so he hastened to release the bandage and found relief and freedom from his pain, except that the gangrene had taken over the limb, and I was unable to revive it.
The gangrene continued to spread in the limb until it perished.
I saw another physician cauterize and burn a cancerous tumor, and after several days the patient's pain increased because the cancer was composed of black bile, so it should not be exposed to cold iron.
Except if it is in a limb that can be amputated completely.
And for this, my sons, it is incumbent upon you to learn that the work of surgery consists of two parts: safe work and dangerous work in most cases.
I have warned in every place that this book mentions the work which carries risk and fear, so it is incumbent upon you to beware of it and refuse it.
Lest the ignorant find a way to criticize and blame, so take for yourselves diligence and caution, and for your patients, compassion and steadfastness.
The best way leading to safety and the praiseworthy outcome is used, and the dangerous diseases that are difficult to treat are avoided.
And purify yourselves from what you fear may bring uncertainty into your religion and worldly affairs, for it is the best provision for your journey and raises your status in this life and the hereafter according to your worth.
Therefore, Galen said in some of his advices: "Do not treat a bad disease lest you become bad physicians.
This article has been divided into three chapters.
Chapter One
In it, the cautery by fire and the cautery by strong medication are described and arranged from the horn to the foot, with illustrations of the instruments and cautery irons, and everything needed for manual operation.
Chapter Two
In it, incision, cupping, bloodletting, venesection, surgery, and the extraction of arrows, and all such matters are described and arranged with illustrations of the instruments.
Chapter Three
In it, fractures and dislocations, the treatment of sciatica, and similar matters are described and arranged from the head to the foot with illustrations of the instruments.
Chapter One
On Cautery.
Before discussing its use, it is necessary to mention its benefits and harms, and in which temperament it should be used.
I say that the speech on the benefit and harm of cupping is long and precise knowledge, hidden secret, and a group of sages have spoken about it.
And they differed on it, and from their speech there remains only a little, for fear of becoming lengthy.
I say that cupping benefits all types of ailments, whether with or without bloodletting, except for two types: hot temperament without bleeding and dry temperament without bleeding.
As for the dry temperament with bloodletting, they differed on it; some said that cupping is beneficial in this case, while others disagreed, saying that cupping is not suitable for a disease of heat and dryness because the nature of fire is heat and dryness.
It is impossible to cure a hot and dry disease with a hot and dry remedy, but those who say the opposite claim that cupping with fire may benefit from a hot and dry disease occurring in human bodies. Because when you add the human body and its moisture to the temperament of fire, it makes the human body cold.
And I say, following his statement, because experience has revealed this to me many times; however, it is not proper for anyone to consider this matter except one who has practiced and trained thoroughly in the art of cupping. "And he stopped at the difference of humors in people and the nature of diseases within them, their causes, symptoms, and duration.
"As for the rest of the humors, you should not fear them, especially the cold and moist diseases, as all physicians agree on their treatment and do not differ in the benefit of cupping therapy for them.
"And know, O sons, that the secret of treatment by cupping with fire and its superiority over cupping with burnt medicine is that fire is a unique substance that does not exceed the function of the member being treated, nor does it harm another connected member except for slight harm.
"And cupping with burnt medicine may exceed its function to what is beyond the members and sometimes causes a disease in the member that makes its treatment difficult, and sometimes it kills. Fire, due to its nobility and the honor of its substance, does not do this except when used excessively.
"This has been clarified to us through experience over a long period of service and care for the profession, and by paying attention to the facts of the matter.
"And for this reason, I have dispensed with lengthy discourse, though if it were not unsuitable for this book of mine, I would have presented to you a profound secret about fire and its method of operation in bodies, driving out diseases with philosophical arguments that prove the essence of understanding.
Know, O sons, that they have differed on the time suitable for cauterization, and considered the best time to be in spring.
And I say that cauterization can be suitable at any time, for the harm caused by time is less than the benefit obtained from cauterization. Especially if the cauterization is for severe, urgent, and life-threatening conditions that do not tolerate delay, lest it be followed by disfigurement greater than any harm inflicted by time.
And do not be deceived, O sons, by what the common people and ignorant physicians think: that the cauterization which cures a disease can never recur or make it chronic.
The matter is not as they thought, for cauterization is like a medicine that adjusts the temperament and dries the humors which are the cause of the conditions.
But cauterization is preferred over medicine for its quick effectiveness, the strength of its action, and the intensity of its power.
And the disease may recur at some point in time, depending on the temperament of the patient and the strength and nature of the disease, as well as what is prepared in the body from the accumulation of excess humors in it, and his neglect of himself in acquiring nourishment and similar causes.
O God, do not let the disease for which the knife is used be a delicate disease or in a limb with little excess flesh and moisture. Like cutting a tooth to relieve pain and similar things, it may not recur, and that would be in the least amount.
As for the common saying that surgery is the last resort in medicine, it is a correct statement, except for what they believe, which is that there is no cure either by medicine or by other means after the incision, and the matter is contrary to that.
The meaning of "surgery is the last resort in medicine" is that when we have used all means of treatment for a disease and those drugs did not cure, then we use another thing, which is surgery, and it cures. From this comes the saying: "Surgery is the last resort in medicine. Not in the sense that the common people and many of the ignorant physicians understand it.
And it has been mentioned before that cutting with gold is better than cutting with iron, and they said this because of the balance of gold and the nobility of its gemstone, and they said that it does not cause inflammation at the site of the incision, but this is not absolutely true.
I have found that this method works better in some bodies than others, and it is the best and most effective compared to iron, as they say. However, if you heat the needle in a gold fire, it will not be clear to you when it reaches the desired degree of redness for the gold.
And because it cools quickly, even if you increase the heat in the fire and melt it, it becomes brittle. Therefore, the use of iron is faster and more accurate for work, God willing.
And I have organized this chapter on cauterization into sections that I have arranged from the head to the foot, so that it will be easy for the student to find what he needs, God willing.
Chapter One.
For cauterizing the head, there is one method.
This method is beneficial for excess moisture and coldness in the brain, which are causes of headaches, excessive discharge from the head to the eyes and ears, excessive sleep, toothache, and earache. In summary, this method is effective for all diseases caused by coldness, such as paralysis, sciatica, and similar ailments.
This is a picture of that cyst, which orders the patient first to cleanse with a simple, pure medicine for the head three or four nights according to what necessitates the strength and habit of the patient.
Then he commands him to shave his head with a razor, and then sit before you with his hands on his chest.
Then place the base of your little finger on the base of his nose between his eyes, so that where your middle finger ends, mark that spot with a pen.
Then heat the olive oil lamp shown in this picture.
Uncover the bone as much as the head of a needle or the size of a poppy seed, then raise your hand and apply the hot iron or another if it has cooled down. Until you see the bone as I mentioned to you, then take some salt and dissolve it in water, and soak a cotton cloth in it and place it on the spot, leaving it for three days.
Then apply to it a cotton cloth soaked in oil and leave it until the scab from the fire disappears, then treat him with a quart of mercury until he is cured, God willing.
The wound, as long as it remains open, continues to drain pus, and that is better and more beneficial.
Some of them mentioned that the skin should be stretched over the bone and held until part of the bone marrow is burned; then, whatever has been burnt from the bone should be removed and treated afterwards.
Others said that it is necessary to stretch the skin until it affects the bone strongly, causing a small piece of bone, similar in size to a grain or a small nail head, to fall off. They claimed that this releases a vapor from that spot, and the wound should be left open for a long time.
Then it should be treated until it heals, and I do not see this type of stretching in most people except in some cases of gangrene. I prefer to leave it alone for safety reasons because the head will heal when its natural connection is separated, as we have observed in other parts of the body.
Especially if the patient's head is naturally weak, and I prefer the first type of stretching for it is safer and more effective. So use this method and may God grant you success.
Chapter Two.
Stretching the Skull as Well.
If there is a long and persistent pain in the head, and that is caused by an underlying condition, and treatments such as enemas, purgatives, baths, sweating, and bleeding were used, especially if he has previously used the single enema that we described, and it did not benefit him from that, look. If the patient's head is strong in nature and not weak, and he feels intense cold, then give him another enema on top of that one, but a little less. Then give him an enema on each forehead of his head until the coldness of the skin disappears and the extent of bone that we described is revealed. And give him an enema at the back of his head in the place known as the "behind the neck" and be gentle with your hand, do not expose the bone, for the patient will find this very painful, unlike the pain from the other head enemas, all of which I will mention in their places.
And the enema used for the forehead and back of the head should be milder than the enema used for the middle of the head, as we described it.
Chapter Three.
Cure the non-chronic sinus.
If pain occurs in the side of the head with swelling and the pain extends to the eye, the patient should be purged with cleansing medicines for the head, and the rest of the treatment that I mentioned in the classification of diseases should be used. If this does not cure it, then trepanation is performed on both sides. Either the trepanning with hot cautery, or with iron.
As for the trepanning with a hot cautery, it is done by taking one clove of garlic, peeling it and cutting off its edges from both sides. Then, make an incision in the painful spot of the cheekbone with a wide blade until there is a space under the skin to fit the clove.
It is placed under the skin until it disappears, then it is firmly bandaged with tight bandages and left for fifteen hours. Then it is unwrapped, and the garlic is removed, leaving the wound open for two or three days before dressing it.
And it is dressed with cotton soaked in oil until the spot heals. Then it is treated with poultices until it recovers, God willing. If you wish, you can do this with some of the burnt medicines that I mentioned in the eighteenth chapter on burnt medicines.
And as for cauterization with iron, it is done in this manner: the cautery, which is depicted here, is heated.
The cylindrical cautery is so called because its tip resembles a screw, and it has some indentations, with a small hole in the middle.
Then place it on the site of pain and hold it with your hand, gradually turning the iron little by little; thus, the amount burnt from the skin's thickness will be like half of it. And lift your hand so that you do not burn the veins below, which causes bleeding. Then drink cotton in salt water and place it on the site, leaving it for three days. Then carry the cotton with oil, then treat it with honey until it heals, God willing.
And if you wish, you can cut this incision with the smooth edge that comes from the cautery, and it will protect against cutting the veins in this incision except for the intended ones specifically.
Chapter Four.
Make a deliberate incision.
If you treated the incision with the remedies mentioned earlier and as described in the division of diseases, but the treatment did not work and you saw that there was no reason for it, then blame must be placed on the initial cauterization either with medication or fire. It is necessary that the surgical blade be heated until it becomes white after learning on the place of pain with a line length of half a finger or thereabouts, and leave your hand once and clamp it until the vein cuts and reaches near the bone.
Unless you avoid damaging the masticatory muscle, which moves during chewing, you will burn the nerve or motor muscle that activates it, causing paralysis.
Be cautious and careful not to rupture the vein you have cut, for there is danger in its cutting. Especially for those who are ignorant of what they do and are not experienced practitioners, it is best to leave the work to someone more skilled.
And the method of handling accidental rupture of a vein will be mentioned in its place in this book, God willing. If you see something that cannot be done with these methods, it is not your fault.
If you see the patient's body suitable for this method in the middle of the head as we described, then treat the wound until it heals, God willing.
And if you prefer, use the cauterizer we mentioned in the chapter on tying off veins with the double-bladed cautery, for it is a better and more effective method than this one.
The Fifth Chapter.
On the Pain of the Ears.
If pain occurs in the ear due to cold, and it is treated with compresses and other treatments mentioned in the division, but the pain does not go away, then use the cautery known as the point, which is shown here in its image.
Then, after heating it, use it to cauterize around the entire ear or both ears if the pain is in them. Keep the point away from the base of the ear slightly after learning its place by touch, and the point should be about ten points for each ear or thereabouts. Then treat the places until they are healed, God willing.
The Sixth Chapter.
On Weakness.
The weakness that is treated with cautery is of the type that occurs due to phlegm, as mentioned in the divisions of diseases.
And cautery should be avoided for the type that occurs due to dryness and nerve exhaustion.
If this type of weakness has been treated with ointments, suppositories, and potions, and the treatment did not work, it is necessary for the patient to be cauterized in three places. One at the base of the ear, the second a little below its root, and the third near the junction of the lips.
Translate the excerpt into English: "Make a pad from the opposite side of the patient, for relief only occurs on the side that appears healthy.
Translate the excerpt into English: "The shape of the pad should be cylindrical, placed near the upper ear under the corner of the head slightly, and another one on the cheek, with a length equal to the length of the temples.
Translate the excerpt into English: "Lower with your pad until it burns half of the skin's thickness, and this is the shape of the cautery iron, which is a type of surgical instrument whose image has been presented, except that it is slightly finer as you see. "The knife should have a slight edge, then treat the place with what was mentioned until it heals, God willing.
Translate the excerpt into English: "Chapter Seven.
Translate the excerpt into English: "Pad the inflamed bladder.
"If the bladder is inflamed and you treat it with what we mentioned, but your treatment does not work and the cause is not clear humors, then pad it with four pads. "Place a pad on each corner of the head, and two pads in the middle of the head as mentioned earlier, and one pad on the back of the head.
The treatment of ulcers as described, and if there is also a fistula on the mouth of the stomach, it will be better. Then treat with what is mentioned.
Chapter Eight.
The cure for forgetfulness.
The one who has ulcers should first drink from the large intestines and the clean brains for the brain.
Then his entire head should be shaved, and on the back of his neck, he should carry a pouch containing almonds written in the chapter on almonds, carrying it repeatedly for it is effective against ulcers.
And do this on the ribs themselves as mentioned above, for he will be cured by it; otherwise, make three fistulas in the back of his head, extending from the top of the head to the bottom of the neck.
And make the space between each fistula and the next one thick, like a finger, then treat the fistula as mentioned before. If you want to increase it and the patient can tolerate it, then open the middle fistula.
If you want to increase it, then open on the temples. Then treat him until he recovers, and the ulcer will be like an olive, as mentioned before.
Chapter Nine.
In the treatment of hernia and the healing of all parts of the body.
First, you should clean the head with vinegar and what we have mentioned. Then, shave the patient's head. Place a bandage in the middle of the head, and place a bandage on each side of the head, and another on the back.
And three on the neck, for if there is a need in healing the body to more than that and the patient can bear it, and the disease is strong and firm, then place four bandages on the sides of his back. And continue with the bandage until it burns most of his skin, then raise your hand and treat him as mentioned before until he recovers, God willing. The bandages should be made from olive oil.
Chapter Ten.
On bandaging the ulcer.
The ulcer that is to be bandaged, whose ulceration comes from the brain, should first have its head cleaned with large vinegar and all the treatment that we mentioned in the division. If the patient is big and can bear taking medicines, do so.
But if it is a child who cannot bear medicines, then use gargles and clean honey for the head several days before that, along with improving his diet.
Then he shaves his head, and cuts a single tuft of hair in the middle of the head as previously described, and another tuft at its rear. And on each horn of the head, a tuft; if the patient is strong and can withstand it, let him cut the tufts mentioned in the care of the parotid glands and on the neck and back, and the shaving should be olive-shaped as previously described.
If the patient is a child, make the shaving gentle in this manner.
The Eleventh Chapter.
In cutting of the tonsils.
If the cause of the tonsils is bad humors and thick phlegm, cut the tufts that we mentioned in the care of the parotid glands.
If the cause of the tonsils is a humoral imbalance leaning towards black bile, and the patient's body is moist, let him rinse his brain with what washes it as mentioned in the division [of diseases].
Then shave the patient's head, and make a firm cap from cotton like a circle, then place it in the middle of his head while the patient is sitting on his heels, holding each side. Then take one pound of old ewe's fat.
Then heat it over moderate fire as much as the finger can bear if placed in it, then pour it on his head within the circle and leave it until it cools down. Do this with the patient every week along with the rest of his good treatment until he is cured, God willing.
If you wish, let the poultice be small and numerous without your hand holding the bowl, but it should be a paste, for this type of poultice moistens the brain moderately.
Then place on it a cotton cloth soaked in oil or chicken fat.
Chapter Twelve
In the section on water poultice for the eyes.
If you notice the beginning of water in the eye with the signs mentioned in the classification, then hasten to wash the patient's head and keep him away from all moisture, and steam him in the bath on the steam for several days.
Then shave his head and apply a poultice in the middle of the head, then apply two poultices on the temples; if the water discharge starts in both eyes together or in one eye alone if it is in one eye.
Then cut with the scalpel all the veins and blood vessels beneath the skin, and let the sutures be in them in length according to the width of the jawbone, and take care not to spill the blood.
If you see anything of it, cut it off in place with any treatment that is possible for you, and we will come to the wisdom of closing the blood vessels and cutting them, and taking care not to spill [the blood].
And there may be in the heel under the bones two prominent sutures.
Chapter Thirteen.
On the suturing of chronic tears.
If the tear of the eye is chronic and persistent, and it is from the veins and blood vessels that are on the surface of the head outside the head, and you have confirmed that this is due to cold, thick, phlegmatic humors, then suture the tear as described with its eye at the beginning of the descending water.  (Note: The word "eye" here refers to a specific point or mark on the vein where the suturing should start.) A suture in the middle of the head, two sutures on the jaws, two sutures in the heel under the bones; and if it requires more, make a suture on each side of the tail of the eye on the edge of the eyelid with a small scalpel.
Chapter Fourteen
In the case of nasal polyps.
If you have treated it with what we mentioned in the division and the treatment does not help, then hurry to administer castor oil to the patient for three nights, then wash his head and cut the middle polyp with the olive oil probe. Then cut it with the screw probe two polyps above the eyebrows, under a little hair, and be careful not to cut the artery. This is the shape of the screw probe.
Chapter Fifteen
In the case of removing cataracts from the eye.
If the cataract of the eye is removed due to disease or moisture, cut one cataract polyp with this crescent probe.
And if you wish, cut two polyps above the eyebrows a little in each direction, and keep away from the eyelids, and let the length of each polyp be the length of the eyebrow.
Do not let your hand overdo the polyp, but only to the extent that it burns one-third of the skin, and this is the shape of the probe.
Chapter Sixteen
In the case of removing a cataract from the eye.
If its membrane has inverted inside, then press on the eye and cut it in two ways. And the cauterization, either by fire or by a burnt drug. As for cauterizing with fire, instruct the patient beforehand to remove his clothes if he is one who can undress until they become long and even.
So if its stem is short at the time of planting, tie his eyelids with a bandage so that they do not move until it grows. Once it has grown and settled, place the patient's head on your stone, then mark the corner of the eye with a pen in the shape of a leaf of asafoetida.
The beginning of the mark should be near the eye socket, then place a cotton swab soaked in egg white or azure blue under the eyelid and cover this swab with a patch.
Then cover the shape that you marked little by little in many times until the surface of the skin, which is like the leaf of asafoetida, is completely burned. The sign of your work being successful is that you see the eyelid has wrinkled and the hair has risen from the eye meat.
Lift your hand at that time and leave it for three days, then place a cotton swab with oil on it until the scabs fall off, then treat him with myrobalan until he recovers, if God wills. If any of the hair returns after a while and the eyelid wrinkles again.
The excerpt translates to: "Prepare the cautery as you did before. If the hair is on the lower jaw, shave it until it returns to its natural place and does not irritate the eye. As for the cautery with the burnt medicine, it is that the patient is ordered to leave the scar until it lengthens and evens out.
Then make a paste from kaghd (a type of paper) and take equal weights, about a dirham each, of trusted soap and unslaked lime, grind them together well with a pestle so that it does not dry out. Then, spread it on the paper paste you made, like a sheet of paper, and place it on one or both sides of the eye’s jaw. Place beneath the eye a cotton swab soaked in egg white, and put the patient's head on your stone.
Place your soaked finger over the medicine and press it slightly, moving it whenever the patient feels the burning of the medicine, for it burns like fire. As long as the patient feels the burning, leave the medicine in place and move it with your finger. When the burning stops, remove the medicine and wash the eye with water.
Look, if you see the abscess has risen as it rises with burning or cutting, then prepare a remedy on the place where the remedy did not act and was not sealed until your work is completed and the eye is burned, then put cotton with oil on it until the scab of the burn falls off.
Then treat it with date stones or something similar until it is healed. And you should be very careful during the procedure that nothing from the remedy falls into the eye, for if the abscess bursts after a few days and anything falls into the eye, you will have something to fear.
Prepare the remedy on that spot where the abscess burst, just as you did before, then treat it until it heals. And this is a representation of the eye's sheet.
And know that the eyes of people can vary in size, so your burning should be according to that, and the path to correctness is not hidden from one who has a path in this craft.
Chapter Seventeen.
In the case of a sty on the eyelid.
If you treated the sty with what we mentioned in the section on diseases and it did not heal, then you must consider this feature.
The patient is instructed to place his head in your lap and to have a servant hold his head between your hands, ensuring that it does not move or shake.
Then place a soaked cotton cloth in the white of an egg or on the eyelids, and heat the cauterizing iron as shown in its image.
It should be hollow like the talon of an eagle, with one end closed and containing a hole. If you wish, you can make it open at both ends or even completely closed except that this hollow method is better for your work, if God wills.
Then, if it is open, squeeze out the pus from the nasal cavity and clean it. If it is not open, then open it and extract its contents, after which place the cauterizing iron on it, for it is very protective. Hold it with your hand until you reach the bone.  />
Then move your hand slightly towards the eye from the hole in the nasal cavity to avoid any error or causing anxiety to the patient, so that the cauterizing iron does not fall into the fat of the eye and damage it. If you reach the bone on the first try, good; otherwise, reheat the cauterizing iron a second time if needed.
Leave it for three days, then apply a flax cloth with oil and treat it with dried myrobalan until it heals. If forty days have passed and it has not healed, apply the sharp drug known as calcanthus until the bone is exposed. Then scrape it according to what will be mentioned in its chapter, God willing.
Another method mentioned by the Nasor, as noted earlier, involves digging into the site of the ulcer, then placing a thin tube in the same cavity. This is its illustration.
And pour into it the weight of a dirham of melted lead and hold the tube firmly with your hand so that the patient does not move, lest the melted lead flow into his eye. It is necessary to place a flax cloth on the patient's eye, dipped in egg white or water.
For lead burns the site of the ulcer and heals it wonderfully. If the ulcer does not heal with the methods mentioned for cauterization and treatment, then there is no choice but to pierce the nose and drain the ulcer into the nasal passage as will be detailed in its specific section.
Chapter Eighteen.
In the clefts of the lips.
It often happens that there are clefts in the lips, which are called hairs, especially in children's lips. If this cleft is treated as we mentioned in the division, and the treatment does not cure it, then a small hook-like knife should be used in this manner.
Its hollow should be on the blade of a knife, then place it in the cleft with a wheel until the hollow reaches the depth of the cleft, then treat it with cotton until it heals, God willing.
Chapter Nineteen.
On the Clefts of the Palate that Occur in the Mouth.
If it appears at the root of the gums, or on the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, and becomes inflamed, swells up, and bursts with pus, forming a cleft in the palate, then if treated, it does not heal. Therefore, one should apply a bandage that fits well into the cleft.
Then insert a bandage into the hole of the palate and grasp it with your hand until the iron is covered on both sides, and do this one or two times. After that, treat it as we have mentioned in the treatment until it heals, God willing.
If the bone is broken and clear, there is no need to uncover it; otherwise, it must be uncovered at the site, and the diseased bone should be removed according to what will come in its section, God willing.
The Twentieth Chapter.
On the treatment of carious teeth and rotten gums.
If the gums have rotted from moisture and the teeth have moved and were treated with drugs but did not improve, place the patient's head on a stone, then insert the probe into the tooth after placing the syringe on the tooth.
Then insert the hot syringe with the wheel, and hold your hand a little until the patient feels the heat of the fire reaching the root of the tooth; then lift your hand, then repeat the syringe several times according to what you want, then let the patient rinse his mouth with salt water.
And let him hold it for an hour, then spit it out; because the moving tooth will stabilize and the rotten gums will heal and the foul moisture will dry up.
The Twenty-First Chapter.
On the treatment of toothache.
If the toothache is from cold or there is a worm in it and does not improve with drug treatment, then treat it in two ways: either by cauterization with oil or by cauterization with fire.
The cumin with ghee is to take the cow's ghee and melt it in an iron pot or a frying pan, then take a piece of cotton and wrap it on the end of the reed, then dip it into the melted ghee and place it on the hurting tooth with a wheel, and hold it until it cools down.
Then repeat the process until the heat reaches the root of the tooth. If you wish, you can dip a wick or cotton in cold ghee and place it on the hurting tooth, and then cover it with a heated iron until the heat reaches the cavity of the tooth.
As for cauterizing with fire, it is done using a copper or iron tube, and there should be some thickness in the walls of the tube to prevent the heat of the fire from reaching the patient's mouth. Then heat the cap that matches its shape and place it on the same tooth, and hold your hand until the cap cools down. Do this several times.
The pain will disappear either that day or the next, and after this cauterization, it is necessary for the patient to fill their mouth with good ghee and hold it for an hour, then spit it out. This is what the cap looks like.
This is done on either side as desired and according to what is possible, and this is the appearance of the tube.
The Twenty-Second Chapter.
On Pig's Bladder.
If the pig's bladder is not ripe and free from cold humors, and has not been pickled with medicines for cooking, and you want to cook it quickly, heat an empty pot as shown in this image, both ends open.
Place the pot with the opening facing away from the bladder, and cover it twice if needed until it reaches the thickness of the bladder. If the bladder is small, adjust the size of the pot accordingly.
Then leave it for three days, and place a cotton cloth soaked in oil on top of it to absorb the smoke. After that, clean it with vinegar and water until it is purified, God willing.
The Twenty-Third Chapter.
On the Bladder for Hoarseness and Difficulty in Breathing.
If the humors have dominated the trachea, especially if this is accompanied by a cold temperament, it is necessary for the patient to first empty out with easy medicines, then insert a bladder into the incision at the base of the throat in the lower part.
Fear that it reaches the bones and do not burn more than half of the skin; then take another kay, at the joint of the neck in the last cartilage from it with a prominent hook, and the hook will be threaded as described before.
Then treat it with what was mentioned previously until it heals, if God wills.
The Twenty-Fourth Section.
In the kay, the disease of the ankle and the heel.
If the heel and ankle disease is due to cold moisture and there is no fever or inflammation, and if the disease is chronic, then take two kays above the ankles in the soft, empty places; also, take another kay in the middle of the chest between the breasts.
The hook will be threaded as described before, and if you wish, it may be a kay in which the hook is called al-naqta, and its figure has been shown previously in the treatment of earache, and the naqta will be from thirty naqtas to it.
Then treat it with what was mentioned before until it heals, and a three-pronged hook can be made on this figure, and the kay can be done quickly with it because you can take three kays with it in one time, and this is the figure of the hook.
Chapter Twenty-Five
In the chapter on hernias.
If the tendon's head slipped out due to wetness or was not properly secured when it returned from slipping, causing it to become accustomed to slipping and slip with the slightest movement as we have observed, then the jaw should be reset first. Then, the patient should lie on his back or on the healthy side, and the skin inside the hernia should be lifted up with the fingers of your left hand if the dislocation is towards the inside.
Then, heat the needle with two rods as shown in its image.
Then, use it to pierce the skin until the needle passes through to the other side. This forms a hernia with four openings. It can also be done with a needle having three grooves, making six openings at that time, and the grooves will be on the edge of the needle. بالتأكيد، لا تضيف ملاحظات أو تعليقات أو شرحات.
And this is the image of the three-grooved needle.
And one can be added to this number, making eight openings. Then, place the kerrat medicated with salt on the hernia and instruct the patient not to move the limb until it is healed, which rarely happens if the dislocation is upward.
A good, screw-like cautery above the temple, or many cauteries that prick, for the joint will be strengthened and the moisture will go away, and the patient will recover.
Chapter Sixteen.
In cauterizing the stomach.
If cold and excessive moisture occurs in the stomach, altering its temperament and causing frequent urination, and it is not cured by usual treatments, then it is necessary to make the patient lie on his back, extend his leg and hand, and apply three cauteries. One cautery under the sternum to the extent of a finger with a screw-like iron, and two cauteries below it on each side of the single cautery so that they form a triangle, and keep them apart lest they join if inflamed; the depth of the cauterization should be one third the thickness of the skin, and such will be the shape of the cauteries.
According to this picture and in this measure, no more.
And if you wish, make one large cautery in the center of the stomach like this picture.
And the iron used for this single cautery should be in the shape of a circle like this picture.
He who fears this will cauterize the stomach with a point on it according to what is desired by pressure, then he will cauterize it with a pointed hook, and then he will treat it with the treatment that was mentioned until it heals.
The twenty-seventh section.
On cold cautery of the liver.
If the liver experiences pain due to cold or wetness, or due to a very strong wind that causes it to deviate from its natural humoral balance in an excessive manner, and if you treat the patient with what we mentioned in the classification, he will not benefit from this treatment. It is necessary for the patient to lie on his back and learn three cauteries in this manner and this amount, directly on the liver below the ribs where the human diaphragm ends.
And after each cautery, there should be another cautery the width of a thumb, and the cautery should be in a straight line along the body, and do not grip the hook tightly with your hand.
The amount of skin that should be burnt is half, no more, and the patient should stand on his feet; if he cannot stand, then let him lie down with his legs stretched out and his arms raised. And this is the shape of the hook.
And you can use a cautery iron for these wounds, if you have skill and caution in the craft, and be careful not to burn the skin completely so that it burns the abdomen and reaches the intestines, because the skin there is thin, so know that.
Chapter Twenty-Eight
In the case of an abscess and inflammation of the liver with a wound.
If there is a discharge from the liver and you want to know if that inflammation is in the flesh of the liver or in its capsule, for if it is in the flesh of the liver, then the patient will feel heavy and intense pain.
And if it is in the capsule of the liver, then there will be severe pain with limits, and you will see that the physicians have failed to treat it. Therefore, the patient should be made to sit on his heels, and then cauterize the warm area with a hot iron.
Then heat the cautery iron in the fire, and it is the iron that resembles a spear, and this is its shape. Cauterize the wound with it until the skin burns completely and the cautery reaches the capsule until all the discharge comes out, then treat it with the treatment for discharges until he recovers.
This type of cauterization should only be used by someone who has a long experience in the art of medicine and has treated these diseases by trial and error many times, for then he will excel in this work.
Chapter Twenty-Nine.
On Cauterizing the Nipple.
I mentioned earlier the cautery of the nipple by taking a long, dry root of the marshmallow plant, making it as thick as a finger, then soaking it in oil and lighting it in the fire. Then, place one cautery between the junction of the trachea and the neck, and two small cauteries slightly below the armpits slanted towards the side under the cheekbone, and two large cauteries on the chest between the third and fourth ribs.
Two more cauteries between the fifth and sixth ribs, slightly inclined towards the back, another in the middle of the chest, and one above the navel; three cauteries at the back: one between the shoulders, two beside the spine below the cautery that is between the palms;
It is not appropriate for your hand to be deep in the intestine, but it should be on the surface of the skin, barely touching. Some ancient authors mentioned that some people use an iron needle, similar to a spear, which they protect and insert between the ribs until it reaches the same worm.
The intestine comes out as we mentioned in the case of the liver worm, and in this case, there is danger that the patient may die from shock or that a lump appears at the site with no cure for it.
Chapter Thirty
The Cure of Wounds
If the treatment of the wound with what we mentioned in the division is not effective, then the cure for it is threefold, each one correct: One of them is to suture the wound with three or four stitches along its length.
Each stitch should be like the stitches of the liver, whose shape we have previously described. The distance between each stitch and the next should be about the thickness of a finger or slightly more. The thread used for the stitches should be the same type as mentioned for liver stitches. The patient's body should be laid flat on his back during this process, and your hand should not penetrate deeply into the wound.
The other side of the flap and lift the skin that is adjacent to the nipple, where the patient's flap ends, and lift the skin that is adjacent to the nipple on the left side, and your lifting of the skin should be across the body so that the sutures run along the length of the body.
Then, insert the needles very carefully until they emerge from the other side. Then remove the needle, leaving four sutures. If you wish to use another needle with three threads.
Then treat the sutured area after leaving it for many days, as it is better than any other treatment that has been presented before.
Chapter One and Thirty.
In suturing for incisions.
Suturing is only beneficial for narrow incisions, particularly if the patient has been treated with the methods of treatment we mentioned in the division, and your treatment did not help. Then it is necessary to suture four sutures around the wound and one suture on the stomach.
And another suture on the liver, and one on the nipple, and two behind his back between the ribs, one towards his chest and the other towards his stomach. The depth of the suture should be close to the thickness of the skin, then leave the suture open for a long time.
And do not neglect the patient after cupping, as he should be treated with what is appropriate to hasten his recovery. The shape of the cup used for cupping the back should be cylindrical, as shown in its picture, and the one used for cupping the side should be olive-shaped.
Chapter Two and Thirty.
On cupping the feet and calves.
If the feet and legs hurt and swell with yellow water, it is necessary to cup on top of the foot in the groove between the ankle and the heel.
And place your hand on the cup and do not move it, then raise your hand and do not repeat the process for a second time, as this will drain the yellow water, and the cup should be like this picture.
Then, on each leg, place two cups, one at the inner edge of the cup and one along the length of the leg, with one below the knee and another halfway down the leg, and on each thigh, also place two cups.
Leave the cup open without any treatment for a long time to allow water to drain from it, then treat it with everything else we mentioned.
Chapter Thirty-Three
Concerning hemorrhoids.
If the hemorrhoids are due to cold and moisture, which weakened the powers of digestion and retention in the stomach and intestines, and if this condition cannot be alleviated by various treatments, and you see that the patient is prone to hemorrhoids and has strong digestive power, then place a large clyster on his stomach. As described for the clyster of the stomach with a round enema, place four clysters around the anus to be inserted by means of a fine enema cane and a large cotton wad above the large intestine or two clysters.
If you see that moisture is abundant and the patient is prone to this, then place a clyster on the anus and a clyster on each hip, and perhaps two small clysters near the stomach, close to the large one. For it is a successful treatment whose benefit does not fail, God willing.
Chapter Thirty-Four
Concerning clysters for sitting patients.
If the patient is sitting for a long time, whether continuously or once, and if it is from thick, cold substances or bad moisture, and if you treated him according to what we mentioned in the division, then the treatment did not benefit. So place three clysters on the lower part of the back, under the ribs, slightly triangular.
وكيّة تحت السرّة بمثل أصبعين وإن قدّرت أنّ معدته قد بردت وطعامه لا ينهضم ورايت وجهه متورّما فاكوه على المعدة وكيّة كبيرة على ما تقدّم وكيّة على كبده. وأخرى على طحاله بمكواة مسماريّة واترك الكىّ مفتوحا زمانا ثمّ عالجه حتّى يبرأ إن شاء الله.
The fifth and thirtieth chapter.
في كئ الثعاليل.
After cutting it, if the urethra is cut, insert a probe resembling a needle into it, then place a tampon inside the same cut urethra and press your hand until the probe reaches the end where the urine flows from. Do this once or twice.
If the urine is abundant, insert a probe into each one as described, then treat it with appropriate suppositories until it heals. Additionally, inserting a large probe in the cotton will be most effective if it reaches the uterus.
The thirty-sixth chapter.
In the operation on the Nasoor which is in the chair and its surroundings.
If the patient is not able to sit in the chair and perform the operation that we have described, then it might be necessary to perform a surgical procedure instead. Sometimes, when there is an abscess or foul-smelling discharge, it is appropriate for you to first measure it with a thin stick.
Then determine the depth of the abscess with the stick, then heat a hollow needle that resembles a needle. Insert it into the same abscess on the head of the ulcer, and perform the cautery until all the corrupt flesh is burned, once or twice or three times as needed.
And be cautious not to burn a nerve if there is one, or a large vein, and if the ulcer extends to the bone of the bladder or the kidney bone.
Therefore, be cautious of all these places, and you should do this if the ulcer is in a fleshy part and you have judged it to be incurable, then treat the place until it heals. If the area closes and the discharge stops and remains so for some time, know that it has been completely cured.
"And if the matter does not separate from it, know that it is a fistula or in its depth there is a rotten bone or similar to what will be mentioned in its place.
Chapter Seven and Thirty.
In the kidney.
If cold pain or thick wind affects the kidney and diminishes due to this, it is necessary to apply a poultice of nettles on the kidneys themselves, one for each kidney, with a cylindrical compress as previously mentioned. Sometimes, we applied three in the same dish, so there were three well-prepared poultices, which was most effective.
Chapter Eight and Thirty.
In the bladder.
If the bladder experiences weakness and coldness due to cold and moisture, causing the patient to lose control of urination, apply a poultice on the lower back directly over the bladder where the public hair begins, another on the right side of the lower back, and another on the left side.
And after applying the poultice from each side according to the size of the swelling, apply a poultice on the lower back or two if needed, and let the compress be cylindrical as previously mentioned.
Chapter Nine and Thirty
On the Womb
If there occurs in the womb a cold, moist substance, it prevents the embryo from attaching and corrupts its constitution, or if it causes pain at the time of delivery, then it is necessary to place three ligatures around the spermatic cord as mentioned in the section on the testes. A ligature on the cotton below the back or two ligatures, and the bandage should be spiral.
Chapter Forty
On Removing a Wart
Moisture may accumulate around the wart, which can cause it to leave its place. Its sign is that the leg will be longer than the other if some of it is cut off and joined together; you will find a hollow in the cutting site. It is necessary for the patient to have a ligature similar to a circle on the place of the wart.
After learning how to make the bandage around the leg as if it is a circle, the same leg should be placed in the center of the circle. The bandage mentioned above is similar to the one shown in the section on the stomach. If this bandage is not available, apply three ligatures with a large olive-shaped bandage.
"It was cut deep to the full depth of the skin, then treated until it healed, if God wills.
Chapter Forty-One
In the incision of the nose
If pain occurs in the wound due to cold and moisture, and the treatment mentioned in the division does not work, it is necessary to ease the patient from thick secretions by using honey or apple paste and the like.
Then suture it and let the incision face in two ways: either by cutting with a cauterizing medicine or by cutting with fire, and the cut with fire should have many faces, one of which is to be applied directly on the wound itself three times as shown in this figure.
And it is cut for it with a sufficient depth, and there should be between each incision and the next one the thickness of a finger, and the suturing will be olive-shaped. A middle incision can also be made at the top of the wound itself, making four incisions. If desired, it can also be sutured with the circular method previously mentioned for the incision to remove the skin, which is one incision.
The circle should surround all the flesh and burn all the skin's fat. This is a feature of the hook when it comes to the veins of women, if the pain is restricted to the same flesh and does not extend to the thigh and shin.
If it extends to the thigh and shin, then make two hooks on the thigh in the place indicated by the patient's pain. Make a hook above the ankle, four fingers towards the heel side, slightly shallow. The knife should be like a sword, and the depth of the hook should be equal to only the skin's fat.
If the pain extends towards the fingers of the foot, then make a small incision where indicated with a pointed knife three or four times, or more if needed. And if the pain is below the ankle towards the shin, then make one sword-like incision there.
And be careful in all incisions that the hook does not reach to burn a large nerve or vessel, for this will cause the patient severe pain or prolonged recovery.
I have seen two cases where incisions were made above the ankle and, in one of them, the hook reached deep enough to affect the shin until it broke completely and rotted the entire foot, leading to gangrene and death afterwards. So, if the pain is in both directions, both should be treated in this manner.
And some of the wise scholars mentioned in the art of cupping, this device is made like a bowl from iron, and its diameter is half a finger width, and at its mouth it is as thick as the pit of a date or slightly less, and inside that bowl there is another bowl, and a third bowl.
And there should be a space between each pair of bowls the width of a finger, and the bowls should be open on both sides, and their height should be about a finger or two fingers, and a clamp made of iron is taken for them, which has been adjusted in the bowls, and this is its shape.
Then it is heated in the fire until it becomes red hot, and then its contents are poured out, and it is placed on the proper place for cupping, with the patient lying on the correct side, so that three cups are taken consecutively in one sitting. Then he is left for three days and anointed with oil, and the wound is left open for several days.
Then it is treated with a poultice until he is cured. He said, the writer of this book, that we rarely use this type of cup due to its pain and its unpleasant appearance, but few are those whom we find who can endure it except that it is one of the best cups for those who can tolerate it and get better with it.  End of translation.
And as for cauterizing with burnt medicines, it is to make cups resembling a ring in which the medicine will be placed.
The cups should have a height of two fingers or thereabouts, and the distance between them should be about the width of a thumb. They are open at the top and bottom, and they should be fastened together in this manner.
Then place them on the affected part of the patient, who is lying on his healthy side. Hold your hand firmly over them, then pour hot water between the two cups. The water should be heated by a small fire and held in place for about an hour. The patient must endure the burning sensation, as it will feel like fire.
Until the burning sensation subsides, then lift your hand with the instrument and wipe away all the hot water from the affected part with cold water. Leave it for three days, applying oil until the blackening of the burn disappears, and continue this treatment as long as there is any discharge, for it will be most beneficial.
Then treat it with plasters until it heals. If the pain extends to the thigh or calf, make a mold for it that holds water similar to what was done on the affected part, and this is the nature of hot water, which has been proven in the treatise on the rectification of medicines.
From the salt of the sea and from unslaked lime, take an equal part of each, grind them together and place them in a new pot with a small hole at its base to allow the solution to flow out. Underneath this pot, place another smaller vessel.
And pour cold water on the sea salt and lime, enough to cover them, then knead with your hand until well mixed. Leave the pot until the liquid flows into the smaller vessel beneath it. Then collect all that liquid, pour it onto fresh lime and new sea salt, and repeat the process.
For it becomes then very strong, used in many medical procedures and for various body parts because it behaves like fire itself. Among the medicines that also work with it are those made from althea, honeycomb, lime with soap, both well prepared.
And Galen tells a story of an ancient man who cured the pain of gout and sciatica, considering it highly effective and claiming that no other treatment is needed, as it can cure in one application.
To the point that sometimes he would enter the bathhouse carrying it and leave cured, which is to take green nettle; if green is not available, then newly dried nettle is taken, its powder mixed with a little oil, and applied to the gout in the foot or leg or thigh.
It is cauterized and left for three hours or as long as the patient feels the burn, then he enters the bath. If his body swells, he should enter the pool, for the pain will subside and he will heal with God's permission. If he does not heal, the cautery is repeated after ten days.
For he will heal, God willing. Know that no one should use these medicines except after purging the body. Dioscorides mentioned that the cautery of the labia minora, if performed with the juice of the nettle, is beneficial.
The cautery is performed in this manner: take a woolen thread, dip it in old oil, and place it on the deep spot between the thumb and the index finger, closer to the index finger. Then take a dried nettle leaf.
Then light it with fire until it becomes a coal, then place it on the wool and let it cool. Then take another one and continue doing this until the feeling reaches the middle of the finger and the pain subsides by God's will. This type of cautery is called "the nettle cautery.
Chapter Twenty-Four.
In pain in the back
It may present as pain in the back due to many causes, such as a fall, a blow, or excessive exertion, and the like. And it is characterized by cold, moist matter.
For that which is due to the accumulation of cold matter, it is necessary after the patient's exertion and similar actions that he should lie on his back where the pain is, in three rows the same width as a tablecloth, after learning the place with kneading in each row five handfuls or more according to what you see of the patient's strength and endurance.
And the kneading should be with a circular motion, and if you wish, you can knead it three or four times with an average-sized spindle in this manner.
Chapter Three: The Feet
On the onset of sciatica
This affliction often affects young children, and the sign of its onset in a child is that he feels shortness of breath when standing or moving. You will find at the end of his spine a protruding bone that stands out above the other bones.
When you see that, and if you want to stop it, cover it with a circular bandage like this image. Take a linen thread on each side of the ulcer, evenly. If you want, cover it around the ulcer with two or three bands of gauze, and let these points be close to each other. Then treat the place until it is cleansed as we mentioned.
And it is important to use the thread in the part that is affected by nerve inflammation.
Chapter Forty-Four
On the threading of hernias and joint pains.
If the joint pains are due to cold dampness affecting any part of the body, then if these pains occur in the feet, it is customary for physicians to specifically call this a hernia.
If the cold hernia is cured by the treatment methods mentioned in the section, but the pains do not disappear, then bandaging will remove them. This is done by covering the joint of the foot with many linen threads after emptying it, and the bandage should be olive-colored, as shown in this image.
And if it is necessary to bandage the face of the foot, do so with a point bandage. If the pains rise to the ankles or to other joints, which often happens, cover each ankle with three or four threads from each side using this olive-colored bandage.
If the swelling extends beyond this, then make an incision and do not deepen your hand with the knife, but it should only be to the thickness of the skin. If the pain rises to the testicles or the back, use what we mentioned about the knife in its section.
If the pain is only in the hands, then make incisions around the fingers like two circles. If the pain remains in the fingers, then make an incision on each joint and on the wrist. If the pain rises after a few days to the forearms or the upper arms.
Make incisions on both sides, and do not deprive the patient of good care and medication. For if he has the best food and evacuates the phlegm, then he will be cured with this knife, God willing.
The Fifty-Fourth Chapter.
On the Incision of the Fistula.
If a fistula appears in the anus, and some of the excrement and feces discharge to the outer surface, and this happens at first close by, it is necessary that the patient be ordered to fast for one day and to use among the laxatives what will help expel the pus from his body.
Then he should lie on his back in front of you, and you order him to hold his breath until the feces or excrement protrudes. Then press it back with your finger, then make a mark below the fistula under the anus on the bone of the coccyx in the shape resembling half a circle, its edges pointing upwards towards the body.
Then you cover this vessel with its own skin.
until it comes out white, removing the dirt, then return the urine or pus to its cavity; then place an assistant's hand on the spot so that the urine does not emerge, and I have made an incision between the patient's thighs and placed a pad beneath it, and another assistant binds his thigh.
And another on his chest, holding his hands; then lower the vessel onto the mark itself, and hold the vessel upright with your hand, gripping it until it reaches the bone or replacing it again if it did not reach the bone with the first attempt.
And be careful not to allow the urine to emerge while cutting, lest you burn it and cause death or severe harm to the patient. Know that if you do not reach the bone with the cut, your work has not succeeded. It is fitting for children's vessels to be fine according to their size, and for adults according to their size.
Then, after three days, treat the incision site with fat until the burnt smell disappears, then treat it with the rest of the ointments until it heals completely. Let the patient lie on his back for forty days until the wound closes.
يجب أن تجعل غذاءه منخفض في كل مرحلة من العلاج حتى يلين بطنه، ولا يبرز المعاء عند التزحر أو الإنشاق. ثم، إذا كان يريد إحضار القيام بعد الأربعين يومًا، فليستخدم له رباطًا محكمًا ويمسكه أربعين يومًا آخر. إذا صار الأربعين يومًا، فلا تجد من التعب أو الامتلاء من الطعام والشراب والصياح الشديد.
It is necessary that his food be such that it will make his abdomen soft so that the swelling will not appear when he sits or lies down; then, if after forty days he wishes to stand up, a tight bandage should be used and held for another forty days, which will lessen the pain and fullness from food and drink and loud talking. Let it be burnt from the skin, such as a third of it, then treat it with what we have mentioned, for it will not increase, God willing. Some of the ancients have mentioned that the fistula should be cut out with a trephine in this manner.
After learning to cut with a saw and the line that is across the width of the cut on the top side of the saw, and the other line downwards, place your hand in the middle with one cylindrical awl, and the first awl is easier and better, if God wills.
The Sixty-Fourth Section
In the hole of the awl.
If in some of the members there is pain due to a fall or blow, and that pain persists for a long time and does not respond to drug treatment, it is necessary to cauterize the affected area with a cautery point, and each member should have an awl according to its size, smallness, weakness, and strength.
And if the pain and wound are relieved by it, then if he is free from the first cautery, otherwise repeat the cautery on him; for it is customary for these pains to transfer from one member to what is near it. Therefore, it should be followed with cautery until the patient is cured.
The Seventy-Fourth Section
On cauterizing hemorrhoids.
As for those with hemorrhoids, they may greatly benefit from cauterization, especially the type of hemorrhoid that results from inflammation and darkening of the mucous membrane.
If you wish to perform phlebotomy, examine the blood; if it is thin and you have treated it with what we mentioned in the section on division, and it has not coagulated or stopped flowing, and you fear that corruption will spread over the entire temperament of the patient, then bleed him five veins. The first [incision] in the middle of the head, and the second below it towards the forehead near the hairline; two on the temples, one at the back on the bump of the skull, and moderate your hand with the lancet slightly until it has a slight effect on the bone.
And peel off the scabs so that it is easy for the thick vapors to exhale from them, and bleed this vein also on the same spot as mentioned earlier. But if the blood continues on the patient and a clear appearance becomes evident, then you should bleed these veins that we have mentioned on the head. A vein on the side of the nose, two on the cheeks, two on the neck veins, six on the back veins, a large one on the buttock at the gluteal fold, and another above it in the same region; two on the forearms, one on each arm. And two on the thighs, one on each thigh, and two on the knees, and two on the calves, and two on the chest muscles, and bandaged on each joint of the fingers of his hands and feet, and on each knuckle of his fingers, and on the palm of his hand.
And be careful of the nerve that is on the back of the calves, so as not to burn them both, and a bandage can be placed on the shin bone, and another on the stomach opening, and another on the liver. Know that the more you increase the bandages, the better and more beneficial it will be.
Know that the sick person does not feel pain in the bandage as the healthy person does, because his body is weakened. It should be arranged according to the size of the members and joints, following what has been mentioned about the characteristics of iron.
Then treat the bandage with caraway powder mixed with honey and other treatments until he recovers, God willing.
Chapter Forty-Eight.
When a member has become weakened, and it has been treated with medicines, ointments, and dressings but did not recover, then wrap the same weakened member with bandages according to what is fitting for its bone, whether large or small, and let the bandage be tight and adhere slightly into the skin.
Then treat it with the cautery iron until it heals, and some of the flesh may be exposed on the hand or foot in the gaps of the back near the exit of the nerve that moves that member; the flesh will disappear.
And none should undertake this except one who is skilled in the dissection of limbs and the exits of the nerves that move the body.
Chapter Ninety-Four
In the case of a swelling.
If the swelling advances and does not respond to any of the remedies of medicine, then cut a small incision in it until the whiteness disappears and its color changes.
Then treat it with lentil flour mixed with mallow leaf extract, swallowwort juice, and pigeon blood or blood of the white-crowned sparrow, each in equal parts, mixing all together and applying on a bandage, securing the place until it heals.
Chapter Fifty
In the case of cancer.
If the cancer is in its early stages and you wish to contain it, cut around it with a circular incision as it grows. Some wise men have said to make a deep incision in the middle of it, but I do not see this as beneficial because I expect that it will ulcerate, and I have witnessed this happening multiple times.
The correct way is to incise around it with a circle as we have said, or with many small incisions.
Chapter Fifty-One.
In the treatment of the uvula.
If any of the uvula is delayed in healing, whether due to the insufficient strength of its nutrient or due to the patient being old with little blood, or due to the passage of time and you intend to hasten the healing of the uvula, then incise around it with many small incisions.
Then leave it, for it will hasten in healing. If you want to cauterize with a hot iron, heat the cautery as shown in this figure.
And lower it into the middle of the uvula until the skin is burned, and let the incision be from above downward to facilitate the flow of pus. Then treat it with what is appropriate until it heals.
Chapter Fifty-Two.
In the treatment of hernia.
The hernia is nothing but a decay that strives to consume the limb, just as fire consumes dry wood. If you see a hernia in a place suitable for cauterization with fire, heat numerous fine and coarse needles, according to what suits that place where the hernia is located.
Then, clean it from every side until all the corruption is removed and nothing remains of the pus; then leave it for three days, and apply powdered sulfur with oil on the affected areas until all the scabs come off along with all the corruption.
Then treat it with the growing meat cauteries, for if after three days you see that the flesh grows healthily without corruption, then continue [the treatment]. Otherwise, repeat the cautery on what remains of the corrupted areas, and sometimes the ulcer can be treated with strong medicine.
For it takes the place of fire, and is more effective. I have mentioned its treatment with strong medicine in the division, so take it from there when you need it.
Chapter Thirty-Five.
On the cautery of the inverted and non-inverted nipples.
It often happens in the soles of the feet; it is a hard thing that pains the man, and there are two ways to cauterize it: either by fire or by strong water.
As for the cautery by fire, it is done with a wide, hollow metal probe, shaped like an eagle's claw, made to fit around the nipple on all sides and very thin in its edges. Then, heat the probe until it becomes hot enough, then place it on the nipple and rotate your hand with the probe around the nipple until the probe reaches the depth of the nipple.
"Leave it for three days, wrapped in the rind of a salted country loaf, and leave the wrap on overnight, as it will detach from its base. Then treat the wound site with a poultice prepared from meat until it heals, if the stitches are not inverted.
"And often it occurs on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet. Therefore, you should take a tube made of copper or iron or an eagle's quill and place it over the stitch or thread, then pour some boiling water into the tube.
"And hold the tube with your hand, turning it slightly with your hand so that the edge of the tube affects the base of the stitch and the boiling water finds its way to the base of the stitch. The patient should endure the heat of the boiling water for an hour.
"Then leave it, for the stitch will detach from its base. Do this one by one until you have done so with all of them in the body. Then treat their places after they have detached with a poultice prepared from meat.
The Fourth and Fiftieth Chapter
In the case of hemorrhage.
If a person experiences hemorrhage from cold in the nerves, or from the heat of fever, or any other cause, it is necessary to apply four or five poultices on the spine between each vertebra and one on the chest. And on his abdomen, a poultice with olive oil, for the hemorrhage will subside and the cold disease will heal quickly.
The Fifth and Fiftieth Chapter.
In the case of a rupture occurring in the body.
If there is a rupture in the body, which is ugly and caused by cold, thick, and foul matter, it is necessary that at the first appearance of the wound, a light poultice should be applied to the top of each rupture with ashes burned at the end with fire or with the root of long reeds or with lentil oil.
A light poultice should be applied in this manner to hemorrhoids at their first appearance, and they will not increase or become inflamed again, but the patient will recover from them unless the patient is purged beforehand.
The Sixth and Fiftieth Chapter
In the treatment of wounds resulting from the cutting of veins.
It often happens that a wound in a cut vein exposes blood that is difficult to stop bleeding.
If this happens to someone, hurry with your hand to the mouth of the vein and place your little finger on it and squeeze it firmly until the blood is confined under your finger and nothing comes out of it. Then put in the fire small and large olive pits, many of them, and blow on them until they become very hot.
Then take one of them, either small or large, according to the size and location of the wound where the vein was cut, and place the hot pit on the same spot after removing your finger quickly, and hold the pit until the bleeding stops.
If the bleeding resumes when you lift your finger from the mouth of the vein and the pit cools down, quickly take another hot pit from the prepared pits in the fire, and continue to do this with one after another until the bleeding stops.
And be careful not to burn a nerve, as this will cause the patient another illness. Know that if the vein is cut and bleeding, it cannot be stopped, especially if the vein is large, except by one of four methods: either by cautery, as we have mentioned, or by ligature if it has not already been tied off. If the bleeding is reduced at its end and the blood flow is cut off, either a secure and firm ligature can be tied with threads, or medicines that stop bleeding and constrict with bandages firmly can be applied to it.
And if someone tries to stop it by ligature or constricting with cloth, or applying burnt substances and the like, it rarely stops the bleeding that way. If this happens to anyone and he is without a doctor or medicine, let him quickly place his forefinger on the mouth of the wound itself, as we have described.
He should press it very hard until the blood is constrained and it freezes over the wound, on the artery and the finger, and water should not be poured onto it. The cold water should always be very cold, so that the blood congeals and thickens and stops. During this time, he should look for what he needs from a lancet or medicine.
Chapter Two.
In incisions, lacerations, fistulas, and other wounds.
It was said by Khalf, as we mentioned in the first chapter, that for every disease where cautery with fire and burnt medicines is beneficial, there are causes and tools, and images of the moxibustion process have been made, and I have considered all this from the crown to the sole.
And I have threaded this chapter with that thread, so as to facilitate for the student what is required.
Before I begin, it is important for you to know, my children, that this chapter has more errors than the first chapter on the knee.
And for this reason, the warning in it must be severe, as working in this chapter often leads to the loss of blood, which is the essence of life, through opening a vein or an artery, treating a wound or removing a bullet or arrowhead, or incising over a stone, and similar things that all carry risk and fear, and death occurs in most of them.
And I advise you to avoid what is ambiguous for you, for in this craft you will encounter people of various diseases, some of whom have been weakened by their illness and death has drawn near to them.
Because of the severity of his illness, the length of his affliction, and how resigned he is to his condition as a sign of approaching death, some people will spend their wealth on you in hopes of regaining health, even though their illness is terminal. You should not assist those who come to you with these characteristics. ان البيت هو مكان الخلوة والسرور، يجب أن يتماشى فيه السعد والسراء، ويقلع الغم والحزن. فإذا كان بيتك مليئً بالسراء، يجب أن يكون الطبيب مليئً بالسعد.
And let your caution be greater than your desire and effort, and do not proceed with any of that until after certain knowledge that confirms the praiseworthy outcome for you. Use in all treatment of your diseases the advancement of knowledge and warning about what tends toward safety.
For in that you have aid in attaining praise and glory, remembrance and thanks, may God guide you, my sons, to right guidance and not deny you the correct path and success, for that is in His hands; there is no god but Him.
And this chapter has been divided into sections, as was done in the chapter on wounds from the foot to the neck, so that you may understand what you seek from it, God willing.
The first section.
In the treatment of water that collects in the heads of children.
Indeed, this disease often afflicts children at birth if the midwife presses the child's head roughly, and it may also be caused by a hidden cause that is not known.
And I have not seen this cause in anyone other than children, and all those whom I saw of them died quickly for this reason. Therefore, I did not treat it, and indeed I saw among them a child whose head had become filled with water and the head became swollen every day. Until the boy does not sit on himself for the swelling of his head, and the moisture increases until he dies.
And this moisture, either accumulates between the skin and the bone, or it accumulates under the bone on the brain, and to treat this if the moisture is between the skin and the bone, and the worm [swelling] is small, it is necessary to make a single incision in the middle of the head, its width should be one finger and its length about two fingers until the moisture drains. This is the image of the trepanned [patient].
If the moisture is greater and the swelling is larger, then make two intersecting incisions like this image:
And if the moisture is under the bone, and its sign is that you see the sutures of the head open from all sides, and water descends when you press it with your hand, and this is not hidden from you, then it is necessary to make three incisions in the middle of the head like this image.
After the incisions, all of the moisture will exit. Then close the incisions with sutures and bandages. Then apply a mixture of drink and oil to them for five days. After that, remove the bandages and treat the wound with linen and wine compresses. Do not leave the head tightly bandaged. And feed the patient with all dry foods that have little moisture.
To the point where the limb becomes strong and heals, another method of excision is to look for where the bone of the tumor and the collection of water appear, because it may be more in the back of the head or in its front or on the right or on the left.
You aim to excise where the tumor and the water collection appear, so excise it as much as you can, being careful not to cut a vessel which would cause suppuration that could kill the patient from that suppuration along with the moisture.
Chapter Two.
Cutting the vessels behind the known auditory bones.
When someone experiences severe headaches that affect the eyes or the chest, and this condition persists even after trying medical treatments, then the treatment for it is to cut these two vessels.
If you wish to cut them, you should first shave the head of the patient with a razor, then probe the place with a rough needle so that the vessels appear; then tie the neck of the patient with his cloth, observe where the pulse beats and their location, which are two low places behind the ears, for they are not hidden except in some people.
Then learn on them with the saw, then cut them with the lancet to the bone, and that will be by the width of the head. And if you wish, insert the lancet from below the jaw and drive it upwards with the cut, and the length of the cut will be about two fingers.
If the artery is cut, blood will gush out in pulsating spurts, flowing forward and backward continuously. If the jawbone does not appear to be visible, it should be estimated from the ear by three fingers' length, then learn with the saw and bore to the bone.
Blood clots form on the midline, and sometimes more or less is sent out, all depending on the strength of the patient and the fullness of his blood vessels. Then look at the wound; if any part of the shaving remains on the bone, cut it off.
So that it does not expose a hot wound, then suture the wound with a thread of linen cloth, and treat it with bandages until it heals.
Chapter Three.
Excise the jaws that are in the mouth.
If a person has chronic or severe toothache, inflammation in the muscles of the jaw, or similar conditions, and they are not cured by the usual medical treatments, we have tried in these diseases to excise the jaws from the mouth or cauterize them as described.
The approach to treat it is for the patient to shave the hair on the temples, aiming for the visible vein in the temple, as its pulse is clearly discernible, and little remains hidden except in exceptional cases among individuals.
Or, if the cold is severe and it is hidden from you, let the patient wrap his neck with a cloth, then pierce or apply hot water to the spot until the vein appears clearly and distinctly. Then take the lancet that looks like this. Then cut the skin with it until you reach the vein, then insert a thread into it and pull it upwards until it exits the skin. Clean it of any impurities on both sides. If the vein is thin, moisten it with the end of the thread. Then cut a piece from it, the length of which is determined by how much it will retract and contract without causing bleeding. For if it does not burst or break, no blood will flow at all. Then let the blood drain for six to three cups.
If the vein is large, it should be tied in two places with a strong double thread, either of linen or made from the strings of a lute, so that gangrene does not set in before the wound heals and cause bleeding.
ثم تقطع فضل ما بين الرباطين تفعل ذلك فى تلك الساعة أو بعد وقت آخر، وإن شئت أن تكويه كيّاً إلى العظم بمكواة سكينيّة حتى ينبتر أطرافه فيقوم مقام هذا العمل بعينه أو أفضل مما قلنا.
Then cut the bridge between the two ligaments; you can do this at that hour or later, and if you wish, you can cauterize it to the bone with a blade until its edges split. The position of this procedure will be as we have said or better.
If bleeding occurs during the procedure, quickly cut it off either by cauterization or by filling the area with vinegar and pressing your hand until the bleeding stops. If you do not have anything for that purpose, place your finger on it to clot the blood.
Then pour cold water on the area to reduce swelling and press it as needed. This is easier than cauterizing the vessels; just cauterize the artery with this blade after applying ointment to both sides.
And it descends very strongly until it reaches the bone, and the nerve is cut in two places so that what is between its ends does not adhere. This is the appearance of the syringe.
The blades will resemble the small scissors, except that they are less sharp than the blade by a great deal because if they were as sharp as the blade, the cold would enter them faster and the flesh would not cut quickly. Therefore, there should be some dullness in them so that the fire's heat can stay in them.
The flesh is cut quickly, and this operation is the best of all operations, the least painful, and the easiest. After that, there should be between the blades a degree of dullness equal to the thickness of a finger.
Chapter Four.
In the treatment of constant inflammation of the lacrimal ducts.
If the tears are constant and their inflammation is from the vessels on the outside of the skull and no benefit is derived from medical treatment with drugs, and you see the face of the patient has become red. And he feels in his temples a pulsation like the pulsation of an ant, and his eyes are swollen, wet, their margins having been eaten away by tears and constricted by the sharpness of the tears. Therefore, the early physicians were compelled to resort to this treatment, which they call "treatment with the sword," which is to order the patient to shave the hair on his forehead.
Then make three parallel incisions on the forehead, each about two fingerbreadths long. The first incision is in the middle of the forehead, aligned with the length of the nose, the second is slightly below the muscle on the cheek, and the third is on the opposite side.
And be careful not to cut the veins that are in the temples, far from where the jaws meet. The distance between each incision should be about three fingerbreadths. Make sure you have plenty of prepared cloth or clean rags to soak up the blood.
Then insert the pointed, sharp probe as shown in this figure. From the incision next to the cheek to the middle incision, use it to scrape all the skin between them along with the periosteum on the bone. Then do the same from the middle incision to the third incision and then remove this probe. Then also insert into the first incision another instrument called a sharp knife, which is sharp on one side and blunt on the other, as shown in this figure:
Then turn its sharp side upward, toward the meat attached to the skin, and its blunt side toward the bone. Push it until it reaches the middle incision and cut with it all the veins that descend from the head to the eyes, but without cutting into the outer layer of the skin.
Then do the same in the middle part towards the other end, and after a reasonable amount of blood has drained, compress the areas with solidified blood clots. Place a piece of cotton wool on each opening and cover it with a pad that has been soaked in wine or olive oil.
Unless there is severe inflammation, on the third day uncover the bandage and use abundant warm water to wash it. Then treat it with a salve of rose oil and everything else that wounds are treated with until recovery, God willing.
Chapter Five.
Treatment of tears and discharge from the eyes due to a condition inside the head.
When someone experiences frequent, painful, and persistent discharge from the eyes, with the eyes appearing as small, weak, red, and swollen, and their lashes fall out. And there is deep, severe pain in the head and persistent headache, know from these symptoms that those substances and discharges come from many deep vessels. The best treatment for this is to shave the patient's forehead and then make a single incision in the middle of the forehead.
And there is deep, severe pain in the head and persistent headache, know from these symptoms that those substances and discharges come from many deep vessels. The best treatment for this is to shave the patient's forehead and then make a single incision in the middle of the forehead. And raise slightly to the side, and begin the incision from the left cheek to the right cheek, and it will be to the bone, and keep your hand away from the moving tendons of the cheeks when chewing, until the bone is exposed and all the blood is wiped with a sponge.
Separate the incision between the two cheeks with a thick piece of cotton or linen, then bind it from above with bandages and soak the bandages in water and oil to prevent burning heat, and when you remove them and see that the hot inflammation has passed, it is necessary to feel the bone until meat growth begins in it.
Then treat it with dry dressing that promotes flesh growth, such as taking two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colocynth, preparing a poultice from them and applying it to the meat growth in such wounds.
Chapter Six.
In the treatment of ear discharge.
Whatever discharges from the ear is one of four types: either a mineral stone or something similar to a stone like iron and glass, or a plant seed like a grain or a nut and the like, or a fluid thing such as water and vinegar and the like.
If it is an animal, then when a pebble or something like a pebble falls into the ear and does not come out of the ear, then turn the sun to the ear. If you see the pebble, put some fat from a sheep or a goat on it, then try to remove it by moving the head or blowing with a pipe. Block the openings at the onset of the sneezing, after placing a ring of leather or wool around the ear and tilting the ear upwards. This treatment often causes it to come out. If it does not come out, try to remove it with gentle blowing as shown in this figure.
If it does not come out with blowing, try to remove it with a fine, dark probe of little thickness. If it still does not come out, then make a tube from copper and insert the end of the tube into the ear canal gently.
Seal around the tube with wax mixed with oil so that the air has no path except through the tube, then draw it out with a strong breath. This method often causes it to come out. If it does not come out with what we have described, then take some glue from the ants or processed glue, which is used to catch birds. Place it at the end of the tube.
After covering it with a firm cotton cloth, insert it into the ear hole using tweezers after drying the ear from moisture. If it does not come out with everything we described, rush to make an incision before the inflammation becomes severe or pus forms.
The incision method is to first weaken the patient in the neck area, then extract blood from him according to his strength. Then make the patient sit between your hands and turn his ear upwards. Make a small incision at the base of the ear where it is lowest.
The incision should be crescent-shaped, reaching the bone, then remove it with the tools available to you. Then quickly close the incision from where you are and treat it until it heals.
If what fell into the ear is one of the seeds that swell and grow, try to remove it as mentioned before. If it does not come out, then take a very thin, delicate wire like this.
Try to cut that type of seed that has fallen into the ear with it, and you only do this if you are sure that the seed has softened with the steam of the ear until it becomes small, many pieces. Then remove it with a black thread or a delicate hook or tweezers.
It is easy to expel it, and as for the water inside the ear, it is appropriate for the patient to use a syringe first, after having filled his ear with some cotton wool while lying on that ear which contains the water, so it will come out.
Alternatively, many thin and flat pebbles should be taken along the length of the fingers. These should then be warmed slightly over a fire. The patient should insert one into his earhole and place his foot on that side, then strike with another stone on the stone in the ear.
He should continue doing this with stone after stone until all the water comes out. The water may also come out by taking a feather or a reed, inserting one end into the ear and burning the other end in the fire until it is almost burnt, then another reed should be used again.
Do this repeatedly until all the water comes out, or use a syringe as mentioned before with stones. As for expelling an animal inside, if it is small like a fly, treat it as mentioned in the division.
If its body is large and visible, try to remove it with forceps and tweezers; this is easier than any other thing that grows in the ear. As for removing the worms born in the ear, if you treated it with what we mentioned in the chapter on ear infections and it did not heal,
You should look at the ear in the sunlight; if you see anything from the worms, remove it with forceps or fine tweezers. If nothing appears to you from it, then take this tube and shape it like this.
Make its lower part narrow and the upper part wide; then insert its thin end into the ear as much as the patient can tolerate. Then press it with strong pressure, repeating this several times until all the worms come out. If they do not come out, smear wax around the tube as I mentioned to you in the case of the stone.
If they do not come out with what we mentioned, use the ointments that I have described, which the ancients used to kill worms. You will find this in the chapter on ointments. With this device, you can pour the medications and ointments into the ear as shown here:
You see it is made of silver or narrow copper tube, the bottom being perforated with a small hole, and the top wide open. If you wish, let the shield within the tube be of thick copper, and if you prefer, take a reed and wrap its end tightly with tight cotton wool.
Then take the oil or juice, or whatever medication you want from these, and pour it into the tube while it is in the ear; then insert the reed with the cotton into the opening and press it gently with your hand until the liquid runs into the ear canal and settles therein.
The patient should lie down, and whatever is poured into the ear should be warmed a little over fire; but take care that what is poured in is not very cold or very hot, for the ear does not tolerate that.
Chapter Seven.
On treating excessive obstruction of the ear.
Some children come out of their mothers' wombs with their ears unperforated.
In some cases, people may also experience obstruction in the ear canal due to a wound or swollen flesh. This obstruction can be deep within the ear canal, invisible to the naked eye.
And it may protrude slightly outside the aperture and be visible, in which case it is usually difficult to extract. If it is visible, it should be placed in the sun. And look into it, for if you see the obstruction visible, open it with a fine probe, and this is its form:.
Its tip should have a slight width, limited to its upper part, and the rest of the probe should be smooth on both sides so as not to hurt the ear. If the obstruction is from flesh that has grown in the passage of the ear, grasp it with a fine forceps and cut it off with great care until all the flesh is removed.
But if the obstruction is deep in the ear, take a fine, smooth spatula and heat it gently in the fire. Then insert it into the passage of the ear. If you feel the obstruction along with what the patient feels as heaviness in the hearing, then crush it with forceps.
And be careful not to cut the nerve of the ear, then insert into the ear a bandage according to the size of the aperture, which has been soaked in Egyptian honey. Do this for several days until you are sure that the wound is healing, or take a bandage and soak it in water and sprinkle on it powdered gum.
Use it, for if you see the ear has been cauterized and a hot worm is in it, it is necessary to remove the wick and replace it with another that has been dipped in an oil made from roses until the hot worm subsides, then treat it until it heals.
If there is a bloody discharge, dip a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear, then follow the rest of the treatment mentioned in the section on catarrh.
Chapter Eight
In treating polyps that appear in the nose.
These polyps that appear in the nasal passages may be moist or dry; it is necessary to grasp them with tweezers or a hook and cut them off at their roots, then apply powdered lime to the place.
If there is a bloody discharge from it, cauterize it with a fine glass cupping glass; this is the best treatment after cutting it, and if any part of its root remains, it will often return. But if you burn it with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Chapter Nine
In treating excessive cold in the nasal passages of the nose.
Many things appear in the armpits resembling coldness in their severity and rigidity.
Therefore, it is called "cold" and is the accumulation of thick moisture in the upper armpit and the lower armpit. The action on them is to observe; if the coldness appears prominent on the surface of the armpit, moving towards all sides, then its treatment is easy: apply a broad incision over it.
Then scrape it from all directions with a knife until it is removed, and suture it with silk and cut off the stitches. If you cannot prepare to cut it except after the armpit has healed from cutting, this will not harm the patient at all. If the incision is large, gather it together with sutures and treat it until it heals.
If it is small, do not worry about it, for the pus will force it out and soften it. If the coldness leans towards the inner surface of the armpit, turn the armpit inside out and suture the coldness with silk without needing an incision, and treat it from all directions.
If the armpit heals from the incision, this will not harm in any way. Then wash the area after cutting out the coldness with salt water and treat the place with what softens until the patient recovers.
The Tenth Chapter
On treating the sty that appears in the corner of the eye.
The sty is a pustule that forms in the upper layers of the eye's corner, and this usually happens to children. It weighs down their eyes and causes tears in the evenings, and they cannot look at the sunlight. Because tears speed up the process.
Therefore, you will see them constantly leaning on their faces, and they sleep this way. Their eyes are under the covers, wet from blowing or sucking on the sty, which is now evident to the eye. When you press the area with your fingers, you feel the sty between them. The method of treatment is for the patient to place his head on a stone.
Then take a piece of cloth and make a thread from it, and from that thread make a ring the size that fits around the sty from all sides. Place it on top and press with your fingers from all sides to gather the sty in the center of the ring.
Then make a hole in the center of that wetness with a hot needle, making the hole wide and not larger than the hole in a lancet. As for depth, it is necessary to pierce all the skin until you reach the sty.
In most cases, the stylet protrudes from the incision like a white piece of fat. You should remove it using tweezers that you have wrapped with thread between your fingers and then move your hand to the right and left until it is released. Be careful not to increase the incision so that the stylet does not fall into the eye and hurt it.
If the stylet does not appear at first, you should widen the incision slightly until the stylet becomes visible. Then remove it as previously mentioned, soak the tweezers in vinegar and water, place them on the wound, and press with a bandage. Some people crush salt over it.
He places it in the depth of the incision so that any remaining moisture dissolves, then treats it until it heals. If a hot abscess occurs at the site, he treats it with cool compresses until it heals.
Chapter Eleven.
In Cases of Burning the Eye.
If an excessive amount of hair grows in the corner of the eye, below the natural eyelashes and beyond its limit, it can harm the eye and cause various diseases such as constant tearing, inflammation of the corners, whitening, and thickening to the point that it becomes a cause of blindness. ︎
Cauterizing the eye is done in four ways: either by cautery with fire or with a sharp drug as mentioned in the chapter on cautery, or it may be by excision and suturing or by probing according to what I remember.
You should place the patient's head on your lap, then turn the eyelid inside out with your left hand. If it doesn’t turn completely, insert a needle into it from below the eyelid, and pass the thread through the needle from above. This should be close to the same length as the hair, and then pull the thread upwards through the eyelid.
Then turn it inside out again with the pincers, and make an incision in the depths of the eyelid without cutting too much hair, from the larger muscle to the smaller one. Then draw the thread tightly and place a small piece of cotton or linen under the eyelid. Finally, close the eyelid with a bandage.
It should be shaped like a piece of bread, except that the shape should correspond to how much you want to lift the eyelid because this varies among people. Some may need to have part of the eyelid cut off, depending on how much the eyelid has drooped.
...and among them, those who need to have the least of all cut off according to the extent of their desire, then cauterize with the cautery on the two lines that I have taught, beginning from the greater toe to the smaller one, and let there be one cautery near the natural hair with the likeness of the thickness of a strand.
Then insert the reed into one of the corners of the skin, then shave all of it, then join the lips together with a needle and fine woolen thread, and wipe away the blood and stick what remains of the thread to the temples with some adhesive substances.
Whether you choose to do that or not, it does not matter. Leave the sutures and the threads for about three or four days, then treat it. If you wish, leave the wound without suturing it and treat it with something that dries and tightens, because the hair will stand up when the wound is closed and sutured, and stitching is better.
This method of cauterization, which was mentioned before, has the advantage that it depends on the patient and is a good procedure with no risk. There is another method in cauterization, which is to shape the hair like the shape of an almond leaf, as we have described. Then raise the cheek with three retractors that are either separated or grouped as shown in this image:
Then, cut off the excess cheek with small scissors as shown in this image, making cuts gradually:
If you cannot keep the retractors in place and do not have a femur with a string in it, then take another string and insert it into the center of the figure, and insert another string near the larger tooth and a third string near the smaller tooth. Then gather the strings between your fingers gradually, and use them to lift your hand with moderate tension.
Lift the skin and its entire contents as we described, then close the edges of the wound with stitches and dress it until it heals. If heat appears when you cut or tear, calm that heat with a syrup or similar from the anesthetic drugs.
And it may also happen to the lower cheek that its lips turn inwards, and it is necessary to use what we mentioned of cutting, stitching, cauterization by fire or a strong medication. Cauterize it more and less on the patient than cutting and stitching.
The operation with the stalk will be as follows: you invert the skin and puncture the hole that is inside, then make two thin stalks or wooden sticks, their length equal to the length of the skin and their width less than the width of a finger.
And I have placed in their edges from both sides where the strings are attached, then I gather them gently on what is left of the eyelid skin, and tighten the two stalks from both sides firmly and securely, leaving it for several days because the compressed skin will die, turn black, and rot.
Until it falls off on its own, but if delayed, soak it in vinegar and treat it until it heals. If the skin is elevated and the eyelashes of the eye do not bend, this is the shape of the two stalks to be made as follows in length and width:
Chapter Twelve
On Elevating the Bent Hair from the Eye with a Needle
If the work is on one or two hairs, the way to do it is to take a thin needle and insert into it a fine, soft silk thread, then gather both ends of it and tie them with a very small knot, and let the length of the thread be about four fingers.
Then, sew another thin thread in the glands under it in the fortress, and tie its ends if you wish. The patient places his head on your stone, close to the sun so that the operation can be seen clearly, for it is a delicate procedure. Then, insert the needle through the glands into the root of the excessive hair.
Cut it in the temple with the scalpel until it exits above the natural hair, then pull the thread over the glands and enter through the glands, that hair if it is one, two, or three, no more.
Then, pull with your hand until the hair and glands exit together in the temple along with the natural hair. If the glands are pulled out but the hair is not, pull the glands downwards with the thread that you have sewn into them until the glands exit from the upper hole.
Then repeat with the hair and pull it until it rises in the upper hole, so that the eye sees it. At that point, cut the glands and the thread, and remove them, and close the eye and leave it closed for one or three days, until the hair is firmly placed and the flesh grows over it.
If the hair is short, either add long natural hair to it so that it rises with it, or leave it until it lengthens after a while, then raise it.
The twelfth chapter.
On the treatment of trichiasis that occurs in the upper eyelid.
The condition that this hair affects is called "hare lip." This hair can be either natural or acquired, and if it is acquired, it results from the healing of a wound, burn, or the like.
The treatment for this involves cutting open the scar, separating its edges, and placing a piece of cotton between them, tying it until healing occurs. It is not advisable to use substances that dry out and contract in its treatment.
For if you do this, the hair will return even more severely than before. Instead, use substances that soften, such as honey and washing with water in which alum has been dissolved along with the cotton seeds of the dyer's broom, mixed with some herbs. Apply this to the affected area and treat it with it.
The defect in its treatment is that it does not return to its original state, and this work we mentioned is only part of correcting the hair so that the place does not return to its previous condition.
"The Fourteenth Chapter
"In the treatment of the hernia that is in the lower groin.
"This hernia which is from below, it is called in reality a scrotal hernia, and it is natural and external. The external one results from a wound, or tear, or the like.
"The method of treatment for it is to take a needle with a double thread and sew it into the flesh, and pass it from the left testicle to the right until the thread is in the ends of the flesh; then lift the flesh up with the needle and cut it off with a wide blade.
"If the appearance of the groin returns to normal, then well and good; otherwise, take a bandage and place it over the site of the tear, and turn the groin with it, and make two incisions on the inner side of the groin, and the ends of the two incisions should be from the corners that were cut until they meet, forming a corner. "Until, when they come together, its shape will resemble this figure:
"And it is the Greek letter lambda, then remove that flesh to the extent that its hard side is below what is above the groin, then gather the scattered parts with stitches made of woolen thread, and treat it with the drugs and fat we have mentioned until it heals.
And if the wound appeared from a cut or stitching or tearing, it is necessary to make an easy incision that does not include the hair of the eyebrows as well. Then separate the lips with a needle as we mentioned.
And the saying about treating the wound, whether it is from above or below, is that the procedure should be carried out according to what appears to you in terms of the shape of the wound, for it may vary greatly in appearance. The craftsman follows the pathway in whatever way possible.
Until the shape returns to its natural form or closely resembles it. The same disease will guide you regarding what procedure and tool are suitable for it in most cases.
Chapter Fifteen.
In adhesion, fuse the eye with glue or gum.
This adhesion may appear to many people as the glue sticking to the white part of the eye, preventing it from moving easily and hindering its natural function. Therefore, a sharp object should be inserted under the glue.
And it should be lifted up or drawn out with a needle, then the adhesion should be cut with a fine knife that is not sharp like the cutting of knives, but slightly less so that the patient does not get worried during the procedure and the knife might slip and hurt the eye due to its sharpness. Your cutting will be as if you are scraping off that adhesion.
You should wait until the swelling returns to its natural state and all the adhesion is gone, then you should pour salt water into the eye to wash it or drip some of the Zanjari syrup dissolved in water onto it, then separate the swelling from the eye with a cotton pad.
And place a wool pad soaked in egg white over the eye, and after the third day use the dissolved syrups until it heals.
Chapter Sixteen
On cutting the fingernail and removing the flesh of the nailbed.
The nail can be of two types: either nervous, resembling a thin, hard callus, or non-nervous, resembling solid, white wax; if it is touched by iron or pierced with a needle, it cuts off.
And in it, no needle was established, and both types begin from the largest nail to cover a little bit until they block the sight and prevent the movement of the eye, and the method of removing them is that the patient places his head on your pillow.
Then he opens his eyes and you raise the swelling with your hand, then you take the nail with a fine needle and extend it upwards, then you take a needle and insert into it a horse or cow hair, along with a strong thread, and bend the tip of the needle slightly and stitch it in the middle of the nail.
And you execute it with the needle and connect the claw with the thread and extend it above, and remove the hair from the side of the claw that is next to the joint as if you are shaving it with a razor to its end, then cut the rest at the base of the claw with a fine blade or small scissors and leave the natural flesh of the claw.
Lest it expose the permanent stream of tears, the claw has been extended with a splint or thread as we mentioned, then smoothed with a soft blade at this edge.
And beware of the scalpel touching the horny layer, as it causes a split and the joint opens up. After cutting, apply some powdered salt or zinc oxide to the eye and leave it for another day, then treat it as necessary until it heals.
If the claw is insensate and cannot be penetrated by a needle or retain a splint, this type of claw is often treated with medication to heal as described in the section, and if you intend to cut it, open the eye of the patient.
And take a fine, soft blade with a weak edge like this picture. "And I scraped the nail with it, and if you saw it becoming rough and flaky, then sprinkle from your saffron or red safflower or powdered salt on your eye, and close your eye until the next day.
"Then continue the procedure until all of them disappear, unless you feel a hot burn in your eye; if so, leave it and treat the hot burn until it heals, then resume the scraping procedure until it heals. As for the flesh of the eyeball...
"If the pain in your eye is very severe, then tie that flesh with a thread and cut off some of it without delaying the cutting to prevent tear overflow; then sprinkle red safflower on the corners of your eyes until it heals.
"Chapter Seventeen.
"On cutting the red veins and excess flesh in the eye.
"Sometimes in the eyes of some people, red flesh grows to such an extent that it covers the pupil or approaches it, or flows over the whites of the eye, and sometimes the whites turn outward and resemble a rose.
The work in it is that the patient places his head on your stone, then opens his eyes and removes all that red meat with scissors suitable for this purpose.
Or hold it with tweezers or a hook, then cut the first piece of flesh until all is cut away by pieces, and be careful not to harm the eye during the procedure. Your cutting tool for this should either be a small needle or a small scissor. As you collect with it the sclera as shown in the following illustration for this chapter.
When your cutting is complete and all the roots have been removed, fill the eye with finely ground salt or apply a few drops of any warm-tempered medicine, and place on the eye from the outside a cotton pad soaked in egg white to protect against heat irritation.
But if any root remains and you fear that heat will irritate it, leave the eye and treat it with something to alleviate the irritation. Then return to the operation until it is clear of roots; do likewise with any excess flesh that appears in the eye of this kind.
However, it is advisable for you to avoid treating any weak eye by cautery or by operating with an iron instrument, and do not engage in any of these procedures until you see that the member [the eye] is suitable for this operation.
Chapter Eighteen
On the removal of cataracts from the eye.
The cataract is a red vein that spreads over the eye, preventing vision and weakening the eye with time. Therefore, first examine whether the eye with the cataract is strong and free from other diseases.
When you decide to remove the cataract, instruct the patient to place his head on your lap. Then attach those veins with one or two fine needles, as you see fit, and let the needles be like this figure.
Or let them be two needles fused into one body, like this figure.
Then carefully cut those veins with a fine knife, wiping the blood away bit by bit until you see the eye clear of those veins and free from bleeding. Take care not to harm the eye with the edges of the knife, and perform this operation in the afternoon when the sun is mild.
Be very careful in your operation so that you do not cut anything other than those veins. When you finish, drop some green or red vitriol into the eye to consume any remaining cataract, for if you cannot remove all of it in that moment, the eye will experience pain.
Leave it until her pain subsides and the hot worm becomes safe, then perform on her the operation of this kind with the same intent until she is free from this appearance of the pain of the scissors.
Leave it [and the head of the patient will be in the student's lap, and the rest will wipe away tears and achieve tranquility at the beginning of the eye and behind it, and the root is in the work that the eye should be opened with stitched openings or its triangle, which the student holds].
Cut and the head of the patient will be in the student's lap, and the rest wipe away tears and achieve tranquility at the beginning of the eye and behind it, and you are free to start with a section from the top of the eye or from below it, and the first is to wipe off two nerves in the upper corner, one of which will be at the end of the sclera and the other at its beginning.
Hold it between the middle and the sclera, then tie a nerve from below to both of them, then hold it between the cornea and the iris, and move your hand gently until you see all the veins have been lifted and cut off from the smallest part to the west with scissors if you prefer, or with a gentle pinch.
The suture penetrates its bone and all the passages are cauterized until it rises above the mucus, and do not cut the fleshy part, for tears and blood will gush upon you.
Then cut with the scissors what extends above and below the cornea, so that nothing remains but the conjunctiva at the corner. If you can raise it from the cornea, cauterize with the suture, for this is best. In some people, however, it may ulcerate.
And if you cut it, the pain of his wound will persist for days, and the burning inflammation will intensify; then repeat the procedure on him.
Chapter Nineteen.
In Reinserting the Eyelash into the Eye.
The doctors call the eyelash "nasora". If it is treated with cautery or a strong burned drug, as previously described, and it does not heal, there is no remedy for it except to incise into the inflammation when it becomes ripe and extract all the moisture or pus from it.
Until the bone is exposed. If, upon exposure of the bone, you find decay or blackness in it, then scrape it with an instrument like this (its image):
And the rough part, called the head, is made of Indian iron and its end is turned like a burr. It is engraved with a fine engraver's mark or a scalpel's mark. Place it on the site of decay in the bone, then rotate it between your fingers while holding your hand slightly, until you know that this decay has been scraped off. بالطبع، ما هو المزيد من أي شيء؟ هل ترغب في إضافة أي شيء آخر؟
You do this several times, then you force the place with dried binding medicines. If the place is sealed and flesh grows in it and the flow of menses stops for forty days and does not renew on him, and there is no discharge and no event occurs on him.
Know that he has been cured, otherwise there is no remedy for him except to return the instrument to the nasal passage in this manner, which is to expose the bone a second time with iron or sharp medicine. If the bone is exposed, take a swab like this:
The end of the hook should be triangular, and its handle conical, tapered to the end as you see. Then place it on the bone itself, and that will be near the lacrimal bone, a little distant from your hand towards the eye. Then pass your hand with the swab until the bone is pierced and the patient feels it.
If he feels air escaping when he presses his hand on his nose, then force the place with dried binding medicines as I have instructed you. If flesh grows and the area hardens, then the matter that was flowing out will return to the nose, which will be easier for the patient, God willing.
Chapter Twenty
Reattach the protruding eye.
If the eye protrudes with its complete contents and no defect or deficiency in vision occurs, it is necessary to soften the patient, then cauterize him in the upper eyelid, then place a heated cautery in the eyelids without restriction, and anoint it with a fine ointment.
Then place a poultice made of egg whites, cypress, vinegar, and aniseed on the eye. After that, press the upper eyelid with many compresses. The recipe for the compresses is to take plenty of fine ashes; stretch each piece of it over four thin strips made from it.
Then place them one on top of the other according to what the eye needs. Press them with a strong, firm compress and repeat the cautery with ointment without restriction. Remove the cautery and leave the eye compressed for a day and a night.
If the bandage becomes wet during that time, it is necessary to compress gently. Then remove the bandage after a day and night as we said. If you see the eye has returned [to its normal position], otherwise repeat the upper eyelid, compresses, pressing, and cautery until it returns.
Chapter Twenty-One
On Cutting the Vulva
If the fistula is in the vulva, and it has broken through to the outside of the labia, resembling a grape in appearance but having the shape of a human, if you intend to cut it off, do as follows:
You insert a needle into the base of the grape from below to above, then you insert another needle in it with double thread from the opposite side and pull it out, leaving the first needle as is.
Then you cut the loop of the double thread and tie part of the grape around the needle, tightening it well. Then remove the needle and place a wool pad soaked in egg white over the area, leaving it until the threads fall out with the grape, then treat the wound to strengthen it.
Until the wound heals, and sometimes the grape is tightened from all sides with a circular ring of leather until the wound swells pleasantly, then you cover it with a thin cloth reaching to the bottom of the wound, so that the egg white oozes out and the wound relaxes and settles in its place. Then you tighten it until it heals.
Chapter Twenty-Two
In treating hemorrhoids.
This is the method for treating hemorrhoids: it is like a swelling that forms in the anus, similar to flowing water but not the same. The way to handle this is to have the patient sit on a stool and then take their head with both your hands.
And move it until you see the swelling go down in your sight, then hold it and it will not protrude again, and light will be released and the patient will see things as he used to see them. If it does not descend, we know that it is water. Therefore, if the swelling does not prepare to descend as mentioned.
Otherwise, have the patient sit between your legs, then take a small piece of thin cloth and make an incision over the corneal skin slightly below where the hemorrhoid meets the corneal skin in the rectum until the swelling comes out.
Then, if it comes out, sprinkle hot water mixed with honey or water in which a lupine seed and honey have been boiled on the anus. After that, continue with the rest of the treatment until he is cured.
Chapter Thirty-Two.
We have mentioned the types of water in the division, and which one is suitable for cupping in a clear and explanatory manner. Therefore, at that time, it is appropriate for the patient to sit between your legs, facing the light, near the sun.
Use your right hand to tie and tighten the healthy eye, then lift its lid with your left hand if the watery eye is the left one, or with your right hand if it's the right eye.
Then place the tip of the cupula near the lacrimal sac with a moderate amount of pressure on the same side of the eye as the smaller conjunctival fornix, then forcefully push the cupula and turn it with your hand until it enters the fornix. You will feel the cupula reaching an empty space.
The depth to which the cupula should reach corresponds to the distance from the palpebral commissure to the end of the lacrimal sac. Since copper can be seen through the clear cornea, the cupula will be visible as it reaches the location containing the water. Then move the cupula upward to the site where the water is located.
Then press it down repeatedly. If the water comes out of its sac, the patient will see what has been opened to his vision from the sac and the cupula in his eye. Wait a moment; if the water rises again, expel it a second time without removing the cupula.
Then, if it has stabilized and does not rise again, remove the cupula gently while carefully turning it with your hand. Then dissolve a little bit of pure rock salt in water and use it to wash the eye from inside. Afterward, place cotton or soft wool on the entire outside of the eye.
To anoint with saffron, rosewater, and egg white, and bind the correct eye with it. As for us and the people of our time, we place crushed caraway seeds mixed with egg white on it. If the cup does not fit in the eye due to its hardness—for there are those whose eyes are extremely hard— It is necessary for the person to take the ointment that is called "buried" and this is its image.
Then pierce with it the same membrane only, and do not mix in the hole, for it is to make a place for the cup to enter gently. Then insert the cup as mentioned, and when you have completed your work, prepare a firm bed for the patient to sleep on his back in a dark room.
He should avoid all movements and coughing, and his food should be prepared in a way that agrees with him. He should not move his head to the right or left suddenly, and the bandage should remain until the third day, then he is released in that dark room, and you test his vision.
Then you show him things, and then you rebind the bandage until the seventh day. It is not appropriate to do this during treatment or after removing the cup from your hand, but rather it is necessary to avoid that before, because water rises quickly with intense gaze.
If the tumor and worm are hot, it is necessary to close the eye before the seventh [day], and this can be achieved by what inhabits the worm until it settles. Then, release his vision and place a mask on his face that protects his sight from beneath for several days while he is in that dark house, then...
Then he exits the house gradually and performs his usual activities. Know that the learner cannot do without observing many cases before performing the procedure himself. I have been informed about some Iraqis who mentioned that in Iraq, they make a porous cup that absorbs water.
And I have not seen anyone in our country make this, nor have I read about it in any of the earlier books. It might be a recent invention. Here are images of various types of cups for those who are unfamiliar with them:
They are made of copper, specifically, and their edges will be like this pattern with sharp triangular ends.
Chapter Forty-Two
In the treatment of ulcerated flesh in the nose.
In the nose, various types of excessive flesh may grow. Some resemble polyps with many legs, others are cancerous and raw like blood, and still others are soft and not like blood.
"Whatever of these meats is soft, it is not bad or cancerous. So the patient should sit between your hands facing the sun, and you open the skin and receive the flesh in that meat, then pull it out and cut whatever you can grasp with a very fine, sharp blade from one side.
"Until you know that all the flesh has been removed, if anything remains that you cannot cut, crush it with one of the fine instruments until nothing remains. If bleeding or a hot worm overcomes you.
"If it is suitable or if it is from bad wounds, hurry and cauterize it until the bleeding stops and all the flesh disappears. Then pour into the nostril after cutting only water or drink, for opening the nostril and letting the moisture flow to the throat.
"So know that he is cured, for if the moisture does not flow as it should, know that there is a piece of flesh protruding into the upper bones that were not reached by the cutting tool. At this point, you should take a thread from cotton with some thickness.
"Tie many knots in it, and make the distance between each knot as much as a finger or less. The patient should snort the end of the thread into his nostril with a straw or whatever he can manage to make like a straw, pulling the string until it reaches the throat.
ويخرج على حلقته، وكثيرًا ما يفعل مثل هذا الفعل الصبيان في الكتب، وهو أمر يسهل على من أراده، ثمّ تجمع طرفي الخيط: الطرف الواحد الذي خرج على الفم، والآخر الذي بقي في الأنف.
ثمّ تستعمل نشر اللحم بالعقد التي في الخيط تفعل ذلك حتى تعلم أن اللحوم قد تقطعت بعقد الخيط، ثمّ تخرج الخيط وتضعه في الأنف بعد مسح الدم. تيلة قد شربتها في المرحم المصري، تفعل ذلك ثلاثة أيام أو أكثر.
حتى يأكل المرحم جميع ما بقي من اللحوم، ثمّ تضع آخر شيء في الأنف أنبوبة رصاص يوميًا حتى يبرئ. فإن احتج إلى علاج، يجفّف ويستخدمها ذلك.
This is the image of the syringe used for dripping the ointments and medicines into the nose.
He places from silver or copper a candlestick-like small object, its wick open and its spout as well.
And if desired, the pipe is made closed like a straw, and the syringe's wick is flat.
It has a clamp at its end, as you see, which grips it if the oil or any of the extracts or hot substances are in it.
Chapter Twenty-Five.
In the soft part at the end of the nose.
Often, a tumor grows at the tip of the nose; it becomes hard and increases in size over the days until it spoils the appearance.
Therefore, it should be cut off as soon as it appears and all of it should be removed; then place on the spot either alkali or a burnt drug that takes the place of alkali. If its cutting is delayed until it becomes hard, look at it: if it is sclerotic with a dark color, it has little sensation.
So do not expose it to iron, for it is a cancerous tumor. Often, when this tumor is cut off, a great ulceration returns in its place on the person. But if the tumor is soft and pale, and I have seen that cutting can be done in all of it. The patient should be emptied and cut without hesitation or fear, and the site should be treated with what dries and closes until it heals.
Chapter Six and Twenty
In the sewing of the nose, lip, and ear. If their connection is disrupted due to a wound or similar, know that when the connection in one of these parts is severed, it rarely causes pain except in some people.
When this happens to someone, if the wound is flowing with blood, it is necessary to join the lips of the wound by stitching them together and then treat [them] until they heal. If the separation has already severed its connection and each edge remains intact, it is necessary to cauterize each edge with a hot iron until it heals.
Then join the two lips by stitching them together and compress them, leaving on them powdered resin and milk, and place a patch of glued raisins or other cooked raisins above the suture. Leave it compressed for one to three days, then remove [the patch].
Replace the medicine and leave it until the threads fall out by themselves, then treat [the wound] with resin until it heals. The method of stitching is to join the severed connection either with needles as we have described in abdominal surgery, or with thread as you have learned there.
"The Twenty-Seventh Chapter
"On the Extraction of Teeth from the Mouth.
"Some people may have small hard lumps inside their mouths, similar to some grains of sand or smaller and larger, so it is necessary to turn the cheek and scrape each tooth and attach it to a silk thread.
"And cut them from every side, then fill the place after cutting with powdered gypsum until the blood stops, and chew it with vinegar and salt and treat the places by binding until the wounds heal.
"The Twenty-Eighth Chapter
"On the Excision of Excess Flesh in the Gums.
"Often, there grows on the gums excess flesh which the ancients called 'apolex'. It is necessary to attach it with silk thread or grasp it with forceps and cut it at its base and leave the opening for pus or blood to drain, then place powdered plaster on the site.
"Or one of the tight and dry ligatures, for if that flesh returns after treatment, it often returns; cut it a second time and cauterize it, for then it will not return again.
Chapter Twenty-Nine
On extracting teeth with iron.
There may be rough, ugly scales on the surfaces of the teeth, both inside and out, between the gums, which may turn black, yellow, or green until they cause decay to spread to the gums, making the teeth unsightly because of this.
It is necessary for the patient to sit between your hands, with his head on your stone, and you should scrape the molar and the tooth in which you have seen the scales and the material resembling sand until nothing remains of it; likewise, do this with the black, green, and yellow [areas], and others, until they are clean.
If the first scraping has not removed what is in it, then repeat the scraping on another day, second and third time, until you reach your goal. Know that the molar needs many different shaped scrapers of various kinds according to what suits your work.
Because the scraper used to scrape the molar from inside is different from the scraper used to scrape it from outside, and the one used between the molars has a different shape. These are the various shapes of the scrapers that should all be prepared for you:
Chapter Thirty
On the extraction of teeth.
It is necessary to treat the tooth from its pain with every means and to avoid extracting it, so that there will be no consequence if it is extracted, for it is a noble organ. Even if extraction becomes necessary, one should not delay it.
It is necessary, if the patient decides to have it extracted, that he fast until his toothache subsides. Often, the patient is deceived by the pain and thinks it is in the healthy tooth, so he extracts it, but the pain does not go away until the diseased tooth is extracted. We have seen this happen many times with barbers.
If the pain in the tooth subsides, then it is appropriate to loosen the tooth with a thread that has some strength in it so that the gum loosens from all sides, and you move it gently with your fingers or with soft tongs at first lightly until it shakes.
Then you make use of the two large forceps that facilitate well, and place the patient's head between your knees, having secured it so that it does not move. Then draw the tooth towards you, keeping it upright so that it does not break. If it does not come out, take one of those instruments, inserting it beneath from all sides with gentleness and a pin to move it as you did before.
And if the tooth is perforated or eroded, it should be filled with gold, and it should be sealed well with a thin layer of lead so that it does not disintegrate when you press on it with the pliers, and it is necessary to probe around the gum with a needle from all sides.
And be careful not to break it, leaving some of it inside, which will cause the patient more pain than before. Beware of doing what ignorant barbers do when they rush to pull out a tooth without using what we have described.
Therefore, they often cause people great pain; it would be better if the tooth were to break and its roots remained completely or in part. Or if some of the jawbone is pulled out along with the tooth, as we have often seen, then after it is extracted he should chew something like powdered glass and rub it on the site. If there is bleeding from the site, this frequently happens; then grind some of the glass and apply it to the site.
And if the glass does not help, then use the long-handled pliers with a short beak and a wide mouth, so that it does not slip when you grip the tooth with it. This is the shape of the large pliers:
The tweezers should be thick at the tips so that when they are squeezed, they do not give way to themselves or spread out. They should be made of Indian steel or firm steel with precise edges, and on their tips there should be teeth that fit into each other for a secure and strong grip.
And the tips can be made like pincers to also have a strong grip.
The First and Thirty-third Section.
On the extraction of tooth roots and the removal of broken jawbones.
If, after extracting a tooth, the root remains broken, it is necessary to place cotton soaked in oil on the site for one or two days until pus develops; then the suppuration or the calamities can enter. Which resembles the beak of a bird called "balarja" and this is the image of the calamities:
They should be made like pincers from the inside or like a scissor, for if you cannot remove it with these calamities, you should drill into the root and expose all the flesh with a curette, then insert the instrument that resembles a small hook, whose image is this:
Short at the edge, a little thickened, and not to be injected lest it breaks; for if the root exits in this way, otherwise use these other instruments whose form is as follows: the first has a triangular tip with some thickness.
A picture of another subtle triangle:
And we have also used this two-pronged instrument, the form of which is as follows:
And with other instruments and tools that were mentioned in the section on extracting teeth, we have also used this instrument that resembles a large forceps, as shown in this picture:
A triangular edge with a slight thickness so that it does not break, and it should not be injected. Know that there are many tooth instruments, as well as other instruments, which cannot be counted. The skilled craftsman, through his diligent work and the nature of the diseases themselves, may invent new instruments for himself.
Because some diseases have not been mentioned by the ancients, and there is a difference in their types; therefore, if one of the jawbones or any bone in the mouth breaks or decays, search for it in its place using whatever is suitable from among these instruments and the hooks that were mentioned for extracting roots.
And we rely on this image for its appearance.
It will have a little bit of viscosity to control the bone so that it does not slip until the bone comes out. We force the place with suitable medicines for this, for if the bone is in a rotten condition, we cleanse it of its rottenness and blackness until it is pure, then we treat it until it heals.
Chapter Two and Thirty.
Concerning the eruption of retained teeth on others.
If the tooth erupts in an unnatural way, it is disfigured by that appearance, especially if this happens in women and children. It is therefore necessary to look into whether the tooth has erupted behind another tooth.
If it cannot be made to erupt or fall out, then extract it; and if it is attached to another tooth, cut it with this tool whose appearance is as follows:
It resembles a small pair of scissors and should be made of sharp Indian steel, so that it can cut through the tooth in many days due to its hardness, without disturbing other teeth. However, if it is possible to extract it, use a forceps from India like this:
It will all be from India, and its engraving will be very fine, it will be like the one used for making needles. You cool the tooth with it a little by little over many days, in order that the tooth does not shake and fall out. Then you soften it further and polish it with some of the polishing stones.
And if a piece of the tooth has broken off and causes pain to the tongue when speaking, it is necessary to also cool this part until the edge of that break disappears, and it becomes smooth and soft so that the tongue does not hurt and speech is not disturbed.
Chapter Thirty-Three.
In aligning the movable teeth with silver or gold wires.
If the anterior teeth are shaken or moved by a blow or fall and the patient cannot chew anything for fear that they will fall out, and if drugs that tighten have been applied to them without effect,
The solution is to bind them with a gold or silver wire, and gold is better because silver tends to tarnish and rot after some time, while gold remains in its original state forever and does not experience this. The wire should be of medium thickness and somewhat thick so that it can fit between the teeth.
The figure of the suture is that you take the thread and insert it between the correct teeth, then stitch with both ends of the thread between the mobile teeth, whether one or more, until the stitch reaches the correct tooth from the other side.
Then you repeat the stitch back to the side from which you began, and secure your hand with skill so that the knot does not move, and let your thread tension be at the bases of the teeth so it does not loosen. Then you cut both ends of the extra thread with scissors and gather them together and twist them with a cord and hide them between the correct tooth and the mobile tooth.
So that the tongue does not get caught, then you leave it thus secured, and if it comes loose or breaks, you secure it again with another thread so that it enjoys this condition for the rest of its life. And this is the figure of the teeth and the arrangement of the suture between two correct teeth and two mobile teeth as you see:
Sometimes a single tooth or two will fall out and return to their place, and they are sutured as we have described, and they remain. Only a skillful craftsman can do this. A bone from the bones of an ox can be carved into the shape of a tooth and placed in the spot where the tooth has gone missing. And it will become swollen as we have said, and he will enjoy that.
The Fourth and Thirty-third Chapter.
On cutting the ligament that appears under the tongue to prevent speech.
This ligament that appears under the tongue may either be natural, with which man is born, or it may be a result of an old wound.
And the treatment is to open the mouth of the patient and place his head on your knee, then raise his tongue and cut that sinewy ligament crosswise until the tongue releases from its hold. If there is some hardness and adhesion in it, being a remnant of an old wound, slice into it with a scalpel and divide it crosswise so that the ligament separates and the knot dissolves.
And be careful not to cut too deep into the flesh, lest you sever a vein there and cause bleeding. Then rinse the wound with rose water or vinegar and cold water. Then place a piece of cotton under the tongue, which the patient holds every night.
Otherwise, if there is bleeding, place powdered alum on the site. If the blood overpowers it, wash the area with a syringe filled with water. Then he treated him with the rest of the treatment until he recovered.
Chapter Fifty-Three.
On Extracting the Frog Born Under the Tongue.
Sometimes under the tongue, a worm resembling a small frog prevents the tongue from functioning naturally and may grow so large that it fills the mouth. The treatment for this is to open the patient's mouth in sunlight and observe the worm.
If you see that it is red or black and the patient does not feel it, then avoid touching it because it is cancerous. But if it is inclined towards whiteness and has moisture in it, cut into it with a needle and split it with a fine blade from all sides.
If the bleeding overwhelms you while performing this task, sprinkle some powdered gypsum on it to stop the bleeding. Then continue with your work until you completely remove it. After that, he should rinse his mouth with vinegar and salt.
Then treat him with the rest of the appropriate treatment until he recovers.
Chapter Sixty-Three.
On Treating Worms in the Almonds.
If what grows in the throat from other worms appears as glands inside the throat resembling those that appear externally, they are called almonds. If treated with the methods mentioned earlier and do not heal, then:
Look, if the wound is deep like a bruise and has little sensation, do not expose it to iron, even if its color is red and its base is thick. Do not expose it to iron either for fear of hemorrhage. Instead, leave it until it heals, whether it suppurates or bursts on its own.
If it is white in color, round, and its base is thin, this is the one that should be cut. The procedure for it is to observe before acting whether the hot wound has completely settled or if part of it is still unsettled.
Then, let the patient sit with his feet in the sun and his head on your knee. Open his mouth and have an assistant press his tongue downwards using this instrument, as shown in its illustration.
It should be made of silver or copper and be as thin as a razor blade. If you press the tongue with it and the wound becomes visible to your sight, take a thread, insert it into the almond-sized hole, and draw it out as much as possible without drawing any other tissue along with it.
Then, cut it with this instrument, as shown in its illustration. It resembles a pair of scissors, except that each of its ends is curved and has sharp edges made from Indian steel or Damascus steel.
If this tool is not available, then cut it with a knife like this image.
One side is sharp and the other is not. After cutting one almond, the others are cut in the same way. Then, after cutting, the patient is washed with cold water or vinegar and water.
If there is bleeding, rinse with water in which pomegranate peels or oak leaves, or similar astringents have been soaked until the bleeding stops, then treat it until it heals. There may also be other wounds that develop around the almonds; they should be cut as described for cutting the almonds.
A woman was treated for a worm that had grown inside her throat, reaching to the Adam's apple with little feeling, almost closing the throat. The woman was breathing with difficulty and was unable to eat or drink water.
She was on the verge of death if she survived a day or two, and the worm had sprouted two branches that exited through her nostrils. So I hurried and inserted a hook into one of them and pulled it out, pulling along with it a piece of flesh.
Then I cut it where I reached it from the nostril opening, then I did that with what appeared from the other nostril opening, then I opened her mouth and pressed down her tongue, then I inserted the needle into the same vein, then I cut some of it, and only blood flowed from it.
So the woman's ring flew off, and she hurried to drink water, then ate some food. We did not stop cutting from that vein for a long time, and the vein would remain instead of being cut until it grew longer with her, and so it was.
The vein widened and was tied inside the ring, and it stopped growing. Then I left that place, and I did not know what happened to her after that.
Chapter Seven and Thirty
In cutting the jugular vein.
Which, if it protrudes to the jugular vein and becomes inflamed, is called a 'pillar' when it is white and elongated. If it is thick at the bottom and rounded, it is called an 'aneurysm'. If treated with what we mentioned in the division, the cure will not work.
I saw that the vein had subsided and was thin. It should be cut, along with what is connected to it in a circular manner, without length. If it is reddish, or like the color of blood, or black, or has no feeling, then it should be avoided from being cut.
If he has a cataract, it is necessary that if you see it in the condition mentioned by its whiteness and length, then the patient should sit with the sun's shoes on and press his tongue with the instrument whose description I have given, and then pierce the needle into the grape.
And draw it down and cut it with one of the two instruments which I have mentioned for cutting the lenses, but do not cut more than what is necessary to correct the natural condition, without excess. For if you cut more, you will damage hearing and speech.
Then after the cutting, use what we described for cutting the lenses and treat it until it heals. If the patient is reluctant to have it cut, then use cunning to trick him without fear or caution. The trick in this case is to use a strong drug, which is to place the patient's head on your lap.
Then press his tongue with the instrument that we mentioned, and take some of the strong water which I have described in the chapter on cunning, and with it make a thread not extinguished, neither thick nor thin. Fill this instrument's reservoir with it, and this is its form:.
The end that you put the medicine into should be narrow like the narrow part of a spoon, and place the apparatus with the medicine on the side of the patient who is lying on his side so that the fluid flows from it into his throat, lest something harmful to him come out of it into his throat.
Then hold the medicine with your hand and squeeze it onto the side for half an hour until you see that the wound has blackened and the effect of the medicine has subsided. And if you wish, take a cotton cloth and wrap it around the tip of the spoon and soak the cloth in the medicine.
And insert the spoon with the cloth into a tube from above until the cloth adheres to the side, doing this repeatedly until you achieve the degree of closure you want. Then leave it alone because it will become loose and fall off after three or four days. If you need to reapply the medicine, do so again.
After the closure, clean around the polyp with a cloth soaked in oil and remove any medicine surrounding it. Then he should rinse his mouth with cold water and be treated from outside with compresses and from inside with suppositories until he recovers, for this type of treatment is more beneficial than cutting and further from danger.
And the ulcer is also treated with something milder than cautery and excision; it is treated with incense in this manner: fennel, saffron, anise, dill, cumin, sumac, and similar herbs are taken and all of them or some of them are mixed together in a cup and soaked in vinegar.
It is then boiled, and the cup is closed tightly with the lid of a bottle (flask), on which the hollow device, made in this manner from silver or copper, is placed.
And the end with the sponge is placed in the mouth of the patient until the steam reaches the ulcer through the tube, causing the ulcer to swell nicely; then it is repeated on it several times until it softens. Be careful not to make this treatment at the beginning of the inflammation.
For it often increases the inflammation, and it is only proper to do this when the heat of the inflammation has subsided. If you do not have this device, take a reed; fit into its end the shell of an egg so that the patient's mouth does not burn.
Because the eggshell prevents the heat of the steam from burning the mouth, and this is a good treatment with its safety.
"Chapter Thirty-Eight.
"On the extraction of thorns and other things that grow in the throat.
"Often, a bone or fishbone or other things grow in the throat. It is necessary to extract what is visible and can be seen after pressing the tongue with the instrument towards the sun.
"You should be able to see what is in the throat, and if something does not appear to you and hides in the throat, it is necessary for the patient to drink before he swallows his food, because the thing that grows may come out by itself or the patient may swallow a piece of cloth or the root of a plant.
"Or he may swallow a piece of dry bread, or take a piece of soft sea sponge and tie it to a thread, then swallow the thread. If it reaches the place where the thorn is, quickly pull on the thread; do this several times.
"For often the thorn or bone becomes lodged and exits, but if it does not exit as mentioned, then use an instrument made of lead in this shape:
"It should be slightly harder than lead, and at its tip there is a fork that the patient puts in his throat with ease while raising his head upwards, being careful not to touch his tonsils so as not to cause pain, and he pushes out the bone or thorn with it, or the doctor can insert it with his hand.
And the insertion of the instrument is best done with knowledge of the place of the protruding thing, and it is pushed down or pulled up by the instrument until it comes out.
Chapter Nineteen and Thirty.
On the Extraction of Prolapsed Hemorrhoids in the Anus.
If the hemorrhoid is treated with the drug mentioned in the division of treatment and does not heal, then look at the anus of the patient in the sunlight after compressing the tongue with the instrument I described to you.
So if your sight falls upon the hemorrhoid, draw it out with a small hook or a fine, strong thread. And if you cannot manage it that way, then take a wide pipe and insert it into the patient's anus near the hemorrhoid, then insert an iron probe into the pipe, covered in fire.
Do this repeatedly, and the patient must fast from water for the entire day. Then he should take a mouthful of cold water and swish it around in his mouth without swallowing any, moving the water with his hand now and then.
Then the hemorrhoid will fall out if you sense the water, and if it does not come out as described, then fumigate the anus with urine and hellebore using the instrument I described for fumigating the vagina; do this repeatedly until it falls out.
The method of using inhalation is to take a vessel, fill it with burnt ginger and cover it with a lid that has a hole in the middle. Then, place one end of a tube into this hole, and let the smoke pass through. Place the patient's mouth over the other end of the tube and close their mouth so that no smoke escapes until it reaches the throat.
The polyp falls onto the tongue; if it does not, the inhalation is repeated several times and the patient endures thirst, eating salt and garlic, and not drinking water. By this method, it must come out. And this is a picture of an instrument that draws the polyp from the throat if it has been seen.
It resembles the forceps, as you see, except that it has this tip which enters the throat; its end resembles a bird's beak and has a cold iron point. If it grasps something, it does not let go of it.
Another instrument is used to compress the tongue; it is a wide iron ring whose diameter fits in the mouth over the tongue, and it enters the mouth standing on its side. Thus, the mouth remains open despite the patient's will, and the patient cannot remove it by force until it is taken out.
The instrument by which the mouth is opened according to this measure with the eye.
Chapter Forty.
On the incision and suturing of wounds and their fissures.
Wounds are of many kinds, each differing according to its incision and suturing, as will be mentioned one by one in this book. They vary in two respects: one type is the wound itself with its contained fluids, and the other is...
And the second type is according to the locations in which they occur within the body, for a wound occurring in the head differs from one occurring in the abdomen, and a wound occurring in a fatty area differs from one occurring in a joint. Each of these has its own rules for treatment.
Some wounds should not be incised until the boil in them has ripened and reached its peak, while others should be incised even if they are not yet fully ripe, such as wounds near joints.
Because if a wound occurs near a joint and its condition is prolonged until it becomes gangrenous, the surrounding tissues may become corrupted, affecting the ligaments or nerves of that joint, which can cause paralysis of that limb, or the wound may be near the head of a bone.
You have delayed the removal of the arrow until it is well-healed, thereby damaging the main limb or causing it to be near the joint. Cut it short and only cut the tip that has not healed completely near the joint, lest the pus spreads inside the joint and becomes incurable.
And it will become incurable, and it is important to learn the time of cutting healed wounds that have completely healed. This is when the pain from the wound stops, the swelling disappears, the redness decreases, the pulsations stop, and other signs appear.
And it is necessary to perform the cutting below the location of the wound if possible, so that it will be easier for the pus to drain downwards. Or in a higher location on the wound and more severe swelling, and let the cut be along the length of the body if the wounds are near the hands or feet.
And the locations of muscles, tendons, nerves, and blood vessels in general, in all flat areas without any protrusions; as for those that do protrude, let the cut follow according to that location. But if the wound is in fleshy areas, it is better to leave its cutting intact.
"...so that it solidifies as we have said, if you had sutured it beforehand, the glue from the fish would have been plentiful with pus and putrefaction, and possibly his cheek and jaw could have stiffened, and some of the scars might have been visible on the surface of the body according to necessity or as needed by the limb.
"It is necessary to use a single thread for small scars and a wide thread or many slits according to the size of the scar, and some scars may require that the skin be incised and cut if it has become like a leather.
"It became like the limit of what can be seen in many animals and prisons, some of which are cut with three angles, and others are cut like a plane leaf, such as the crown of an Arabian thorn tree.
"And some of them use circular cuts and crescent-shaped cuts and similar cuts, and if it does not have a head like flat soft scars, then only a simple thread should be used, and if the scar is large and has accumulated much length and has been sutured, do not hurry so that all the pus comes out at that time.
I took some of it out, then pressed the worm for another day, and then took more of the pus as well. Keep doing this gradually until all of it comes out.
Especially if the patient is weak, or a pregnant woman, a young child, or an old man with little strength, for the animal spirit often departs with the exit of pus in large quantities, and perhaps the patient will die while you feel nothing. Beware of this matter greatly and be warned.
After removing these worms, it is necessary to wash the wound and look at it. If the worm's cut is small or if the incision is simple, use a bandage of cotton wool or coarse linen. But if the worm is large and the incisions are many...
... it is necessary to insert a bandage into each incision so that they touch each other. And if the worm has been cut from the skin or turned inside out, it must be packed with coarse linen or dry cotton wool and pressed for three days.
Then remove it and treat it with the appropriate medications until it heals. If blood discharge appears during treatment, use cold water and vinegar after soaking a piece of cotton in them. Apply it to the bleeding area repeatedly.
If the abscess persists, it is necessary to use incision, treatment, and urgent measures that we have described in many places in this book. In winter, if the location of the abscess is highly innervated, it is necessary to heat the compresses with hot drink and oil.
And place them on the affected area. If it is summer and the areas are fleshy, it is necessary to apply compresses soaked in water or oil, or in drink and oil, all cold, until on the third day as we have said, it is necessary to open the abscess and clean it.
And use whatever remedy is needed to heal it, for this is all that is required to know about the general treatment of abscesses. As for the detailed method, each type of abscess has been mentioned with its specific treatment in a summarized manner.
Chapter Forty-One
Concerning the treatment of abscesses that appear in the skin of the head.
Abscesses appear in the skin of the head as small abscesses, and they are one of the types that have pustules. They resemble the yolk of a chicken egg, and their varieties are many, some are fatty and others contain moisture similar to pus.
And among them is what contains moisture resembling Dushish and Hasa, and the like; and some are hardened, solid, and none of it has any danger in its incision or extraction unless you object when extracting a cataract.
And the procedure for its incision is to first press it with the instrument that resembles the one shown after this, called the Mudass, until you know what it contains. If it contains moisture, incise it with a long, straight incision like this image:
And begin the incision from point ~B~ to point ~j~. If the moisture is released, cut the bag that contained that moisture and remove all of it, leaving nothing behind, for often it returns if any part remains.
Then soak a cotton swab in vinegar, or if it is not available, in salt water, and fill the wound with it, leaving it until the next day, for it will dissolve any remaining bag. Then prepare another cotton swab with vinegar, and possibly a third one, as needed.
Until you are certain that nothing remains of the bag, then treat the wound with vinegar until it heals. And if the worm contains an oily substance, incise it as shown in this image:
Cut it with a scalpel and place the hooks in the wound's edges, then scrape it from all sides. If you encounter difficulty in removing the hook, do what I described earlier. Similarly, do this for the worm if it is devoid of the hook.
The treatment is the same as mentioned before, and removing the hook from the worm that has shed its skin is easier because it has less blood and moisture. Some of these worms in the head of certain people have no moisture with them, and I removed a worm from someone who had.
The head of an old woman, the worm was like a hard, coarse white stone; it could not be broken even if someone threw it at a rock, and none of the other worms that occurred in the head were like this, except for the worms that afflict children's heads.
At the roots of the ears, cut it completely with a fine incision and make its base from below to facilitate the flow of pus downwards, then treat it with what is suitable for it in treatment.
Chapter Twenty-Four
In the incision on pigs that occur in the neck, these worms often occur in the neck, under the armpits, and in the groin. They may also occur in other parts of the body. The one that occurs in the neck is usually one but can be many, and some of them generate from others.
Each boil is enclosed within its own special pouch, similar to the testicles and the veins of the head as we have described. There are many types of these boils, some that are hard and others that contain moisture, and there are also some that are bad and do not respond to treatment.
What I have seen of the best condition in touching is when its appearance is close to the color of the skin, moving in all directions and not adhering to the nerves of the neck or arteries or veins, and it is not ulcerated. It is necessary to incise it with a simple incision from above to below the body in this form, from line ~j~ to line ~b~:
And scrape it from all sides, and extend the edges of the skin with a needle or two needles, or many needles if needed, as we have said for the veins of the head, and draw it out little by little and let it be on a hook so that no nerve or artery is cut, and let the thread not be too hard.
So that your hand does not increase in cutting or alarm the patient and cut something that does not need to be cut, if you have cut an artery or vein and it prevents you from working, put powdered alum or some of the herbs that stop bleeding into the wound.
The wound has healed and been left until the inflammation subsides, the wound has softened, and it is about to burst with pus. At that moment, return to your work until you are free, then examine with your little finger if there remains a small abscess; cut and cleanse it.
If there is a large vein in the root of the abscess, it should not be cut from its root but tied with a double and strong thread and left until it falls out on its own without harm. Then fill the wound with boiled cotton wool that has been soaked in Egyptian myrrh and treat it.
If the entire abscess has been cut out, it is necessary to bring together the edges of the wound and stitch them with sutures after ensuring that there is no remnant of pus. But if you see any residue of the bone of the abscess,
Then it is necessary to aim for its root and base and use stitches and what we have mentioned. And whatever abscesses retain moisture, cover them with a simple bandage where their site of collection appears, and place the bandage from top to bottom as we said.
Then, after the butter, use the Egyptian lentil and its kind to eat what remains of the corruption until you see that the wound has become clean; then treat it with the planted lentils until it heals.
The thirty-third section.
In the case of a hernia caused by a worm in the neck.
The ancients have mentioned this hernia in the neck, but I have not seen anyone in our country perform it, and this is their discourse. As for those who practice surgery, they should avoid performing a hernia in the neck, as it does not benefit them.
Because all of the intestines and esophagus are sick, as for those who have a hot worm in the mouth or neck or throat, if there is no obstruction in the esophagus, it is necessary to use hernia in the neck to escape from the corruption that comes from strangulation.
If we want to do this, it is necessary to make a hernia in the neck below three circles of the esophagus or four small incisions with a width that fits between two circles, so that the incision is in the throat and not in the gullet, and this place is suitable for the incision. ة
It is because it has little flesh, and its blood vessels are distant from each other; therefore, if the patient is anemic, it is necessary to stretch the skin of the ring finger with a thread, then cut the skin until reaching the bone, away from the blood vessels if he sees something from them.
Then he cuts the membrane that we have described, and judges that the bone has been cut from the marrow that comes out with what is torn and by the interruption of sound, leaving the wound open for a time. When the time that was feared for constriction has passed, the edges of the wound are gathered from the skin.
And its incision alone without grafts, then use the medicines that grow flesh until it is healed. The author of this book said: Interpretation of this saying we have reported is if they see the patient has blocked his finger with one of these wounds they mentioned.
And if the patient is near death and his soul strives to depart, they cut into the trachea so that the patient can breathe over the wound a little, and he will be saved from death. They were commanded to leave the wound open until the course of the disease passes and its course is three days or thereabouts.
When they were ordered to sew the wound and treat it until healed, I personally witnessed a servant who took a knife and sent it onto her neck, cutting off part of the trachea. She was then taken for treatment and found to be decomposing like a slaughtered animal, so the wound was uncovered.
I found the blood flowing from the wound, so I was certain that no nerve or vein had been cut. Air was coming out of the wound, so I rushed and treated it until he recovered, and the servant only experienced hoarseness in his voice, nothing more.
And after a few days, she returned to her normal condition. So from this we can say that cutting the trachea is not dangerous.
Chapter Forty-Four.
On cutting the worm that appears in the neck from outside and is called the filaria of the neck.
This worm that is called the filaria of the neck is a large worm, matching the color of the body, and it is very common in women, and it comes in two types.
Either it is natural or artificial. As for the natural one, there is no harm in it, but as for the artificial one, it occurs in two forms: one resembling fatty tumors and the other resembling the worm that comes from the entanglement of veins, and cutting into this one is dangerous. Do not expose it to the cautery iron except for what is small from it if you left it and probed it with a needle, then sewed it up so that it resembles an oil-saturated seam, and it was not connected to any of the vessels, split it as you would on a seam. Remove it along with the bladder if it is in the bladder, otherwise collect all of them and then treat the place as appropriate.
The fifty-fifth chapter.
Cutting into different types of seams.
There are many types of seams, and all their types have been mentioned in the division. Here we should explain the difference between a seam and an abscess, as it is problematic. I say that with an abscess there will be heat, swelling, and severe pain until the pustule softens. And the necrosis completes, at which point the swelling and redness subside. A seam does not have any heat, swelling, or pain, and it is contained in a thin-walled sac that has its own specific space, appearing on the body with a color similar to the skin. Its beginning is like a pimple, then it becomes like a blister, both large and small.
...It is of two types: either fatty or containing moisture, and the colors of moisture are many as mentioned in the classification. Therefore, if you reach the treatment of a wound, it should be delayed and inspected first using the instrument called the scalpel, as shown in the following chapter...
Measure the bone of the ulcer, then remove the scalpel and observe what comes out in its wake. If a viscous moisture of any color exudes, cut it with a simple incision as mentioned for other ulcers. But if no moisture follows the scalpel, know that it is fatty.
Make a firm incision over it as shown in the figure I have described to you, and tie it with ligatures. Scrape the skin from each side carefully, and keep it in a bag if possible, so that it comes out correctly with the wound.
If the bag breaks during the operation and you cannot remove it correctly, it often happens that way. So, extract it piece by piece until nothing remains. For if any part of it remains, whether small or large, the ulcer will likely recur.
When the wound is deep and only a little of it remains, let the wound be cleansed with some sharp, stringent substances that constrict the wound; place upon it what attracts heat to the wound and treat it with the rest of the treatment until it heals. If the tissue is large, cut it open and treat it with what adheres.
If you encounter a pulsating or non-pulsating artery with oozing blood, quickly clean the area with powdered alum and leave it compressed for one or two days until the wound heals and the bleeding stops; then return to cutting off what remains of the tissue.
Chapter Sixty-Four
In the illustrations of the instruments.
Those that are used for sutures and among them are the illustrations of needles, which are three types: large ones, medium ones, and small ones.
Image of a large needle:
Image of a medium needle:
Image of a small needle:
Made from iron, square in shape and sharp-edged to facilitate quick entry into wounds. These are the images of forceps, also called clamps, which come in three types as well: large, medium, and small. Image of a large clamp:
Image of a surgical instrument in the center.
Image of a small surgical instrument.
It is suitable for examining wounds, ulcers, boils, and abscesses to see what is inside them such as bones or other things. It is made round, polished, smooth like a probe from brass, or Spanish iron, or from copper, or from iron, or from silver. The best one is made of Spanish iron.
Probes can also be made from black lead, and they are suitable for examining ulcers that have cavities in them with these probes. These are also of three types: long, medium, and short.
Each ulcer needs a probe according to its size and narrowness, and its thickness is based on the size and narrowness of the ulcer. Image of a large lead probe:
Image of a medium-sized lead probe.
Image of a small lead probe.
Images of forceps, which are of many types. There are simple ones, meaning those with a single handle, and they are three types: large, medium, and small. There are also blind forceps, which are three types, and there are double-handled forceps, which are three types, and there are serrated double-handled forceps. ‌ Here are the three types, and among them are those with three edges, which are of three types, and all these types require in their place a simple large form: A medium simple form:. A small simple form:
A large blind form: A medium blind form:
A small blind form:
A large form with edges: Medium form with edges: عمياء: Small form with edges:
Large form with three edges: صورة صنّارة وسط ذات الثلاثة مخاطيف:.
Medium form with three edges Small form with three edges
And these are the forms of needles that penetrate and cut through flesh and wounds, which are three types because some of them are large, others are medium, and still others are small. Large form of needle:
Medium form of needle:
Small form of needle
Its ends that penetrate are limited, while the other ends are not limited. They were made this way so that he may use them to cut through flesh when fearing cutting a nerve or vein, and the patient will find some relief from the burning sensation that he finds when cutting through the wound.
And these are the images of the hernias, which are three types: some are large, others are medium, and others are small. Image of a large hernia:
It is made of copper, resembling a half-pipe that surrounds it. On one end there is something like a broad spoon with two layers, at the tip of which there is a hidden knife blade that resembles a bird's tongue, which can be moved inward and outward as you see fit.
Images of the wounds that are hidden between the fingers during the swelling of the extremities, which the patient does not feel. They are three types: some are large, others are medium, and others are small. Image of a large wound:
Images of the incisions used to cut the flow of blood, which are three types: some are large, others are medium, and others are small. Image of a large incision:
It is made of copper or porcelain, slightly bent in length as you see, and it should be thin. These types of incisions should always be with you, large and small, to cut the blood quickly when needed and when no medicine is available.
And do not use for cutting blood in every place of the body, but only use it in fleshy places such as the calf muscle and thigh, and arm muscles, chest, abdomen, and similar fleshy parts.
And small tools like pistachio shells can be made from them, as shown in this figure:
It cuts blood if it leaks from the wound, or when a nerve or vessel is cut. Small hooks can also be made from them, as shown in this figure:
Chapter Seventy-Four
On treating the chest of men.
And the chest of some people may swell during puberty to resemble the breasts of women, and it remains warm and ugly. Therefore, if one dislikes this, it is necessary to scarify the chest with a crescent-shaped scarification tool in this manner.
From line ~b~ to line ~j~ Then scrape off all the fat, and fill the wound with medicinal oil. Then suture the edges of the wound with stitches and treat it until it heals. For if the chest wall extends downward and attaches to the bone as in women.
It is necessary to make two cuts on its upper sides, each in the shape of a crescent, touching each other at their ends until the larger line surrounds the smaller one, as shown in this image: From the line ~b~ to the line ~j~, then scrape off the skin that is between the cuts and remove the fat. Use the stitches and bandages that we have mentioned, along with any necessary treatments, until healing occurs.
If the wound does not absorb as it should, either from fear of the patient or due to blood loss, you must fill the wound with cotton wool soaked in honey-vinegar and leave it until the remaining fat is consumed. Then treat it until healing occurs.
Chapter Eighty-Four.
In the treatment of wounds that have been cut below the navel.
These wounds that have been cut below the navel are of a hard, porcine nature and are enclosed in a sac. Some of them contain moisture. If it contains moisture, then it should be cut with a crescent-shaped incision like this.
From line ~b~ to line ~j~. Once all the matter from the wound is removed, fill it with cotton wool and leave it until the next day, then remove the cotton.
And treat it with the suitable cautery until it heals, and if the wound is of the type of swine ulcers, cut it open as we mentioned in cutting on pigs, whether or not the wound has reached the bone. If the bone is exposed, use the trepan as we mentioned before.
The Ninth and Fortieth Chapter.
On the incision of ulcers that appear before the veins or arteries, known as aneurysms.
If the veins are cut and the skin above it is wounded, an ulcer often appears from that, and likewise, if the artery is wounded, a swelling or ulcer may also appear in it.
The signs by which one can recognize that the ulcer or swelling is from a vein or an artery are as follows: if the ulcer is from a vein, it will be elongated and concentrated in the depth of the body, and if you press on it with your finger, you will feel that it has a pulsation.
And that which is from an artery will be round in the surface of the body. Incising these ulcers is dangerous, especially if they are in the elbow, the wrist, the neck, and many other parts of the body. Great care must be taken not to treat them with iron.
And what is also in the margins or on the head, it should be avoided. If there was swelling of the throat, incise over it in the skin with a long cut. Then open the cut with scissors. Then scrape the throat and clear it from the scabs.
Until it is revealed, then insert a needle under it and thread it to the other side. Then tie the throat with two threads in two places as you were taught for tying the throats of those in the temples. Then cauterize between the ligatures until all the blood in them comes out.
The worm will dissolve, and then the treatment that causes blistering is used until the ligatures fall off. Then it is treated with suitable ointments until he recovers.
If the worm is inside the cut, it is necessary to grasp as much of the worm with the skin as possible. Then insert a needle below where you grasped and thread it so that it comes out on the other side. Then tie it to the worm with a good knot as you were told for tying the grape from both ends of the thread. If you fear that the threads will slip, insert another needle with another thread under the entire worm at the point where the first needle intersects.
Your threads are attached in four places, then the worm is cut in half until what is inside it comes out; then cut off the excess skin and leave what was connected to it, then place a cloth that has been soaked in vinegar and oil on it. Then use the treatment that is made with pine nuts and grapes until it heals.
Chapter Fifty
The worm that is exposed from the nerve.
Just as the worm is exposed in the veins and arteries, so too is the worm exposed in the nerve if it is struck or occurs due to excessive fatigue, and this happens more frequently in the places of the fingers and toes.
And in each place where the joints move, there is a soft worm that resembles the color of the rest of the body, and it is usually painless. If pressed firmly, the patient feels a sensation similar to a tendon, and the worm does not gather in the depths of the body.
But it is under the skin and moves in all directions, neither forward nor backward. Therefore, whatever is in the joints should not be exposed with iron, for this may cause a delay in healing, and what is in the head or forehead.
Cut the skin with a scalpel, then if the worm is small, grasp it with forceps and cut it from its root; but if large, ligate it with thread and cauterize it, then remove it and gather the wound with sutures and treat it until it heals.
Chapter Fifty-One.
On cutting the fingers that are exposed in the abdomen.
It often happens to some people that in their abdomen and other parts of the body there are fingers called natural, which resemble a finger in origin; its root is thin and its head is thick. Its two lips may turn into small ones, or they may become very large.
I once saw a man who had in his abdomen two fingers that were almost indistinguishable from an actual finger; they were white and thin-rooted, their two lips having turned into small ones and split open, with moisture constantly oozing out of them. I cut them out, and one weighed about eighteen ounces, the other about six.
The procedure for cutting them is as follows: if the patient is moist and the finger is white, moist, and thin-rooted, cut it with a broad scalpel, and have ready near you a hot iron, because often much blood will flow upon their being cut.
If you are bleeding, bandage it. If you see the patient is anxious and afraid of cutting with iron, take a thread from lead wire and tighten with it the vein that has this description, and leave it for two days, then increase in the tightening of the lead, do not stop tightening the lead.
Whenever you touch the vein until it breaks and falls out on its own, without effort, if the vein is thick at its root, there may be some fear and hesitation in cutting it, especially when it is in the abdomen, but part of it or half of it can be cut.
Then bandage it so that it does not return, then treat it until the wound heals. Be careful not to cut a vein that is dark in color, has little sensation, and looks dull, for it is a sign of cancer. And we will mention cancer later.
Chapter Two and Fifty.
In the treatment of bladder stones.
The cause of bladder stones can be numerous, either from the tearing of the fascia covering the abdomen, which releases blood or urine into the rest of the cavity, or from blood that oozes from a vein or artery, as mentioned before, or from air that has been trapped.
And if it is before the rupture of the abscess and the exit of the pus, then its color is similar to that of the flesh, and it will be soft without pain, and various positions will appear. And if it is before the exit of the urine, its condition will be more varied with what we have described, so that when you press it with your fingers, it disappears then returns. It may sometimes be accompanied by a rumbling sound and greatly increases at bathing or heavy labor. If it is before wetness, it will be soft.
It does not disappear when you press it with your hand, nor does it increase or decrease. If it is due to blood, then along with these signs, the pus will appear black. If it is due to congealed meat, the pus will be yellow and firm, and it will settle in one place.
If it is due to wind, its touch will be soft. The treatment for this is to observe, if the vein of the anus is affected by blood or pus or wind, then you should abstain from treating it, as there is fear and doubt in that, as I have informed you in the chapter where I mentioned the abscesses that occur due to the veins and pus.
"For if the hernia is caused by water or cold, it is necessary to instruct the patient to grasp himself and stand erect, then learn to bandage around the hernia completely. Then instruct him to lie down on his back, then bind around the hernia with a wide bandage in the place you learned to bind, then pass through the middle of the bandage above with a large needle, then tie the binding place with a strong thread or thick silk securely.
The binding knot should be a series of loops, then open the middle of the bandage above the knot and insert your little finger, and ask for water. If you find it taken by the bandage, loosen the loops and push the water into the abdomen. And if cold is found, draw it out with a needle.
And cut its tip, for if you find resistance from the intestine or vein, then bandage it firmly and return to your work. Then take two needles and insert in them two strong threads; insert the two needles into the binding that you made around the hernia with two swabs that have passed through them, then press the hernia in four places on the needles.
If you wish, remove the thread and leave the place until the compressed flesh decomposes and falls off by itself, or cut it if it softens and decomposes, then treat it with appropriate medicines until it heals, for it was a piece of flesh that was not completely removed.
Or if it is due to moisture, it is necessary that the worm should be cauterized as we mentioned and the blood or the moisture that you find in it should be evacuated, then treat it with what can heal the place.
Chapter Thirty-Five
On the Treatment of Cancer
We have mentioned in the division the types of cancer and how to treat it with medicines, and we warned against treating it with iron lest it ulcerate. We also mentioned cancer that occurs in the uterus and warned against its treatment.
The earlier discussions mentioned that when the cancer is in a place where it can be completely removed, such as breast or thigh cancer and similar removable organs, especially if it starts small; but if it progresses to become large, it should not be approached.
For I could not heal anyone from it, nor have I seen anyone else who achieved this before me, and the procedure in it, if it is feasible as we mentioned, should be advanced so that the patient can escape the black day, then it will putrefy him clearly if it is in the veins.
Then place the patient in a position suitable for surgery, then obtain the lancets used for cancer, then cut it from all sides with the skin until its roots are completely removed, leaving the blood to flow and not cutting it off quickly.
On the contrary, compress the wound and clot all the thick blood either by hand or with any available instruments. If you encounter heavy bleeding from cutting veins or arteries, cauterize until the bleeding stops, then treat it with the rest of the medication until he is cured.
Chapter Forty-Five.
In the treatment of burns.
We have been informed in the classification of the types of thirst, how the water should be collected and the signs of each type, and its treatment with drugs. The one that is treated with iron is only the bilious type alone, and the phlegmatic type and the blood type should not be treated with iron. ‌
If you have treated this bilious type of burn with drugs and your treatment has not been effective, then observe: if the patient is weak or has another disease besides the burn, such as fever.
An ulcer, discharge, or the like; be careful not to treat it with iron, for it is dangerous. If you see that the patient has excessive strength and only suffers from this one disease, and he is neither a child nor an old man, then the treatment is to make the patient stand upright between your hands. And behind him is an assistant pressing his abdomen with his hands, directing the water downwards towards the anus. Then take a small amount of syrup in this manner.
It has two ends, one long and defined, the other end is pointed like a needle, except that it has a little fat at its tip so that it does not penetrate to the bladder and harm it. Then look; if pus comes out from the side of the bladder.
It is necessary to make an incision in the groin three fingers below the navel, above the anus. If pus comes out from liver disease, let your incision be easy three fingers from the groin. If it comes out from spleen disease, let the incision be on the right side, three fingers.
It is also not appropriate for the incision to be on the side where the patient wants to lie, so that the exudate does not drain to that weak spot. Then cut through the skin with the instrument, then insert the instrument into that incision and raise your hand.
The cautery between the skin and subcutaneous tissue is as if you are cutting it, and the amount you cut will be the size of a fingernail or close to it. Then, you penetrate the subcutaneous tissue until the cautery reaches an empty space, which is the place of water. Then you remove it and insert into the hole the instrument that looks like this.
It is similar to a tube made from thin reed, manufactured from silver or copper or softened lead, with a small hole at its base and three holes on its sides: two on one side and one on the other, as you see.
And its end can be covered with a cap, similar to the cap of a pen, like this image.
At its upper end there is a ring, so when the instrument reaches the water, it descends to the instrument from its hourglass, thereby emptying the water in an average time. If you empty it more quickly than needed, the patient may die from the sudden disruption of his vital spirit.
Or it may cause him to approach death, but empty it according to his strength and what his condition indicates from the strength of his pulse and the good color of his face, then remove the instrument and close off the water, for it closes from its hourglass.
Because of the skin that holds the hole on the eyelid that I informed you to cauterize with that method, then repeat the procedure another day if you see the patient can tolerate it.
And it also emerges from the water in small quantities, so do this every day while you are on your guard and beware of mistakes until there is only a little water left. If you fear for the patient and leave too much water, then treat him by burying [the wound] in hot sand.
And frequent immersion in the bath and exposure to the sun, making him endure thirst, and treating him with drying medicines until he is cured. Then place him on a diet of bread and vegetables after the water has been expelled as described earlier.
Chapter Fifty-Five.
In the treatment of children whose urethra is not perforated, or if it is narrowed or located incorrectly.
Some children may come out of their mother's womb with the urethra not perforated, so it is necessary to hasten and perforate it within an hour after birth.
By applying a very thin piece on this image:
Then place a thin lead tube in the hole, secure it and hold it for three or four days. If he needs to urinate, turn him away and make him urinate elsewhere, then return him. If the lead tube is not used, the urine that passes over the area may not close.
As for those whose hole is narrow, treat it with lead as mentioned for many days until it expands. And those in whom the hole is not in its proper place, such as those born with the hole at the end of the bladder, so that they cannot urinate forward.
Until he raises the sperm with his hand above, and it does not come out before the semen can reach the womb in an upright position; this is a very ugly cause. The treatment for this is that the patient should lie on his back.
Then you should pull his bladder with your left hand strongly, and cut off the tip of the penis with a knife or with a sharp, large pen-like instrument, as if you were carving something, so that there is a natia in the middle resembling a bladder, and the hole falls in the center as required.
...and beware of blood infection when performing surgery, as it is often encountered and should be managed by stopping the bleeding and treating the wound until it heals.
Chapter Sixty-Six.
On the fistula that presents in the vagina, womb, anus, gangrene, and adhesion of the vagina to the uterus.
This fistula often appears in the rectum and is a thick, fleshy growth that can be either benign or malignant. The benign type should be tied off with a fine silk thread.
Cut it until all the pus is drained, then apply a medicated cotton pad soaked in Egyptian myrrh. After that, treat it with date-myrrh until it heals. But if the fistula is thick and dark in color, it is necessary to use cauterization after cutting and cleaning it.
If the fistula is in the vagina and has not been treated, and some of the fistula is inside the vagina while some is outside, it is necessary to first remove the internal part of the fistula until it atrophies. Then treat the external part.
Because when you treat them together, the vagina may perforate and it may also present in women with gangrene or putrefaction of the vagina. It is necessary to cut out all that has turned black and seems about to putrefy or has already putrefied.
Then, he treats it with honey mixed with crushed and sifted pomegranate rind and vinegar. After that, he applies the rest of the treatment until it heals. If blood oozes out, then use a hook with a crescent-shaped tip on this wound:
For both conditions (bleeding and infected wound), the hook is beneficial. If the urethra swells and its opening goes into the path of the penis, insert a lead pipe to release the urine from the patient. As for the adhesion of the foreskin to the glans:
This adhesion only occurs in those whose foreskin is normal and circumcision was not necessary for them, and it can occur due to a wound or bite. It should be treated with a potent caustic until the connection dissolves and the foreskin separates from both sides.
If it is difficult to separate them with a scalpel, then some of the foreskin and the glans should be cauterized because the glans is thin and may tear easily due to its delicacy. Then, separate the foreskin from the glans using a piece of thin cotton cloth that has been soaked in cold water to prevent further adhesion.
Then he is treated with a drink that makes him vomit.
Chapter Seventy-Five.
On Purifying Children and Treating Their Ailments.
Circumcision is not something other than the separation of connection, as in all other surgical procedures, except that since it is done by our will and used specifically for children, we must describe the best method for it.
And the easiest way leading to safety, so I say that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books because it was not practiced among their laws, and it is what we have acquired.
Through experience, because I have found that most of the surgeons and cupping practitioners use circumcision with a scissor or a knife, and they use the ligature with thread and cut with the nail, and I have tried all these methods.
Therefore, I did not find anything better than circumcision with a knife and ligature with thread because circumcision with scissors often leads to loss of skin due to the fact that the foreskin has two layers, so it may cut off the outer layer while the inner layer remains.
Cutting further, persistent pain, and cleansing with a probe are not reliable for cutting the end of an ulcer, as it may enter its cavity. As for cleansing with a nail, there is a risk that the skin will slip and spoil your work, or the child's skin may be naturally short.
Many are born this way and do not need cleansing, as I have seen. As for cleansing with scissors and suturing with thread, experience has shown me its preference because the scissor blades correspond to each other like the upper blade corresponds to the lower blade.
When you have squeezed your hand so that the two blades of the scissors cut at once and at the same time, the stitch becomes like a wall around the ulcerous skin from all sides, without any mistake in suturing. The first step is to make the child faint.
Especially if he is one of those who understands little that you are only tying the thread in his ulcer and leaving it for another day, then you make him happy and glad in every way possible with him, according to what his mind accepts. Then you stop him between your hands while standing upright.
He should not be sitting, and hide the scissors in your pocket or under your foot, lest the child's eye fall upon it among the tools. Then insert your hand into the dilator and blow into the skin, flattening it until the tip of the dilator comes out.
Then clean it from the gathered pus, then tie a double thread to the marked spot, then tie another thread a little below it, then hold the two ends of the threads and the scab with the lower knot firmly, and cut between the two threads. Then quickly lift the skin and remove the dilator, then let the blood flow for a bit, which is better and causes less inflammation of the dilated area. Then wash it with a wet rag, then sprinkle on it some dry, burned ashes or also fine semolina flour, both are excellent.
Then quickly lift the skin and remove the dilator, then let the blood flow for a bit, which is better and causes less inflammation of the dilated area. Then wash it with a wet rag, then sprinkle on it some dry, burned ashes or also fine semolina flour, both are excellent. Then place on the ulcer from above a piece of white linen cloth cooked in rose water mixed with good-quality rose oil, and leave it on until the next day. Then continue treating it with the rest of the treatment until he is cured.
This is the depiction of the scissors suitable for cauterization.
The blade should be sharp without a swivel on the axis, and the length of the blades should be equal to the handles. As for errors in cauterization, it may happen that all or part of the inner skin is flipped when cut; you must extend it with your fingernail before the site becomes hardened.
Cut it evenly; if you are unable to grasp it with your fingernail, attract it with tweezers and cut it. If three days have passed and the swelling beneath the head of the boil remains hot and red, leave it until the inflammation subsides, then scrape it gently with a spoon.
Cut it according to what is convenient for you, and take care not to cut the head of the boil; if part of the head is cut off, it does no harm. Treat it with any of the ointments we have described in our chapter on ulcers.
If you cut more skin than needed and it is raised above the surface, this also does not cause much harm. Treat it with what we have mentioned until it heals.
Chapter Eighty-Five
On the treatment of urine retained in the bladder.
Urine retained in the bladder is due to its blockage by a stone, clotted blood, or swollen flesh, and the like. If it is treated with what we mentioned for the number of treatments described in the division.
If the urine has not been released and it is observed that its retention is due to a stone that has obstructed the neck of the bladder, the patient should lie on his back and then another person should sit on his stomach, pressing his abdomen towards his back while the patient himself holds onto something as much as he can.
Then, the neck of the bladder will be forced to expel the stone towards the back and the urine will be released. But if it does not come out with what we mentioned and the condition worsens for the patient, it is necessary to use an instrument called a catheter, which looks like this:
It is made of silver and should be thin, smooth, and hollow like the beak of a bird in the length of a cubit, about half a finger long. One end has a delicate bulb. To draw out the urine with it, one should take two threads and tie them firmly at the end with wool or cotton.
The thread's end enters below the anus, and a small piece of wool is used as a stopper to prevent it from entering the bowel, like a plug. Then, the anus is anointed with oil, lard, or egg white, and the patient sits on a chair.
His penis and scrotum are anointed with wet adhesive, oil, or thick water. Then, the thread is inserted into the anus accompanied by the enema until it reaches the bottom of the anus. The anus is then turned upwards towards the side, and the thread is pushed inside.
Until, when the anus is turned, the thread is pushed inside until it approaches the seat. Then, the penis is tilted downward with the thread inside it, and it is pushed until it reaches the anus, and the patient feels that it has reached something empty.
It is done in this manner because the urethra, through which urine flows, has a twist. Then, the thread is pulled with some wool tightly, and the urine follows the wool. After it is removed, urine will flow out, and the thread is reinserted.
Do not continue to do that until the bowels are emptied and the patient finds relief.
Chapter Ninety-Five.
How to Enema with a Syringe.
And the figure of the instrument that can be used for this is made of silver or hollow bone with a long tube on the end of a syringe, and it was intended to inject water and drugs into it; this will be done by an instrument called the syringe, and here is its image:.
It is made of silver or hollow bone with a long tube on the end of the syringe, and it is all hollow except for the tip, which is sealed. There are three holes in it, two from one side and one from the other, as you see.
The hollow place where the piston is located should be closed without any excess so that when something liquid is drawn with it, it will draw; and when it is pushed, it will push to a distance similar to the catapult used for throwing oil in sea wars.
If you want to inject liquid into the bowels, insert the tip of the syringe into the liquid and draw it up with the piston until the liquid is drawn into the hollow of the syringe. Then insert the tip into the anus as we have described for the enema and push the liquid out with the piston.
The moisture reaches the anus while standing, so that the patient feels it, and this is also a fine injection for the anus.
It is made from silver or brass, its top part resembling a small funnel, and below it there is a ring in which the band passes. Then take an animal's rectum, put into it the moisture you want to inject into the rectum, then tie it firmly between the two rings with a double thread.
It is warmed slightly over the fire, then its tip is inserted into the anus, and you press your hand firmly on the anus with the moisture until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the anus.
If you do not have a rectum, take a piece of leather and make it into a circle; then puncture holes in it from all its sides. Then insert a strong thread through those holes as it revolves. Then gather the circle as one gathers a pouch after putting into it whatever moisture or ointment you desire.
Then tie it to the instrument and use it as you would with a rectum, pressing it with your hand until the moisture reaches the anus.
Chapter Sixty.
Removal of the stone.
We have mentioned in the division the types of stones and their treatment with medications, and we noted the difference between the stone that forms in the kidney and the stone that forms in the bladder, along with all its signs. We also mentioned the stone on which manual operation and cauterization are performed.
And these are specifically the stones that form in the bladder and that grow in the urethra, and I have described this clearly and concisely.
So I say that the stone that forms in the bladder is more common among children, and one of its signs is that urine exits from the bladder resembling water in its flow.
And sand appears in it, and his penis becomes constricted and he plays with it, and often it is delayed, then spreads, and with it the desire for defecation appears in many of them. It is easy to heal children from this until they reach fourteen years old, but it is difficult for the elderly, and as for adolescents, it is moderate between these two. ︎
And the one whose stones are larger, his treatment will be easier, and for smaller ones it is the opposite. So if we proceed to treatment, firstly it is necessary that the patient is injected with an enema that expels all the stool in his intestines, for it may prevent the stone from being found during the examination.
Then the patient is taken by his feet and shaken downwards so that the stone descends into the bladder, or he may be made to jump from a high place several times, then you sit him between your legs, with his hands under his thighs, so that the entire bladder tilts downwards, then examine him.
Then you make him urinate from the outside, and if you feel the stone in the urethra, hurry to press on it, for if it does not fall out, you should moisten your little finger with oil from your left hand if the patient is a child, or your middle finger.
If he is an adult, insert it into his urethra and search for the stone until when it falls under your finger, you move it little by little to the neck of the bladder, then press on it with your finger and push it out to the desired location to be crushed.
And you command a servant to press the bladder with his hand, and another servant to stretch the membrane with his right hand and with his other hand to stretch the skin below the membrane away from the location where the crushing will occur, then take the instrument that looks like this:
Cut between the chair and the anus, not in the middle but towards the left side of the anus, and the cut should be on the same surface as the chair and your finger in the anus, and you press it outwards, making the cut wide from the outside and narrow from within, to the extent that the stone can come out.
Do not press the finger too hard in the anus, lest it push out the stone before the incision is made, and know that sometimes stones have corners or edges which make their removal difficult.
Some are soft, like clay, and rounded, making their removal easy. If it has corners or edges, make the incision a little larger; if it does not come out this way, it is necessary to use a tight band around it, either by gripping it with a firm clamp whose end is like a spoon.
To secure the stone so it does not escape, either use a delicate instrument with a hooked end inserted beneath it, or if you cannot reach it, widen the incision slightly; and if there is any blood, cut it off with scissors.
If there are more than one, first push the larger one into the rectum and then cut on it; afterwards, push the smaller one and do likewise if there are more than two. If they are extremely large, it is better not to make a large incision on them because this exposes the patient to risk in two ways.
If he dies or if he has constant dribbling of urine, it is because the place does not heal. Try to push it out until it exits or dissolves in its breakage with blades until it comes out completely.
When you have finished treating the wound with candles, vinegar, patience, bandaging it tightly and covering it with a cloth soaked in oil, wine or almond oil and cold water to soothe the burning, then let the patient lie on their side and do not change the dressing until the third day.
If it becomes inflamed, wash the area with plenty of water and oil, then treat it with fig paste and a poultice until it heals. If excessive heat, pain or similar symptoms appear in the wound, such as blood clotting in the bladder preventing urination and recognizable by the presence of blood in the urine.
Then insert your finger into the wound and remove that blood, for if it remains, it will cause the bladder to rot and deteriorate. Afterwards, wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt, or whatever treatment method is suitable until it heals.
It is necessary during all treatment times to bind the thighs together and gather them to secure the medicines placed on the site, for if the stone is small and goes into the urethra and sticks in it and prevents urination from exiting, treat it with what I will describe before it reaches the narrow part.
Often, this treatment is sufficient without reaching the narrow part; I have tried this myself, which is to take a hook made of steel shaped like this:
A triangle with a pointed edge, pierced in the anus, then take a thread and tie it around the urethra below the stone to prevent it from returning to the bladder. Then insert the hook into the urethra until it reaches the same stone.
Then turn the hook a little in the same stone until you have made an opening through it, and then it will exit from the other side; immediately urine will flow out. Keep your hand on what remains of the stone outside the urethra; it will crumble and come out with the urine, and the patient will be cured.
If this treatment is not available to you due to obstacles preventing it, tie a thread under the stone and another thread above the stone. Then make an incision in the urethra between the two threads and remove the stone.
Then, the bandage is changed and the clotted blood in the wound is cleaned out. The thread must be tied below the stone to prevent it from returning to its original place; the other end of the thread is tied above so that if the thread breaks after the stone is removed, the skin will return to its place and cover the wound.
And for that reason, if you tie the upper thread, you should raise the skin upwards so that when you release it, it will return and cover the wound as we have said.
Chapter One Hundred and Sixty-Seven.
In Removing the Bladder Stone for Women.
Rarely does a woman have a bladder stone, and if any of them has one, it is difficult to treat her due to several reasons: the first is that she might be a virgin, and the second is that you will not find a woman who will expose herself to the physician.
If she is a virgin or one of the close relatives, and thirdly, you will not find a woman skilled in this craft, especially working by hand; and fourthly, the location of the incision for removing the stone in women is far from the location of the stone, so it requires another incision.
In such a case, if necessity demands it, it is necessary to have a skilled female physician, but rarely will you find one. If she is not available, then request a chaste physician accompanied by his friend, or arrange for a woman who can be helpful in women's matters, or a woman who has some skill in this craft.
She should prepare and order her to perform all that she orders her to do in examining the bladder first, and this is because if the woman is a virgin, it is necessary for the finger to enter her seat and search for the bladder; if found, it should be pressed under the finger.
Then she should order her to be split open, and if she is not a virgin but rather widowed, the assistant should insert her finger into the patient's vagina and examine the bladder after placing her left hand on the abdomen and pressing it firmly.
If she finds it, she should push it down from the mouth of the abdomen to below the extent of her power until she reaches it at the base of the thigh, then split open over it at the halfway point of the vagina near the base of the thigh from whichever side is easier for her and where she feels the bladder.
Her finger should not leave the bladder compressed beneath it, and let the split be small at first; then insert the scalpel into that small split. If she feels the bladder, she should increase the cut to whatever extent she knows the bladder will come out from it, and know that there are many types of bladders. عندما يكون الشقّ جذاباً فليترك مكانه حتّى يخرج الحصاة، ثمّ تُطَهِّر المكان من الدم.
From it, small and large ones, soft and harsh, long and round, and those with branches; therefore, know its types to achieve what you want. If blood dominates you, then sprinkle powdered glass on the spot and hold it for an hour until the bleeding stops, then return to your work.
Until the stone comes out, and perform so that it coincides with yourself from the tools mentioned for the extraction of stones in men to help you in your work. If bleeding overwhelms you and you know the pulse's throb is due to a severed vein, then place a tampon on the spot.
And tighten it with tight ligatures, and leave it, and do not repeat it, and leave the stone without extracting it; perhaps the patient will die. Then treat the wound. If the bleeding stops after a few days and the spot heals, return to your work until the stone comes out.
Chapter Two Hundred and Sixty-Seven.
In the incision on the bladder.
The bladder is merely a collection of moisture in the white membrane that lies beneath the skin surrounding the egg, and it is called the tunica albuginea. It may also be found in its own special covering which nature has prepared for it at one end of the egg.
Until he thinks it is another egg, and it is between the skin of the testicles and the white membrane that we mentioned, and this happens rarely. This cyst arises from a weakness exposed to women, which settles in her, and it may be exposed due to a blow on the woman.
This moisture comes in many colors: it can be yellow, or reddish-blood colored, or blackish-dark, or clear white, which is the most common. These are its signs.
Where the water collects, if it is in the white membrane that we mentioned, then the worm will be very elongated like an egg and the testicle will not appear because the moisture surrounds it from all sides.
And if the moisture is in the skin of the testicle, then the worm will be elongated like half an egg.
Because of this, a person may think it is another egg. If the moisture is between the skin of the testicle and the white membrane, it will fall under the touch. But if you want to know the color of the moisture, hold the worm with the square needle that I have shown before; whatever comes out from behind the needle will indicate its color.
If we resort to treating with iron, it is necessary that the patient be made to bleed if possible and you see his body full. Then he should lie on his back a little high and put many embers under him, then sit on his left side.
And order a servant to sit on his right side, stretching his penis towards one side of the anus and towards the side of the abdomen. Then take a wide, thin instrument and pierce the skin of the anus from the middle lengthwise up to near the tip.
And make the cut vertical, parallel to the line that divides the skin of the anus into two halves, until it reaches the white mucous membrane. Scrape it and be careful not to cut it; your scraping should be more from the side attached to the anus and collect the scrapings as much as you can.
Then place the mucous membrane in water, warm and wide, and drain all the water. Then separate the lips of the cut with probes and stretch the mucous membrane upwards, not touching the surrounding skin. Cut the mucous membrane as much as you can, either by lifting it or cutting piece by piece.
Do not cut the thin side, for if you do not cut it precisely, water may return, and if the egg protrudes from its skin during your work, after finishing cutting the sack, put it back, then gather the two sides of the skin with stitches.
Then treat it with the rest of the surgical methods until it heals. If the egg has been affected by another disease, it is necessary to tie the ducts that are in the appendix to prevent infection, then cut the skin from the appendix, remove the egg, and treat it as mentioned before.
If the water collected in both sides is all together, know that they are two ureters, cut the other side as you did with the first one. Whether it is necessary for the work to be done on only one or not, do it, then wipe away the blood.
Insert wool that has been soaked in oil or rose oil into the incisions, and from outside, place another wool that has been soaked in vinegar and water, and spread it over both sides, and cover the abdomen with a bandage, which is the rafad. And tie it from above with the bandage that has six edges, as shown in this figure.
Then two pieces of bandage are taken, rubbed and covered with wool from the fleece according to this example, and the ends that are tied with them are made from cotton or wet wool, and they are gathered with a tight strap in the belt of trousers, and one of the ends is placed on the seat to the back.
And the second is taken towards the ankle, and both ends are placed on the thighs from below, and the remaining two ends are placed on the calves. All the tension is gathered in the belt of trousers, and this bandage can also be made with a leather strap instead of iron.
And it is that a thin, sharp lancet is taken and with it the skin of the calf is cut until the white sac containing the water is exposed. Then another lancet is taken in this manner:
It resembles the Greek eye, then it is covered with that sac and it protects until all the moisture comes out. Then the sac is stretched with tweezers and the outer layer is burned with the lancet and cut as much as possible until all of it is removed, taking care not to touch the egg with fire.
"Know that this procedure is safer and more effective than draining blood. If you encounter inflammation during the procedure, or if there is a hot wound, bleeding, or any other issue, it should be treated as soon as possible with an appropriate treatment.
"If the patient is impatient and cannot endure this procedure, use pigeon dung as I have described, which will prove effective based on the evidence we have presented.
"The watery discharge should be treated by having the patient sit on a high chair, and then the wound should be cupped below with a broad cup. Apply pigeon dung to the body from head to toe, ensuring the opening is wide enough for all the water to drain out. Then place a cotton cloth over the area and tie it.
"Let it sit in the remaining water, then treat it until the wound heals. If the water does not flow out when you cup him, it is because the white membrane has swollen at the mouth of the wound, preventing the water from flowing out.
"In that case, you should insert a hazel splint or the instrument used to extract water from the blisters that were previously shown, or enlarge the opening of the wound slightly.
The water may return and collect after six months or thereabouts, so if it does gather, it will be the same as before, and the patient will defend themselves.
Chapter Thirty-Six
On the Fistula on the Fleshy Urethra and Its Treatment
Know that the fistula on this urethra is a dangerous mistake leading to death in most cases, so we see it abandoned and safety from it, while I mention the work on it and types of worms.
I say that there are many tumors in the bodies that have a female constitution, and this occurs for many reasons, either from an innate predisposition inclining to the female constitution or from a blow, and the color of the worm will be like that of the body, and it has no water.
And the worm will be soft, and sometimes the worm may be like a bruise in color, with no feeling, which can occur from the constriction and swelling of the veins as mentioned before, or from the swelling of the testicles. What occurs from the swelling of the veins is known as the itching of the worm.
If you press it with your fingers and it does not appear to be inflamed, then as for the one that occurs from swelling of the testicles, nothing will itch from pressing it with the fingers. This type can sometimes ulcerate on it and on all the flesh.
He cut the skin of the hernia, then brought the intestine out and removed it from the white tissue. He released the attached appendage from its connections and tied off the appendages, cutting off the appendage after freeing it from all sides of the intestine, for if the intestine had adhered to that flaccid flesh.
It is necessary to bring out the intestine and cut it, and if there is adhesion between some of the tissues or between the appendages, then it is necessary to free all that adhesion and cut it in a continuous circular manner.
If the flesh that has grown in the place of adhesion, which is usually behind, it is necessary to cut all of it and bring out the intestine as we said. Then, when your work is done, cleanse the wound with wool dipped in rose oil and wine, then treat it with the rest of the treatment until he recovers.
Chapter Forty-Seven.
In the treatment of an abscess that is associated with a fistula.
A fistula is a chronic ailment that resembles a cord with some twisting, often affecting women and making it difficult for the patient to move, exercise, or walk. In treating this condition, there are several methods similar to those mentioned earlier.
The patient should sit on a high chair, then the testicles are pushed downward, and with your fingers, you hold the skin of the scrotum along with the adjacent membrane to the penis.
Then an assistant holds and stretches it strongly, and you cut through it with a sharp, wide scalpel until the scrotum is exposed. Then you cauterize from both sides as I previously mentioned for the spermatic cords in the groin, then sew them with two threads.
And you tie them in the first place where the thread appears and also tie them at the end, then cut through the middle with a vertical incision along the body's length, and what gathers there of foul, sticky fluids will come out.
Then treat the wound with the same treatment as other wounds, so that the scrotum can fall off within a period of time. If the thread appears in all the scrotums, then one testicle should come out with it, so that the sperm does not lack nutrition. Before cutting the vessels, it should be burnt and not benefited from.
Chapter Fifty-Seven.
In the treatment of inflamed hemorrhoids.
This hemorrhoid occurs due to a rupture that appears in the rectum, which extends into the abdomen for about two handbreadths from the navel, and pus from this rupture flows into one of the intestines.
This rupture may occur either in the rectum itself or in its extension, and both types are caused by various reasons, such as a blow, a fall, a sudden movement, or lifting something heavy, among other things. Its sign, if it occurs in the extension of the rectum, is that it occurs little by little over a long period of time.
And it does not occur suddenly, and the pain is constant up to a certain depth before the rectum expels the pus. If it occurs from a rupture in the rectum, its sign is that it begins with severe pain at first, and the swelling appears clearly under the skin nearby.
And that is because the pus exits and its path leads outside of the rectum, and it may exit with feces, in which case this hemorrhoid is called both inflamed and fecal, and sometimes it has a foul odor, and there might be pus in the pus, and it becomes trapped there, leading to the death of the patient.
"For it causes a severe headache and dizziness, especially if pressed, and treating this condition with iron is dangerous. The remedy is to instruct the patient to return the water with their hand into the cavity if it returns.
"Then place him on his feet between your hands and raise his foot, then stretch the skin over the anklebone upwards and cut all of the skin of the tendon lengthwise, then make stitches in the edges of the cut to open it as much as necessary.
"The cut should be large enough for an egg to pass through, then scrape the fascia beneath the skin until the white, firm fascia is exposed on both sides. Then insert your little finger into what is below the bone.
"Between the white fascia under the bone's skin and the second fascia, there is an attachment coming from behind the bone. Then with your right hand, reach inside the tendon sheath, while with this, stretch the white fascia upwards with your left hand and lift the bone along with the fascia towards the edge of the cut.
The servant is commanded to extend the egg to the top and release it, but ensure that the contact with what is behind is complete. Check with your finger to make sure there is nothing of the soft material remaining in the white part of the shell. If you find anything, push it back into the yolk below.
Then take a needle with a thick thread, which has been cut from ten threads, and insert it at the end of the shell under the skin of the scar that is next to the crack. Then cut the ends of the thread so that there are four threads. Then arrange some of them on top of each other in a tight manner and use them to strongly bind the shell that is under the skin of the scar from both sides. Also fold the ends of the threads and tie them tightly so that nothing can reach the cavities that feed it. To prevent a hot worm from emerging and to make a second bandage outside the first, placing it less than two fingers' width away from it. After these two bandages, leave an amount of the shell under the skin of the scar equivalent to the size of a finger bone.
To prevent a hot worm from emerging and to make a second bandage outside the first, placing it less than two fingers' width away from it. After these two bandages, leave an amount of the shell under the skin of the scar equivalent to the size of a finger bone. And cut the rest all around, and with it remove the egg. Then make an incision in the skin of the scar from which blood and pus flow out as we described earlier. Then use the wool soaked in oil and place it in the wound, and use the bandage that was described.
The white membrane which we mentioned after it is cut, should be cautious of bleeding profusely. Leave the suture until it falls off by itself. If its falling off is delayed, then apply warm water and place on it what makes it fall off.
Then treat the wound with all the usual treatments until it heals.
Chapter Sixty-Seven.
In the hernial rupture, this hernial rupture I have not seen anyone undertake to treat it with iron. The early authorities mentioned that it should be treated as we described in the case of a hernia with testes, by tying the scrotum after incising it with a ligature below.
Then make an incision in the middle, and treat the swelling with something that will open it up until the scrotum falls off; then treat the wound as we have mentioned until it heals.
Chapter Seventy-Seven.
In the fistula that occurs in the rectum.
The fistula in the rectum may appear as we mentioned, it will not discharge anything to the vagina, and if it does, it will be slight and return at all times.
But if time has passed and the pain in the abdomen increases to the point that it drains pus and blood into the intestines, this indicates an extension of the abdominal wall, as we have said. This is because the abdomen stretches and then contracts, causing the area to darken and swell, and its treatment is by cautery as we have described it.
And it can be treated with iron in this way: the patient lies on his back between your hands, then you make a warm incision in the place of the rupture, extending it to a width of three fingers, and then compress the layers beneath the skin.
Until when the white abdomen is exposed, take a piece of felt and place it on the open area of the abdomen, pressing it down to the depths of the abdomen, then sew the two open areas together at the edge of the felt with the abdomen, and stitch one to the other.
Then wrap the edge of the felt without cutting the loose abdomen or touching the omentum, and treat it as you have been taught for treating a pus-filled abscess, then treat it with the treatment of wounds.
If the stitches break, clean them and press on the wound until it heals, because the abdomen will contract and there will be no further swelling of the rupture.
And the caecum is best in this place because it is closest to safety.
The eightieth chapter
In the treatment of the skin of the anus
The skin of the anus is often treated in some people, but not the flesh inside it, which makes it unsightly. Therefore, for those who wish to treat it, it is necessary for the patient to lie on his back.
And all the skin that has been treated is cut to the thick skin, then the two edges are joined together. If you wish, stitch first the edge of the treated skin with three or four stitches, and make a knot from the stitching, then cut between the stitches.
Then it is treated with the usual treatment of wounds until it heals and the stitches fall out.
The ninetieth chapter
On hemorrhoids
Hemorrhoids are forbidden in our religion.
And for this reason, it was appropriate for me not to mention it in this book of mine, but I have mentioned it for two reasons: one is that a physician should know about it if asked, and learn how to treat those who are afflicted by it; the other reason is that we often need to cauterize some animals for our benefit.
The kangaroo, the wallaby, the cat, and similar animals, I say that cauterization is done in two ways: either by searing or by incision and cutting. The method of searing is to sit the animal in hot water until its female opens up and softens.
Then you cauterize it with your hand until it softens and is not painful to touch. As for the method of incision and cutting, it is necessary to grasp the animal and press its skin with your left hand. Then tie a tourniquet and make an incision on each testicle once.
until the testicles protrude, then cut them off after cauterizing them. Do not leave anything of the vessels except for the thin vessel that is on the epididymis. This method of cauterization is better than that which is done by searing.
Because searing sometimes leaves some of the females, which causes the animal to desire mating. Then treat the wound until it heals.
Chapter Seventy
In the treatment of hermaphrodites.
The hermaphrodite in men occurs in two ways: one is that it appears below the navel or between the testicles as if it were a woman's vulva, with hair and urine may come out from it.
In women, there is one kind that occurs above the vagina on the pubis like small testicles in men, and it extends to one side as if it were a man's penis, while both are like females. The treatment for these three kinds is the same.
The two kinds from men and the single kind from women should have their excess flesh cut away until the condition is cured, then treat it with the usual surgical methods until it heals completely. As for the second kind in men, which excretes urine through a hole in the skin of the scrotum, there is no treatment or cure for the testicles.
Chapter Seventy-One
On cutting the growths and excess flesh from women's genitals.
The growth can sometimes increase beyond the natural size until it becomes unsightly and repulsive, and in some women, it may grow to the size of a man's and interfere with intercourse.
It is necessary to hold the base of the growth with your hand or a clamp, then cut it off without hesitation, especially at the root, so as not to cause bleeding.
Then treat it with the usual surgical methods until it heals completely. As for the excess flesh, it is a growth of tissue in the mouth of the uterus that fills it up.
"And perhaps it protrudes outwards like the snout. "Therefore, some of the ancients called it 'snout disease.' It should be cut as a pustule is cut, and treated until it heals.
"The Second Chapter: The Seventy-Seventh
"On the Treatment of Hernias.
"Hernia is when the female vagina is not pierced, or if it is pierced, then it should be small. It can be either congenital, born with, or acquired, due to a previous cause such as excessive fatty tissue.
"Or a thin or thick fleshy protrusion, which can be in the depth of the uterus, or on its sides, top, or bottom, preventing intercourse, conception, childbirth, and possibly menstruation. This is known by visual inspection.
"If the protrusion is visible and close to the labia, if it is not visible, then feel for it with her fingers or a probe. If the protrusion is thin fleshy tissue and near the labia, hasten to incise it, which means to make an incision like small slits on both labia, then apply your ointment to both.
The woman has a wound on her back, and then the scissors are pressed strongly until they pierce the thin skin and open the blockage. Then she takes wool and soaks it in oil and places it on the spot, and the woman gathers herself every day, lest the place becomes inflamed again.
If the skin is thick and dense, it should be cut with a broad blade resembling an oak leaf. If the blockage is of fatty tissue, tie it with threads and cut it off. You should have with you medications that calm inflammation without burning, such as calamint, anise, and milk mixed with egg white.
Then, use a wide lead pipe so that the wound does not become inflamed quickly; hold it for several days and then apply a linen cloth soaked in oil. Treat it with all other herbal remedies until it heals. It may also present another meaty tumor in the uterus, which should be cut off in this manner.
If it is not a cancerous ulcer, for the cancerous ulcer that occurs in the uterus should not be treated with cautery.
Chapter Thirty-Seven.
In the treatment of varicose veins, hemorrhoids, and red lesions that appear in women's genitals.
And the varicose veins are a swelling of the openings of the veins until blood flows out profusely and constantly. If the varicose veins appear, they become hemorrhoids. I have mentioned in the classification their types and signs, and I will mention them here.
What can be treated and what cannot be treated, I say that varicose veins and hemorrhoids, if they are deep in the womb and do not protrude to touch, there is no treatment with iron. But whatever of them is in the opening of the womb and touches it, these are the ones that can be treated.
The woman should enter a cold room, then she should extend the hemorrhoids with a plucking device or with a rough cloth and cut them from their roots, then leave them if blood oozes from any of the severing points without bleeding.
Examples include qaaqia, shiyan, laban, and the like; then she should raise her feet to the wall for an hour, then wash them in cold water. If the bleeding continues, seat her over a broth of sumac, pomegranate peels, and vinegar leaves, then take barley flour and cook it with honey and vinegar.
He was ordered to be cupped on his back, and if the blood did not stop, then tighten the two breasts without conditions. Then take wool and soak it in the juice of tarfa or the juice of the colocynth or the juice of the olive branch with vinegar water and apply it to the place.
If the worm subsides, treat the area with aloes until it heals. As for the red pustule, it resembles the heads of lettuce with a rough appearance; it is necessary to cut off whatever appears from it as mentioned in the previous section, and continue treating it until it heals.
Chapter Forty-Seven.
In the case of prolapse that occurs in the womb.
Various types of tumors may appear in the womb, such as cancer, ulcerated worms, ulcers, fistulas, cysts, boils, pustules, and hot worms. All these diseases, their kinds, and symptoms have been mentioned in the section on classification.
It is necessary to mention in this treatise the hot worm that appears in the womb, for if it is one of the tumors that increase in size, how to cauterize it with iron should be considered. If the pain of the worm is severe at the beginning with throbbing and inflammation and heat.
I saw it redden when the touch was applied, so do not hasten to treat it. Instead, treat it with what aids in healing until these symptoms subside. Then the woman should sit on a chair with two cushions and lean on her back.
She should bring her legs together towards the lower part of the stomach, and let her thighs be open; she should place her arms under her knees, and tie them together with a suitable bandage.
Therefore, let the woman sit facing from the right side and use the instrument that opens the uterus, as shown in the following figure. It is necessary to measure with a finger the depth of the woman's uterus so that what enters from the instrument does not exceed the depth of the uterus.
If the patient experiences pain, and if the instrument is longer than the depth, then a pad should be placed on the neck of the uterus to prevent the entire instrument from entering the depth of the uterus. It is necessary for the sphere that moves in the instrument to be on top.
You hold the instrument, and the assistant turns the sphere until it opens the neck of the uterus. If the discharge appears and is touched by hand, and it is soft and thin, then it should be cut off at its end with a wide knife. If all the contents have been emptied. ‌
In wound dressing, use a soft, soaked linen bandage in rose oil or green oil with some alum, and place the bandage outside the injury on the uterus neck, and cover it from outside with clean wool soaked in boiled barley water.
Then, after two days, treat with the suitable ointment until healed.
And the uterus and wound may be washed by injecting with water and honey, then with boiled sedge or long-stalked bulrush, and return to the ointment, for if the discharge is continuous inside the uterus.
It is necessary to avoid treating it with iron, but rather treat it with what we mentioned in the division.
Chapter Fifty-Seven
In teaching the pupils how to treat hernias when they protrude in an abnormal shape.
The pupil should know first the natural shape of childbirth, and among its signs is if you see a woman inclining downward and panting to hold her breath and what she has on her lightens for her.
"And if the birth is quick, know that this birth is natural and the baby will come out headfirst with the umbilical cord attached or hanging from it. If you see these signs, it is necessary to squeeze her abdomen so that the baby comes out quickly.
"For if he comes out headfirst, the umbilical cord will come with him and it will be cleaned from that filth very well. And if this birth is not completed, then it is abnormal because the baby may come out feet first or his hands before his head and feet.
"And his one hand or one foot may come out, or he may come out face first, or he may turn onto his back, and similar abnormal positions. Therefore, the midwife should be very careful with all these things and avoid errors.
"And I clarify each form and how to deal with it, so that you may rely on this and stand by it. If the baby comes out headfirst, the birth is natural, but if it is difficult for the woman and she has difficulty pushing, and you see her strength weakening, then sit her on a stool and order women to support her.
And treat it with cooked wheat and wet compresses, then insert the midwife's little finger between her fingers to rupture the membrane or she can break it with her nails until its moisture comes out and squeeze the woman's abdomen until the fetus descends.
And if it does not descend, it is necessary to inject the woman with wheat bran mixed with shiraj oil, then command her after the injection to sneeze and blow her nose with candied sugar, holding her mouth and nose closed, for the fetus will come out of its own accord. If the fetus's hands come out first, they should be gently pushed back a little at a time.
And if she does not approach the descent, let the woman sit on a stool and raise her legs upwards, then shake the stool on the ground while the woman holds onto the stool to prevent falling during the shaking. If the hands do not enter and the fetus dies, cut them off and pull out the rest of the fetus.
Or tie his hands with a rope and pull them gently, for he will come out. If the fetus comes out feet first, it is necessary to push its feet upwards, then turn the fetus slightly until it becomes even, then take one of the feet and straighten it little by little.
If it exits to the thighs, she should be ordered to sit and he should cut it with a scalpel; for if it does not exit as we have described, then return the fetus bit by bit until it is restored to its natural shape, for it will then exit easily. If it resists with all that we have described.
Mix honey, aloe, rose oil and dissolved resin, then pound them well in a mortar. Apply it to the woman's vagina and below her belly, then have her sit in hot water until it reaches the soles of her feet.
If you see that it has descended to her lower parts, make for her a pessary of wool which she should sit upon for an hour. Then have her sit on a chair, cut [the pessary], close her mouth and nose, and press lightly below her belly. For the fetus will come out within the hour, exiting with its limbs and hands.
If it comes out in this manner, place your hand inside a little at a time; then have the woman turn onto her heels and lower her legs while lying on her back, clenching her fists; then press lightly above her belly. Then extract what is under her feet from the membranes until it becomes protruding below, and if the fetus does not come out, take both her legs together and move them strongly, then press above the hips a little at a time until the fetus rises above, then enter your hand and straighten the fetus a little at a time.
And command the woman to deliver until the fetus comes out, the coming out of the fetus is resisted by one of its hands, take it in your hand and return it, if you are not able to return it, stand the woman up and make her walk, if she cannot walk, let her lie down.
Shake her bed and shake her leg vigorously, then use the ladle as previously described. If she goes into labor, seat her on a chair; then continue with the return of the hand and straightening of the fetus to its natural shape, and encourage the woman to deliver until it comes out.
When the fetus comes out on its feet, holding its hands out in front of it with its face towards its mother's back, the attendant should grasp the fetus' hand and gently turn and straighten it. If it is upright, carry it to its mother's breast as we have described for the oil and wraps.
Then have her move slightly, and if you do this, sit her on the chair and command her to lean to the right side; then have her lie down and faint from the anesthesia, for it will come out, the fetus exiting on its side.
If it descends into the uterus in this manner with the placenta, cut the placenta with your nails until it is free from moisture. If it clings to the face or neck of the fetus, cut it away from the uterus so that it does not choke and die; then push the fetus back inside until you position it as needed.
Command the woman to faint several times, for it will exit easily, an easy birth of twins or many fetuses. Know that twins are rarely born, and three or four can live, but five is unnatural and cannot survive.
Even if there are many, surround them with a single placenta, and they will separate with a septum attached between each of them in their respective uteri. They may exit as a single fetus naturally and easily, or they may exit together as we have described.
It is because some are difficult at birth and reach the shapes we mentioned that are not natural, so treat them as we described, and let it be flexible and do what it does with gentleness and ease, and change into any shape according to the direction leading to safety.
Fetuses in the womb sometimes fall out, they may be one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, more than ten, and I have seen a woman who gave birth to seven, and another who gave birth to fifteen, all of them were seen like this.
By the estimation of the noble and knowledgeable, all this should be part of the knowledge of the midwife, for perhaps something like that may happen to her one day, so she will meet it as is necessary.
Chapter Sixty-Seven
On the Extraction of a Dead Fetus
If the dead fetus was not expelled using the previously mentioned treatment methods, and you are forced to use your hand, then it is necessary to observe whether the woman has normal strength and does not have any conditions that could lead to harm from this procedure. In such a case, the woman should lie down on her back on the bed.
The head of the woman will be tilted downwards, with her legs raised and held by two assistants from both sides or tied to the bed so that her body does not move during delivery.
Then, her mouth is moistened with wet cloths along with the root of sweet almond, rosewater, and cotton seeds. Then, she anoints her right hand with these cloths and ointments, then inserts it into the womb gently, then seeks a place to pierce the amniotic sac from the fetus and the suitable places for that.
If the baby is presenting head first, pierce the amniotic sac in its eyes, nostrils, mouth, navel, under the chin, or any of the nearby places to the shoulders or under the armpits.
If it is descending with its feet first, then in the ankles and the middle of the thighs. It is appropriate to hold the amniotic sac with the right hand and roll it between the fingers of the left hand, then gently insert the hand and pierce the sac in some of those places we have mentioned.
Until she reaches something empty, then pierces another sac or a third one, if needed, to ensure that the suction is even and does not tilt in any direction. Then, she extends the extension steadily, not just vertically but moving it in all directions.
It is not easy to extract it as it is done with the tooth when extracted, and between that it is necessary for the cloth to be moistened; if something remains stuck, it is necessary to anoint some fingers with oil and insert them from the side to direct what is stuck. If some of the contents come out, move the tweezers to other places.
Raise it slightly, do this until all the contents come out. If a hand comes out before the others and cannot be returned due to its constriction, it is necessary to cut a slit in it, then draw it out until it all comes out, then cut it off.
Whether in the wrist or the ankle, you should do the same with the other hand and the feet. If the head of the fetus is large and feels pressed during birth, or if there is water collected on its head, it is necessary to insert a hook between the fingers.
And tear the head with it, and the water will come out, or cut it with the instrument called the scissors, whose image comes with the images of all the instruments in the chapter following this one.
Likewise, if the fetus has a large head by nature, it is necessary to tear open the fontanelle or cut it with scissors as we said, then extract the bones with forceps. If the head comes out and is constricted at the neck, tear until the moisture in the chest subsides.
When the chest adheres, if it does not adhere and does not approach for exit, cut as much as you can. If it is below the abdomen or has a tumor, it should be opened until the moisture comes out of it.
If the fetus is on its feet, extracting it is easy and placing it in the uterine mouth is simple. However, if there is pressure on the abdomen or chest, it is necessary to extract it with a hook wrapped around your hand and open the abdomen or chest until what is inside them comes out.
If all the limbs are removed and the head has retreated, then let the left hand enter. If the uterine mouth is open, let the hand enter into the neck of the uterus and request the head with it, and draw it to the uterine mouth with the fingers; then introduce a hook or two hooks and draw it with them.
If the uterine mouth is adhered to a hot dry wound, it should not be torn but rather, at that time, wet and dirty substances should be used and pessaries employed; sit in water that boils and becomes softened.
And if the fetus is on its side, if it is possible to turn it, then use what we mentioned for the living fetus; if not, cut and remove it, and nothing of the placenta should be left inside the uterus. Once you have finished treating, use what we mentioned for the treatment of hot wounds that occur in the womb.
If there is a flow of blood, it should be submerged in cold water and the rest of the treatment used. I have seen a woman who became pregnant and her fetus died inside her, then she became pregnant again.
Then the other fetus also died, and after a long time an ulcer appeared on her vulva and swelled until it burst and discharged pus. So she was called to be treated, and she was treated for a long time, but the wound did not heal. Therefore, some strong adhesive plasters were applied to it.
Then a bone came out of the place, and after several days another bone came out. I was surprised by this, as there are no bones in the womb. So I thought that these were bones from the dead fetus. Therefore, I explored the wound and found many skull bones coming out of it.
I have not ceased to follow this until I extracted many bones from her, and the woman is in good health, and she lived thus for a long time, and indeed I came here with this rare example.
For it contains knowledge and assistance for what the physician attempts by hand in treatment.
The Seventh Chapter.
In it are the images of the instruments needed for extracting the fetus.
Image of a womb opener used to open the mouth of the uterus.
This is the hook which books describe as having handles at both ends of the wooden bars, but this hook should be thinner than the hook and made either from bone or boxwood, and each handle should be one finger's breadth in width.
And the handles of each should be about a finger's breadth, and their length one and a half fingers, and in the middle of the two bars there should be two wedges of the same material, firmly affixed to them, whose length should be half a finger or slightly more, and whose width should be about two fingers or slightly more. And these are the wedges.
These are the two that enter into the mouth of the uterus to open it when you use the hooks, image of another instrument similar to this, but more delicate and lighter.
Create from the wood of the ebony or boxwood in the shape of calipers, except that on their ends there are two points as you see, the length of each point is about a finger's width and their width is two fingers, so if you want to open the uterus with them.
So place the woman on a bed with her legs spread apart between her thighs, then insert these two points into the mouth of the uterus while you hold the end of the instrument below between her thighs, then open your hand with the instrument as you do with calipers to whatever extent you desire to open the uterus. So you can make the uterus whatever shape you want, an image of another uterus is shown above.
Image of the cushion with which the fetus is pushed out:.
Image of the forceps used to extract the fetus's head:.
It resembles a scissor, having teeth at its ends as you see, and it may be made rectangular like calipers as shown in this image, and it has teeth like saw blades that cut and crush.
Another image of a cushion:
Image of a needle holder.
This needle holder should have a little bit of flexibility so that it does not break when pulling the fetus with it, image of a double-shafted needle holder:
Image of broad-bladed scissors for cutting the fetus.
All these tools, as their types increased and they were prepared by the maker, became easier to make and more valuable to people due to their usefulness, so none of them should be neglected such that you do not have it ready when needed.
Chapter Eighty-Seven.
On the Extraction of a Dead Fetus.
If the dead fetus remains after delivery, it is necessary to order the woman to hold her breath and then blow into her mouth with a tube, pressing your hand on her mouth and nose. If it comes out this way, otherwise take forceps.
And make a hole in the lid through which to place open pods for the mouth of the womb, such as fennel, aniseed, caraway, poppy, dill, parsley, and coriander. All these drugs or some of them should be soaked in water and then heated over a fire. Then place a silver tube on the hole in the lid, and the other end in the mouth of the womb.
And hold it until the steam reaches the depth of the womb, then blow as we have mentioned. For if the dead fetus does not come out quickly after this treatment, order the woman to immerse her left hand in sheep's fat or castor oil.
Then enter it into the womb and search for the membrane, and if it catches it, hold onto it and extend it little by little until you remove it. But if it is adhered deep in the womb, then insert your hand as we described until when you find the membrane, draw it out little by little through the vagina.
So that the womb does not drop during strong pulling, it should be moved gently to the right and left sides, then increase the amount of pulling, for it will come out at that time and free itself from adhesion. But if the mouth of the womb is constricted, we have described its treatment with fumigation, uterine suppositories, and poultices.
If it does not come out with all that we have described, beware of being harsh on it in repeating the pulling. But it is necessary to tie what comes out of it to the mouth of the womb and to the woman's thigh, then pour over it a quarter cup of vinegar, for it will rot after some days.
And it will dissolve and come out, except that when it rots, a foul odor rises from it to the stomach and the head, and this troubles the patient. Therefore, it is necessary to use a suitable powder.
The first ones have tried some herbs, such as the leaves of the hemp plant and dried figs, to induce abortion in women experiencing delayed menstruation or menstrual blockage.
It is made from lead, similar to a bell, or it can be made of copper. The thin end is placed in the womb and the wide end remains outside over the fire and incense cooked on myrtle berries, holding it until that incense dissipates and replacing it with another.
Chapter Ninety-Seven.
In the treatment of fistulas other than perforated ones.
Many children are born with fistulas that are not perforated, and the opening is often closed by a thin membrane. It is appropriate for the midwife to puncture this membrane with her finger or, if she cannot, to tear it with a sharp hook, taking care not to damage the muscle.
Then she should place a wool swab soaked in water and oil on it, and then treat it with compresses until it heals. If she fears that it may close again, she should insert a lead tube into the opening for several days and remove it when the child tries to defecate.
The closure of the fistula may also result from a scar or a wound, and it is appropriate to incise that scar and then treat it as we have mentioned in the treatment and cauterization methods.
Chapter Eighty.
In the treatment of fistulas that occur below.
The fistulas that occur below are adhesions and thickenings which take place near the anus, either outside or inside one of the areas, and there is one fistula or more.
If that adhesion becomes severe, it opens and discharges a watery white liquid or thin pus. Some of these fistulas may extend to the bladder and the rectum, while others are not extended. The extended ones can be recognized by what is discharged from them in terms of odor and smell when the patient uses the toilet.
Sometimes worms come out of them, and if they are inside the body, they may extend to the bladder and the urethra. Some may extend to the joint of the thigh or the gluteal fold. What is known as a fistula that extends to the anus can also be non-extended.
Insert your little finger into the anus, and insert a thin probe of copper or iron into the fistula if there is no discharge in it. If there is discharge, insert into it a thin leaden probe or a horsehair.
"Until you feel the thread or hair in your finger, if it does not cause pain and nothing emerges from the hole - neither pus, nor smell, nor worms as we mentioned - then know that it is not healed, so hurry to treatment.
"If the abscess is healed to the anus or the urethra, its sign is the discharge of urine from it and its refusal to be sealed by medicines. However, if it is healed to the joint of the thigh or the tip of the penis, its sign is that the thread reaches there.
"If it does not have a tunnel to the bone, and there is pain towards the area, and pus constantly comes out of it, and no treatment heals it, nor does it seal with cauterization, then all these healed abscesses are not free from pain.
"Treating it is a vain hope for those who are fooled by ignorant doctors. As for those that are not healed and not suppurating, it is hoped that they will heal with the use of iron, as I have described and tested. This involves making the patient lie on their back between your hands.
"His leg should be raised above him and his thigh tilted towards his abdomen, then a copper or lead thread is inserted into the abscess if there is a tunnel. If the patient feels it towards the anus, it is necessary to insert your probing finger into the anus.
If you feel that the splinter in your finger has penetrated on its own and is exposed, but you do not feel it between your finger and the object with a membrane or flesh, then know for certain that it has penetrated. Do not waste effort trying to remove it, as there is no benefit from it, as we have said.
They say that in some people it heals on its own rarely, and one of the treatments hoped to benefit is to apply a thin wick over the capacity of the syringe as was previously mentioned, and insert a plug into the syringe until it reaches near the seat, then repeat it two or three times.
So that you know it has completely burned all of the excess fat that resembles a bird's quill, then treat it with an ointment in oil until that fat comes out, and then treat it with cooked meat, and if it heals, it is considered cured.
And if the splinter did not penetrate to the finger in the seat and there was a thick membrane or flesh between it and the splinter, and you saw the syringe on the surface of the skin, then at that time tear the skin from the first part of the syringe. You pass through the fleshy part with the probe until you reach the end of the probe with the fleshy part, and the probe is released and falls off. Then you clean that soft flesh that resembles a bird's quill, and nothing remains of it.
Then you treat it with hot cauteries until it is healed, and if blood overcomes you and hinders your work, it is best to cut off that flesh and the fastest benefit is to burn it with fire or a sharp instrument, because burning with fire achieves two good results: burning away the excess flesh.
And cut the blood and dry it, then treat it with pitch boiled in oil or powdered sulfur mixed with oil until it forms a scab, and that burned flesh comes out with the scab. Then treat the wound at that time with hot cauteries suitable for firm flesh.
And these are the drugs that have astringent and drying properties, for if it heals, it has been cleansed and there is no need to be ashamed of recurrence. But if the ulcer extends to the depth of the seat and away from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the seat and examine it with that.
If you feel the arrow and between you and it is a barrier of leather or flesh, and it was close to exiting, there is no action except by hope and expectation; this is because you should use one of three methods: either you pull it out as we said.
And if you pierce it until you reach its tip, so that you can introduce the stylet and treat it from nearby, do not hesitate in piercing, lest you cut the ligament surrounding the seat, causing the barb to exit unintentionally; then treat him as we mentioned. Perhaps he will heal, as we said.
And if you penetrate that barrier and then bore it after piercing it close to the seat, either with the arrow or another sharp tool, then clean all the contaminated flesh in the bore as much as possible.
Then stuff the entire wound, along with the bore and the upper mouth, until it is sealed, leaving only the barb open inside the seat, which will be lighter on the patient, and the barb may split in this manner.
If the arrow enters through the barb and is in one side of the seat near the surface of the body, along with the skin and the rim of the seat, take at that moment an arrow with a sharp tip like a needle's point in this manner:.
In it, place a loose thread from five threads or around that number, then insert the thread into the needle until it reaches its hollow part. If it is torn near the edge of the seat from within.
Then remove the thread from that hole by inserting your finger into the seat and pulling out the end of the thread, and gather both ends together and tighten them, and leave it for a day or two. Each time the thread cuts through the flesh, tighten it strongly until that piece of flesh between the ends of the threads falls off, then treat the wound until it heals and clears up.
If the hole in the needle is not torn, pierce it as best you can, except if it is too deep and you cannot do this without cutting a tendon, then make it as we have mentioned until it heals.
The image of the pointed lancet that is used to puncture needles must be very sharp on one side and not sharp on the other, so as not to cut something unnecessarily as you see:
Chapter Seventy-One
On the veins from which blood is drawn, their cutting and treatment of ruptures.
The varices are in two forms: either they are inside the cushion, resembling grape seeds or like clusters of raisins, and they are small and large, and blood is constantly oozing from them.
They can be one or many, and they can be outside the cushion and on its edges. However, those that are outside the cushion are usually less moist, from which a yellowish liquid or a small amount of blood constantly oozes, and they match the color of the body.
The treatment for those inside the cushion is to instruct the patient to protrude and protrude until the cushion exits, and then you see the small intestine. You must hurry to tie it with silk thread or hold it with your fingers, then cut it at its base. If the silk threads do not catch due to their moisture and smoothness.
Then wrap it with a coarse cloth or a piece of rough linen, or pull it with your fingers, then cut it. After cutting, sprinkle some harsh astringents on it so that it holds its position, or pack it as described in the chapter on cautery.
Then treat him with the rest of the treatment until he recovers. If the chair does not suit you for sitting, then inject the patient with a syringe to feel some pain, so that it washes away what is in the chair and urges for exiting quickly when the patient shows signs of improvement. The external hemorrhoids are easier to manage; just give them an easy command.
And it is to take them with your fingernails or hook them with tweezers and cut them, then treat them with what was mentioned until they heal. If one dislikes cutting with iron, it is necessary to use their nails for this purpose, taking a thin thread and inserting it into the needle.
Then pull the hemorrhoid up and pierce it with the needle from below on the other side, and leave both ends of the thread hanging below the needle while tightly gripping the hemorrhoid. After tying the thread and removing the needle, do this for all the hemorrhoids except one, which should not be perforated.
To drain blood from it, then place a moistened bandage soaked in rose or cypress oil on the seat and put it on the seat and order the patient to rest, then leave him until they fall off. If the hemorrhoids have fallen off, treat them with compresses and the rest of the treatment until they heal.
And as for the treatment of fissures, it often presents with hardness of the edges and clotting of blood. So if it becomes urgent and does not heal with medication, then it is necessary to scrape it with a knife or your nail until it becomes soft and separates from its top layer that prevents it from healing.
Then treat it until it heals as needed. If it does not heal, repeat the scraping more vigorously than before until it bleeds and becomes inflamed. Then treat it again; it will heal.
Chapter Two Hundred and Eighty-Four
In the treatment of prolapsed and non-prolapsed hemorrhoids, dry ulcers, and gangrene.
The hemorrhoid is only a round knot, the color of the body, resembling the head of a nail, which occurs in all parts of the body and especially in the soles of the feet and the fingers. It causes pain when walking.
It is necessary to cut around the hemorrhoid and hold it with a hook or forceps, then pull it out from its root. Then treat it, and if you wish, apply a cautery on what was mentioned in its section. As for dry ulcers, one of them is a small, rough, round, and hard nodule on the surface of the body.
And often it appears in the hands of children, and its treatment is to lengthen the vein and cut or tear it with a silk thread or a hair until it falls out. If you wish, you can cauterize it with fire or with a strong medicine.
And the inverted and uninverted veins can be removed with the instrument that I mentioned for treating moles. As for the mole, it is also a small swelling with thick fluid on the surface of the body that goes deep into the body, and if it is affected by cold, it feels like the sting of an ant.
And it can be found anywhere in the body, but most often it is found in the hands. Its treatment is to take a tube from the hair of a goat or the strong hair of an eagle and to place this tube around the mole until the circle of the tube encompasses its edges. Then you rotate your hand with the tube until what surrounds the mole is torn.
And it is placed deep in the flesh, and the mole is pulled out from its root. If you wish, you can do this with a brass or iron tube like this:
The upper part of the tube should be made of leather, with a thong attached for easy gripping and tightening by the fingers. If you wish, cauterize the mole as described in the section on cautery.
Chapter Thirty-Eight
On the instruments used for injections in diseases of the anus, hemorrhoids, and colic.
It may be made of silver, or tin, or polished brass, or copper. Small and large instruments can be made from this device according to the users. Therefore, those used for the treatment of small children will be small, and those whose anus is narrow or strictured will have very slender nozzles. Image of a large syringe:
The upper part, in which the nozzle is tied, will be wide like this, having a stopper where the nozzle is tied as you see, and its lower end that enters the anus will be very smooth and soft to the touch on one side of it there are two holes, and on the other side one hole.
The hole will be as thick as the tip of a quill or slightly thicker, and the nozzle in which the medicines are made will be from the bladder of an animal or from the skin of a sheep, made like a small sponge, its diameter being that of a hair.
Many holes will be pierced in it as it is turned, and the distance between each hole will be thick like a finger. Then, a thin, strong thread of spun wool, twisted into ten threads or so, will be inserted into these holes to hold the nozzle together like a sponge. When the medicine is placed in it, the nozzle becomes tightly and firmly closed between the two stones, then it is injected with it. This is the illustration of the circle of the spout and the hole.
And the way to be injected with it is that the bladder or syringe is filled with the medicine while being heated as much as the patient can bear, and beware that it is not very hot or very cold. Then the patient lies on his back and the nozzle is placed above him.
A plug or cloth is placed under it, then the end of the nozzle is greased with oil, egg white, or honey-like substance, and then it is inserted into the patient's anus with care. Then the enema assistant takes it in both hands and squeezes it firmly until everything in the nozzle is emptied into the bladder.
Then the nozzle is removed, and the patient is placed on his side towards the wall. If the medicine stimulates him to expel it, he should hold onto something as much as possible. Even if he sleeps with it all night, it would be sufficient for the enema. If he was injected because of diarrhea and its exit was hastened, the injection should be delayed until he is cured.
If the patient is in a chair with painful varicose veins or ulcers, let the syringe be very fine and softer than those used for children. And this is an illustration of a fine syringe, tightly wrapped around its skin:
Chapter Forty-Eight.
In the treatment of wounds.
I have mentioned in the classification how to treat what resembles ulcers, and now I am mentioning here their complete treatment by hand and with medicines. I say that wounds differ according to what the wound is on and according to where it occurs.
The things that wounds can be on are numerous, such as a thorn, stone, sword cut, knife cut, spear thrust, arrow or similar things.
And as for the wounds according to their locations on the body, there are those that occur on the head, neck, chest, abdomen, liver, and similar organs.
And I will describe the treatment of some wounds so that it may serve as a measure and law for other wounds, and I will begin with simple head wounds because complex ones will be mentioned in the chapter entitled "Thirty-Eight" in this book.
"I say that if a simple wound occurs on the head and no bone is broken, I would look to see if it was from a stone or something similar, and if only the skin was torn, and the wound was large, and there was concern about hot swelling in the patient, then I would quickly remove the bowel onto the place. "And do not delay that, and draw blood from him according to his strength if there is no obstacle preventing removal, especially if the bleeding from the wound is profuse, let the removal be against the direction of the wounded part.
"And warn the patient against overeating, drinking, and thick foods, for preventing the removal is an obstacle; so let him eat little food, not approaching meats or beverages, and place on the wound if there occurs with it hot swelling, a linen cloth soaked in rose oil alone or with the drink that has honey.
"And if the hot swelling is controlled, place on the wound if it is oozing blood and the wind has not altered it, which I will describe to you shortly, but if the wind has altered it, place some linen cloths on it.
"Until the bowel is fully grown, then treat it until it heals. And if the wound is large and from a sword or similar, and its edges have not come together with the sutures, then join them by stitching as I will describe in the chapter on abdominal wounds.
If the skin is exposed and hanging by a thread, and its attachment is only to loose tissue that can be cut, then cut it off, and treat the wound with medicines that will form firm flesh in place of the skin. And instruct the patient to eat foods that contain fat, such as heads and brains, and similar foods.
If there is a wound in the skin and it does not adhere to the bone, cut off all the detached part and suture it back together. Then treat it, for if these wounds have blood vessels or veins from which blood flows and the bleeding is not stopped by medicines, then explore those blood vessels.
If it (the wound) did not heal, cauterize it with the cautery, bind it, and if necessity demands it, even if what we mentioned does not help, burn it until the bleeding stops. For these wounds are small and simple; their treatment is easy and sufficient by leaving this cloth on them while they are still bloody.
Before the air changes it, and the recipe for the cloth is to take a piece of milk and two pieces of oil and three parts of either hot or cold lime. Grind all together and sift, then bandage the wound with it and bind it tightly until it heals well.
He was bandaged with blood, then wrapped from above with cotton cloths and left until he did not need to be changed again; for the medicine will not come off of him until he is cured. Lime powder alone can do this if you do not have yogurt and oil available.
And this can also be done with eggs in many of the larger wounds, if you are skilled in applying it and bandaging them, and the wounds are fresh with blood that has not changed due to the air; but if they have been altered somewhat by the air, especially in the summer season.
There is no benefit in putting this on unless you treat it as we mentioned, by placing some boiled egg yolks on it or a poultice of wheat flour made with water and honey until the swelling subsides, then continue treating it with the rest of the treatment until he is cured.
But if the wound is accompanied by a fracture in the bone and it protrudes, draw it back with a cord. The treatment of fractures has been mentioned as needed in head wounds, so there is no difference in treating a neck wound compared to a simple head wound.
If a nerve from the neck or vein is cut, if it is a nerve, there is no treatment for it except to avoid treating it with anything that constricts strongly like a chain and a ring, because they irritate the nerve and make it throb.
And do not place anything cold on the wound, because the core of the nerve is cold and its connection to the brain, which is the noblest organ, will cause what you treat it with from soft medicines like washed rose oil mixed with water many times, soaked in oil or rose oil and lavender.
If it is also washed with pure water and other mineral stones of this kind, and moist compresses; and if the wound is large, use stitching or close its edges with strips of linen, then treat it until it heals.
If the wound has a cavity and there is a hidden space beneath it where pus has gathered, then open it in its deepest part; and if a vein is cut in the wound and its blood flows out, then tie it or bandage it, if necessity requires it.
If the wound has cut some of the tendons or all of them, and the fingers are paralyzed, gather the edges of the skin by stitching over the tendon, but do not touch the tendon; rather, smooth it out and return it to its natural shape, then bind it with a firm bandage and leave it for several days.
Then treat it with medicated poultices that have compression and drying until he is cured. If the wound has affected the bone, examine it; if there are splinters of bone, remove them all or as much as possible. Whatever you cannot remove, leave until the wound heals and cures, and then extract it.
If the wound is deep, apply the bandage we described earlier. If bone appears in the wound and it becomes prominent, treat it as described in the chapter on wounds of the chest and between the shoulders.
If the wound is from a spear or sword and you see it has an opening, observe if air comes out when the patient breathes. If so, know that it is a penetrating wound. If there is no opening and the wound is deep with blood, do not put a bandage in it at first, nor tighten it, lest the blood be trapped inside.
But bring the wound to the heart, and it will kill the patient. Instead, place two absorbent medicated poultices in it and change them twice a day. If you do not have a medicated poultice, put a cotton wick in the mouth of the wound to absorb the moisture coming out of it, and let the patient sleep on the wound.
The wound is safe if, even after three days or more have passed since the injury and there are no signs of infection such as swelling, darkening, or difficulty in breathing, and if all other conditions appear normal; then know that the wound is healed. Treat it with cauterization and the rest of the treatment until recovery.
If the urine is difficult to pass and the flow is continuous, know that it has become obstinate; treat it from its opening. The wound is safe if, even after a chest or back wound has passed, there are no signs of infection in it; then treat it with suturing as previously mentioned.
If the fragment is large or in the urethra if it is small, examine the wound and be quick to remove those fragments if they are free; if not, leave them until.
It will soften the wound, making it easier to remove them; as for other wounds occurring in the rest of the limbs, their treatment is according to what we have mentioned.
Chapter Fifty-Eight
On Abdominal Wounds, the Exit of Intestines, and Their Suturing
The hernia that appears on the abdomen may be large, medium, or small. The large one can cause a single sac or multiple sacs to protrude, making their insertion and suturing more difficult and challenging.
The small hernia may also be difficult in another way, as its reduction is more challenging. If the sac does not promptly return to its original position within an hour, it swells and thickens, making it difficult to insert. Therefore, the medium-sized hernia is considered best because reducing the sac with it is not as difficult as with these two types.
Know that the suturing of the abdomen can be done in four ways, with two of them being general methods suitable for suturing the abdomen and other bodily wounds, while the other two are specific to suturing the abdomen.
And I will describe each one for you with explanation and clarification. I say that if the wound is small and a part of the sac has protruded and its reduction is difficult, this could be due to two reasons: either because the hernia is small, as we said, or because the sac was inflated due to cold air.
If it is so, then you should warm it by immersing a sponge or a damp cloth in hot water alone, or in which he has boiled sedge and saffron and ginger and hyssop until the swelling dissolves.
And this can be done with a drink that contains cucumber, which is better than water alone for dissolving the swelling. So if you see the swelling has dissolved, then rinse with hot water in which you have boiled chamomile or hops, as it will make its entry easier.
If returning after this treatment is difficult, then make a slight incision in the skin with the instrument used for cutting veins and arteries. The first treatment, if possible, is better than making an incision; however, one may be forced to make an incision when necessary and other methods have failed. This is what the instrument looks like:
Its single curved edge is limited, while its other edge is not. The thin end should not be sharp but slightly rounded. It resembles a small lance as you see. If the wound widens and water enters it, then its return should be in its natural shape.
"As for its specific location, if possible, it is best. However, if the wound is extensive and located in the lower abdomen, the patient should lie on his back with his leg higher than his head. If it is in the upper abdomen, he should raise his head and chest above his lower body.
"Similarly, if the wound is on one of the two sides of the abdomen, always make the side with the wound higher than the other side. This should be done in extensive wounds and in moderate wounds.
"As for small wounds, place the patient as you see fit, then have a helper who is your equal in skill hold the wound with both hands and close its edges together, then uncover it so that the suturing may proceed step by step.
"This is the common method of suturing, which involves taking one or more needles according to the size of the wound, leaving a length from the edge of the wound equal to the thickness of the bone, and threading one needle through both edges of the skin without the thread entering the wound. "Then, thread the two ends of the suture through both sides of the skin and the subcutaneous tissue until they emerge on the other side, which will bring together the edges of the skin and the subcutaneous tissue, making four layers in total. Then, tie a double knot around the needle from both sides simultaneously until the wound edges are firmly united.
Then leave a suture equal in thickness to the finger and make another stitch, then knot it with the thread as you did with the first stitch. Continue doing this until all of the wound is sutured, and the thread should be moderately thick between thinness and thickness.
Because very thin threads quickly cut the flesh, and thick threads are also difficult to enter the skin, it is advisable for the thread to be moderate between thinness and thickness. It is not appropriate to make a stitch near the edge of the skin.
So that the flesh does not tear quickly and the wound opens before healing, and also do not make the suturing too tight so that the wound does not resist healing. Then cut the ends of the thread so that the patient is not disturbed by them during sleep, and make for him bandages from torn cloth on each side holding the ends of the thread.
Leave it until you know that the wound has healed, and this type of stitching with thread is suitable for small wounds because it may be enough to suture them with one or two threads or so.
Another method of suturing is to gather the four lips, meaning the two skin lips and the two muscle lips, in one stitch with a thread that has an adequate length and thickness. Then, if you have secured these four lips with this thread, repeat the thread from the side where you started it.
The thread is interwoven from the top of the wound so that the stitching resembles the stitching used for the bag which the beggar uses, and it makes a small knot between each stitch and the next, and this stitching is known to all people.
By this method, a wound that appeared in the belly of a man who was cut by a sword and whose wound split open more than a finger's width, and he discharged from his intestines about two fingers from the middle intestine, and the splitting occurred in the middle of the belly.
After holding his intestines out of the wound for twenty-four hours, the wound healed within fifteen days, and I treated him until he was cured and lived many years after that, able to function in all aspects of life. The physicians ruled that he could not be cured by any other means.
And it is amazing that I did not treat him with mercury, because I was in a place where there were no medicines. So I used to put clean cotton on the wound twice a day and I made sure to wash it with honey water until he was cured.
As for one of the types of special stitching, I remember it based on Galen's statement, which is to start the stitch from the skin and to pass the needle from outside to inside, so that if the thread penetrates the skin and the abdominal muscles that run vertically along the entire length of the abdomen.
I left the edge of the stitch in the side into which I inserted the thread and passed the thread through the other edge from inside to outside on the other edge of the wound, so if I passed it, then I passed it a second time in this edge itself from the wound from outside to inside.
And leave the edge of the stitch that is in this side, and pass the thread through its other edge from inside to outside, and when you pass it into the wound, pass it also until it reaches all the edges of the wound.
Then start also from this side, and make its line with the edge that is from the stitch in the other side, and bring out the thread from the skin that is near it, then return it into that skin, and make the line of the edge of the stitch that is in the other side with this edge of the wound.
And bring it out from the skin that is on its side, and do this again and repeat it until you stitch the entire wound in this manner. The characteristic of this stitching is that it resembles the stitching of the linen for linen.
That is to stitch the stitch one time from one side with the edge of the skin and leave it once from the other side until it is free, and as for the second type of special stitch that he also mentioned, this is his statement verbatim.
It is to suture it according to how people among the healers do by gathering each part towards its counterpart, for that has a natural affinity. They bring the edge of the wound to the other edge and the edge of the defect to the other edge, as I have explained to you.
It is necessary to make a stitch in the edge of the defect closest to you from outside and pass it inside only with that, and leave both edges of the wound. Then return the thread and pass it from outside to inside in both edges of the wound together, then return it also.
And pass it from inside to outside in the edge of the other defect that is on the opposite side, and this stitching method is better than ordinary easy sewing, which is the sewing I mentioned before. This is what Galen said, and some have said that abdominal suturing can be done with two threads. And that is because one thread enters both of them, and you begin by inserting the thread from your side and passing it to the other side, and the other thread enters from the opposite side to it, then pass it from your side according to the suturing of the arteries, equally.
You should know that if the wound is in the middle of the abdomen, then sewing it up is more difficult than in any other part of the abdomen. As for the treatment of wounds, its rule is the same as for all other wounds, and this is because if you encounter a wound fresh with blood before the air changes it and the humors return to it and regulate it, then carry on it the bandage that is wetted with honey.
If the wound has been altered by the air, then apply some of the herbs that are available to you until it festers and the threads fall out and the skin and flesh adhere together, then treat it like any other wound until it heals.
If you do not have any medicines, then apply cotton wool from the start of festering, and change it twice a day as I have instructed you until it heals, for in most cases you will not need another treatment if the wounds are simple. But if you fear that the wound affects the main parts with pain.
It is necessary to soak soft wool in warm, moderate oil or rose oil and place it around the areas between the navel and the pubis. If he feels pain or inflammation in his abdomen, this usually indicates that, so wash him with a black, tight-fitting garment.
And especially if the fistula has reached the bladder and become an open wound into it, know that what is thick of the bladders is easier to cure, and what is thin of them is harder to cure.
And as for the bladder known as the small intestine, it does not accept healing from a wound that occurs in it due to the abundance of vessels and bones within it, the delicacy of its tissue, and its proximity to the nature of the nerve. But if what emerges from the wound is urine and it reaches it, return it back to the bladder as you would with the bladder itself.
And if it has been a long time and it has turned green or black, it is necessary to tie it with a thread above the place that has turned black, so that blood discharge does not appear, for there are vessels and veins in the urine. Then cut what is below that tie.
And you make the ends of the thread hanging from below the wound outside of it to facilitate its tightening and removal when urination occurs and the wound secretes, referring to the wound that appears in the bladder. But if a hole appears in the bladder and it is small.
The man who has been pierced by a spear in the abdomen on the right side of the stomach, if the wound is cauterized and becomes swollen with gas and air coming out, I treat him knowing that he will not recover. I continued to care for him until he recovered and the place healed, but when I saw the place heal, I feared a bad accident in his abdomen for the patient, and no such bad event occurred, and he remained in good condition. Indeed, he eats and drinks, copulates, enters the bathhouse, and serves, and some experimentalists have mentioned that if a small wound appears in the bladder, it should be sewn up like this.
This is done by taking the large ants and bringing their heads together, then placing one ant on the edges of the wound with its mouth open. If it closes its mouth and clenches, its head will be cut off and will stick without dissolving. Then another ant is placed near the first one.
And this is done with several ants, according to the size of the wound, then turning it over and sewing the wound, for those heads remain attached in the bladder until it heals and the patient recovers without experiencing any pain. The bladder can also be sewn with fine thread.
The one who is pierced by a poisonous animal attached to him after it enters the wound should have the end of this thread taken from the animal and washed thoroughly, then tied at its end a thin linen thread, which is then inserted into the wound. And in it is the thread of the animal, which he will sew with it and then return to the hollow. This blow from the embroidery with ants and animals is only on the path of greed and hope.
But if the wound is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the thin membranes, there is no remedy for it or a way to escape from it.
Chapter Sixty-Eight.
In the Treatment of Conjunctivitis and Trachoma.
Know that any wound or ulcer, if it becomes chronic and does not heal and continuously produces pus without ceasing, is called, in general, in any limb, trachoma. And we call it conjunctivitis and trachoma.
It is, in fact, a hardened and calcified white bone without pain, having a cavity like the cavity of a bird's feather.
Therefore, some have called it a "feather." And sometimes it is wet, continually producing pus. Sometimes the moisture may stop in certain times. This moisture can be abundant or scarce, thick or thin.
And it was mentioned in the division when discussing wounds that every wound does not heal and meat does not grow within it, except for one of nine causes. One of them is either due to a lack of blood in the body or its coldness, or because there is hardened flesh inside it and on its edges, which prevents good meat growth. Or because it is excessive in putrefaction and corruption, or because the wound itself is rotten and the nourishing substance that feeds it is of poor quality, or because the medication is not suitable for treating it, or because there has been an epidemic of plague in the city, or because there is something peculiar to the place.
Or because it is excessive in putrefaction and corruption, or because the wound itself is rotten and the nourishing substance that feeds it is of poor quality, or because the medication is not suitable for treating it, or because there has been an epidemic of plague in the city, or because there is something peculiar to the place. As was the case in the city of Syracuse, where diseases are difficult to heal and wounds take a long time to recover by nature, or because it has one bone or several bones. All these causes, their symptoms, and treatments with medications have been explained in the division.
I must now inform you of the treatment for abscesses and pustules, which is done by hand. Know that abscesses can occur in all parts of the body; some end in large veins or nerves, or in nerves.
To the clitoris, or to the bladder, or to the navel, or to one of the ribs, or to a lumbar vertebra from the lumbar vertebrae, or to a joint from the composite joints such as the hand and foot; some extend towards the head and so on.
But any of these veins that have this quality are difficult diseases that do not accept treatment and preoccupation with them is a burden and ignorance, so if there is a vein that has not reached these locations that I mentioned and hoped for treatment for it.
I wanted to reach that knowledge, so take a thin rod of copper or iron if the varicose vein is on an erect (limb), then examine it with it; and if there is swelling in the varicose vein, examine it with a thin rod of lead because lead softens its body.
If it is soft upon entering and tends towards swelling, if the varicose vein has many openings that cannot be reached by the rod, then empty one of its openings with water, for the moisture you fill it with will flow to the other openings and drain.
Do not remove any part of the body that may contain a bone, nerve, or sinew. Also, consider if the tumor is deep-seated or shallow, or if it has many openings and examine all this to the best of your ability when inquiring with the patient about their pain upon touching the area.
And other indications and causative factors of worms are as follows: If you have considered all this truthfully, then proceed to treatment with confidence by examining the patient.
If the tumor appears near to a healthy area, far from a joint, nerve, vessel, or any of the places I mentioned to you, cut open the tumor according to what has been described and remove its soft tissue and rotten flesh.
If it grows in the mouth as meat or a gland and similar things, treat it until it heals. But if the tumor is deep-seated and stable, you should cut it deeply to the extent possible, then clean all its rotten flesh.
Then use the cooked pulp in strong medicines and apply it to the tumor's cavity that you have reached with the iron. Repeat this until the strong medicine eats away all the remaining rot in the tumor's cavity.
Then compel him with the cauteries that promote healthy flesh growth until he recovers. If he does not recover, then burn him as described. If the cause of the fistula is bone and you have confirmed this, then examine and split it as I have informed you, unless you are prevented by an obstacle.
Whether it is a vein, nerve, or limb as we said, if the bone is exposed and has some decay and blackness, then scrape it until the decay disappears. Then treat it with what promotes healing until he recovers. If he does not recover and the fistula persists as before.
Know that you have not reached all the places of decay, so expose everything again and scrape and clean it with all your effort. Then compel it. If he recovers, otherwise know that this decay is deep in a distant cavity, so expose everything again.
Scrape and clean it with all your effort. If the decayed bone is a small bone and can be extracted, then extract it using fine forceps suitable for this purpose.
If there are many bones, then scrape and extract all of them without leaving any of them behind. Your effort should not be hindered by anything attached to them unless cutting it poses a risk. Then cut those attachments along with the flesh if present and free the bones.
If you cannot remove the bone at that time, place on the wound something that will soften it and leave it for several days until what is around those bones of flesh and ligaments softens, and keep the wound so that the split that you have made during your work does not heal.
But if you fear that, place on it a cloth soaked in powdered sulfur with oil, or a cloth soaked in Egyptian myrrh or any of the green myrrhs, for when those ligaments soften and the bones are freed, their removal is easy and they can be pulled out.
If the bone is large, like the shinbone or thighbone and similar, and only its end has decayed, scrape it vigorously until that darkness and decay disappear; then suture the wound. But if the decay reaches a significant part of the bone and extends to the marrow, it must be excised.
Cut it all the way to where the decay ends, and then treat it until it heals. I will tell you about a man who had a boil on his leg as an example to help you in your treatment. This man was elderly.
"Thirty years ago, he experienced pain in his leg due to a movement inside the body until the material reached the leg and swelled with a large worm, and there was no external cause. Then time passed with the doctors' mistakes until the worm burst.
"Many materials exited him, which was poorly treated until the leg swelled and had many openings, all of them discharging pus and body fluids. A group of doctors treated him for about two years, none of whom were skilled in manual craft.
"Until they brought him to me, and I saw his leg with material pouring from those openings in great amounts, and the man's body had wasted away, and his complexion had turned yellow. So I inserted a probe into one of those openings, and the probe went to the bone, then all the openings began to drain.
"And I found it spreading in all directions throughout the leg, so I hurried and cut into one of those openings until I exposed part of the bone, and I found it rotten and eaten away by blackness and decay, with holes that extended to the marrow, which then spread what was revealed to me.
I treated the infected bone, and I believe that there is no infection in the bone other than what I cut out and removed. I bandaged it and then forced the wound to heal with medicated dressings for a long time, but it did not heal. Then I reopened it again above the first opening.
I found that the infection was attached to the bone, so I cut out whatever appeared to me of that infection and then forced the wound to heal, but it did not heal nor did it close up. So I opened it again, but I continued cutting the bone piece by piece and forcing it to heal until I had almost nothing left of the bone.
I removed it with a spoon, then forced it to heal with medicines, and it healed quickly and completely. This repetition in his condition was due to the weakness of the patient, his low resistance, and my fear that he would die because he had profuse diarrhea at all times.
In place of the bone, flesh grew solid and his condition in his body improved, his strength returned, and he resumed his normal activities without any impediment in walking. If the bone had broken in a part of the body, it would have been a severe injury that would permanently disable him.
Take a bandage, tighten it at the end of the broken bone, and command whoever is assisting to raise it upward; then take another bandage of wool thicker than the first.
Then tie it to the flesh below the bone and extend its end so that the flesh is pulled downward, while you expose the flesh from the place you want to saw, so that the saw does not injure the flesh; then place a small piece of wood or a board firmly under the bone from below.
Because if you do this, the saw will not be prevented from cutting the rotten bone, and it is necessary that the sawing be a little above the place of the rottenness so that there is no rottenness in the cavity of the bone which does not appear on its surface to the touch, and thus you are forced to saw again.
If the bone is rotten and not broken, but some parts are connected and the rottenness is in the middle or in a part of it, then expose all the flesh from every side; then place the wood from below and saw it from the first side where the rottenness is.
Then when you have finished sawing it from one side, saw it from the other side, and let the sawing be a little distance from the rottenness as we said. If the rottenness is in a joint, cut the rotten joint itself, and saw the bone where it connects with the other side.
If the decay is between two joints, there is no remedy other than cauterization. If the decay is in the palm of the hand or the sole of the foot, its treatment is very difficult, but it is necessary to scrape off the decay however it appears to you and cauterize it and cleanse it in any way possible.
And whatever method is suitable for you when you are not faced with a vein or nerve, and know that the saws and knives for cutting these bones are many according to the position of the bones, their arrangement, hardness, softness, size, and density. Therefore, it is necessary to have a suitable tool for each type of work.
And know that the works themselves may indicate to you the type of tool needed if you have a long drill and knowledge of these arts, for from this craft comes the skillful artisan who has witnessed various diseases. He may therefore devise for himself the tools that suit him for each disease, and I will depict for you in the remainder of this chapter several tools.
You make them examples to be marveled at, and a measure by which others are measured if God wills. Image of a saw:
Another picture of a saw:
A small saw picture:
A large saw picture:
The head of this dismemberment tool is in the form of a twisted screw, engraved like an ivory carving. It is suitable for cutting large joints or wide bones if they are rotten. A small dismemberment tool picture:
A broad saw picture:
Its upper arch and blade are made of iron, and its handle is from a carved conical piece of wood. A dismemberment tool with a cavity picture:
Another elegant dismemberment tool picture:
A dismemberment tool with a notched tip picture:
Picture of a small dismemberment tool resembling a plane:
Another small section picture:
Its tip, like a saw, can maneuver in many places of the bones. Picture of a dismemberment tool suitable for cutting through bones:
Its tip is a sharp-edged triangle made of Indian steel, and all the dismemberment tools and sections we mentioned should be made in this manner. Dismemberment tool picture:
The Seventh and Eightieth Chapter
On Cutting Limbs and Bone Exposure.
If the limbs are putrefied, whether from an external or internal cause, and if treatment with medicines does not cure it and you see that the corruption is advancing in the member and nothing stops it,
Then it is necessary to cut that limb until the corruption reaches, in order to save the patient from death or great affliction which is worse than losing the limb. A sign of its need for amputation is when the member becomes blackened to such an extent that you think fire has burnt it.
Or if it putrefies after blackening, to the point that this corruption extends beyond that member and affects the rest of the body, then hasten to cut it off. Similarly, if the cause of the putrefaction is due to a venomous creature such as a sea scorpion, a snake, or a scorpion, and the like.
If the putrefaction or venom is in the tip of the finger, then cut off the finger and do not delay the amputation until the putrefaction spreads to the hand. Similarly, if it affects the hand, cut it off from its root at the wrist and do not delay the amputation until it spreads to the forearm.
And so if he took in the arm, cut off the arm at the joint itself, and if there was gangrene and you saw it reaching towards the shoulder, do not cut off the shoulder, for that would cause the patient to die; use another treatment according to your ability.
Likewise, if gangrene occurs in the toe, cut off the toe at one of its joints. And if it occurs in the foot, cut off the foot at its ankle. If it reaches the leg, cut off the leg at the knee joint.
And if the gangrene has reached above the knee, there is no remedy except to leave it and let the patient die. The method of cutting off a limb or removing it is to bind a ligature below the place you wish to cut and bind another ligature above the place.
And the attendant who holds the lower ligature should pull it downwards, and another attendant holding the upper ligature should pull it upwards, and you should scrape off the flesh between the two ligatures with a broad scalpel until all the flesh is exposed, then cut or remove it. It is necessary to place bandages of linen on all sides.
So that the saw does not touch the correct place and cause the patient excessive pain and burning, if bleeding occurs during your work, quickly cover the place or apply some astringents to stop the blood, then return to your treatment until you finish.
Then, attach the wounded limb with a suitable bandage and treat it until it heals. I inform you of an example of a man with a wound in his leg. This affliction is similar to what I have described for you, for it happened in his leg as a dark mark accompanied by a burn that resembles fire.
And that corruption first occurred in his finger, until it spread to the entire leg. When the man saw the corruption spreading through the limb along with the intensity of the pain and burning sensation, he amputated it at the joint, and was cured.
After a long time had passed, that same corruption appeared in his little finger. He sought me out and I cut off that finger using the medicines I placed on his hand after cleansing his body. But the corruption did not leave and spread to the next finger.
Until the corruption reached his hand, he called for me to cut off his hand. I refused and urged him to reattach that finger, fearing his death upon cutting off his hand since the man was in a weak state. When he gave up hope of this, he returned to his homeland.
I was informed that he later had his hand amputated and recovered. I have told this story so that it may serve as an aid in dealing with cases of this disease, and to be a guide to act upon.
Chapter Eighty-Eight
On the treatment of abscesses and how to inject them with medicines.
If a worm appears in one of the fleshy members and its duration is prolonged until it reaches the maximum length, then it either bursts or ruptures and all that was inside it comes out, leaving the place empty as if it were a vessel.
And the skin over it is like a membrane and has not yet been deeply affected by decay, so that it does not affect bone or nerve or ligament. From here it deserves to be called an abscess, and it is not named "nasura" unless its duration lengthens until the decay affects something of these members.
Then it is called "nasura" or "zikama". Its treatment is to cut off all that skin as if it were peeling, especially if it has thinned and become like a membrane and is sure not to adhere to the place because of its decay.
If it is hoped that the skin will adhere and its decay has not reached that extent, and there is some flesh in the skin, then treat it with an injection. This is done by looking at the abscess; if it is large and the tip of the swelling from which the odor emanates is prominent, then inject it with the Egyptian drug. باسم الله.
The one that is mixed with oil, honey, and a vinegar solution in equal parts, gathered in a container and cooked over fire until the medicine boils and reaches the consistency of honey. Then take from it what you need and dilute it with water and honey, and inject it into the wound, close his mouth, and leave the medicine in it for two hours.
Then remove it during the afternoon, doing this daily until the wound is clean and the pus is gone. If you do not have this medicine, inject water with ash from the trunk of a carob tree or the trunk of an olive tree, mixed with water.
Then strain it and inject until you are sure the wound is clean. If the patient cannot tolerate Egyptian medicine or ash water, then inject with water and honey mixed with some powdered vinegar.
Or inject with a mixture of honey and wine, for it is the nature of honey to cleanse and wash, while wine closes the wound, especially if it contains a little rosemary or sage. Do this several times until you are sure that the corruption has left the wound, then inject with something that promotes flesh growth.
Like taking the date stone and coating it with rose oil and astringent drink, or injecting it with some medicines and other pits that we have proven their properties in the chapter on pits, for if the mouth of the hidden one is narrow and does not fit the injection tube.
Then widen it slightly with iron, or put a swab in it soaked in Egyptian pits or pits of the Syrians until it expands. And if the mouth is also wide, gather its lips with stitching and leave as much as needed to fit the injector without excess.
Likewise, if the mouth from which the pus is draining is elevated above the fissure, cut it lower in a deeper place so that the pus flows downward, because if the pus is injected into the bottom of the hidden place, it prevents the flesh from growing therein.
If you cannot cut the hidden place downward as desired, crush and apply a poultice that easily drains pus from it according to what seems best to you, and crush so that nothing of the stubborn pus remains in it.
As for the medicines that are placed on the hidden place from outside and how to apply them, it is to take one of the suitable medicated pits according to what you want, and spread it on a cloth made of cotton. And let the cloth be as much as needed to cover all of the hidden place. Then, you carve with the scissors a wider hole than the mouth of the cavity slightly. Then, you put on it a soft bandage over another bandage to match the size of the hole and place it away from the mouth of the cavity so that it is easy for the pus to come out, and do not remove the large bandage except later.
Several days, and the one over the mouth of the cavity is the one that you remove at all times so that what has accumulated in it can come out and to know what comes out of it: whether it is a lot or a little, or purulent or non-purulent.
With this, you also examine the same place of the cavity: Does the person feel pain in it or not? Is there a worm or no worm? If your treatment continues like this and you see the matter coming out smoothly from the mouth of the cavity.
Know that the cavity has healed or is close to healing, so at that time you should open it again on the next day or on the third day. When the wound opens, replace the bandage with another one and renew the dressing. If after a long period thin pus comes out of the cavity, do not despair from its healing.
He delays in the formation of flesh in his wound, and some are opposite to that, so if he comes out of the store after many days without inflammation, know that the store has not adhered, for delaying the adhesion of the store is a sign of health.
And his condition worsened, so he increased in the drying of the medicines, and let the medicine be in its composition wet and in its strength dry, like a dried date if it has been increased with more sugar, and whoever reaches the point that what he treats with is to take the dried date.
And he is anointed with rose oil and sprinkled on him the old balanced drink in its composition, then it is kneaded with it and used, and this action can be done if dried dates are not available, if honey is cooked until it boils and used, or take of raisins, figs, and cardamom and crush all and leave them on the honey while it is on the fire. Then it is poured on a cloth and applied to the wound, or it can be poured with honey that has been cooked until it thickens, and the shells are placed on it, then the cloth is put on and secured.
And it can be used in such cases, long strips of the root of the safflower and powdered poppy seeds and the individual peels of quinces are employed, either alone or ground up together, sifted and left on honey that has been described and used. If the matter of the wound persists and does not heal with this treatment, know that there is corruption within it.
And it has an effect on the bones or other hard tissues and ligaments, so treat it with Nasor treatment as described previously.
Chapter Ninety-Eight.
In the treatment of fistulas, ingrown toenails, excess fingers, and finger joint dislocation.
A fistula is an excessive growth of flesh that develops under the toenail of the hand or foot, and sometimes in other fingers. If its condition persists and treatment is neglected, it will become inflamed and painful.
Or it may become corrupt and gangrenous, eventually eating away at the root of the nail, sometimes corrupting the entire nail, and sometimes reaching the bone so that it gives off a foul odor, and the tip of the finger becomes swollen and its color changes to blackish. If you treat it with what we mentioned in the section and it does not heal, your treatment has failed.
It is necessary to cut with iron all the flesh that grows from the nail, then dress the wound after that, for cauterization in this case is very beneficial. As for if the bone is intact and the nail is also intact.
The corner of the nail has sunk into the flesh, causing ulceration and inflammation. It is necessary to place a thin piece of wood under the corner of the nail that sinks into the flesh, lift it up, and cut off that piece of flesh with pincers.
And on what remains of the flesh, place burnt medicines that are not too strong until it all disappears, then treat it with poultices until it heals. But if the infection has affected the bone, it is necessary to cut out that bone and remove it, for it will not heal as long as there is a rotten piece of bone in it.
If you see corruption and putrefaction advancing in the finger, cut it off at one of the joints as mentioned before, then treat (the stump) until it heals. If the nail is struck or crushed and severe pain occurs, it is necessary to first lance the affected area.
Then, cut the nail with a sharp knife, making a slanted cut from top to bottom. Be careful not to let the cut reach the flesh under the nail, for this will cause severe pain to the patient and may result in excessive flesh growth in that area. Then, treat the site with what soothes the pains.
And as for the extra finger that is born in some people's hands, sometimes it is all fleshy and sometimes there are bones in some of them, and sometimes there is a nail. Its root may be connected to some of the fingers.
Or its root may be in some part of the finger, and that which grows from some part of the finger does not move. However, that which grows near the base of the finger might move, and whatever is fleshy, it can easily be cut off, and this is done by cutting it at its base with a wide blade.
As for the one whose root is at the base of the joint, its treatment is difficult because it tends to recur after being cut off. And as for the one that grows on the finger near one of the joints, it is preferable to first cut its flesh in a circular manner to the bone, then saw the bone with one of those appropriate saws.
Then treat it until it heals. And as for the adhesion that occurs between some of the fingers, this is often seen and is one of the things with which humans are born. It may occur during the union of a wound or burn, and similar cases. In such instances, it is necessary to cut open that adhesion.
Until the fingers return to their natural state, then place between them a bandage or gauze soaked in rose oil so that it does not stick quickly and separates between them, or make between them a thin lead sheet until the place is healed as needed.
And likewise, if there is adhesion of some fingers with the palm, break that adhesion according to what can be prepared and adjusted for the shape of the limb.
Chapter Ninety-Nine.
On Cutting Nails.
Nails are thick, rough, blackish veins that occur in most parts of the body but are most common in the legs and particularly among those who walk a lot, such as porters and travelers. It is necessary first to use powerful bleeding from the body, repeated several times.
Then the owner of the nail should use cautery, and as for its treatment with iron, it will be on two strikes: one to break open and release the black blood, and the other to scrape away the vein and remove it entirely. As for breaking it open, this is done by first scalding the leg with very hot water.
Until the thick blood clot dissolves, tie the patient's leg above his thigh to below his foot with a bandage, then make an incision in one place or two places or three wide incisions.
Then remove the black blood with your hand from below the leg to above and from above to below until you extract a sufficient amount of blood, or as much as the patient's strength allows. Then bind it and order him to avoid foods that cause constipation. Repeat the bleeding and purging.
When the veins fill up and cause harm to the patient, but if he sweats, it will be of this kind: shave the patient's leg if it has a lot of hair, then have him enter the bath and wash his leg with hot water until it becomes red and the vein swells or he performs intense exercise.
If there is no bath to heat the limb, then make a longitudinal incision in the skin along the vein, either at its end near the ankle or below it near the heel. Then open the skin with scissors and clean the vein from both sides until it becomes visible.
He appears red and swollen upon emergence, and if freed from the skin, he also resembles a leech. Then, inserting a reed under him until it rises above the skin, secure it with a thin, soft thread, then make another incision near that one, about three fingers wide.
Then, scrape the skin from above the vein until it appears. Raise it with a reed as you did before and secure it with another thread as you did initially. Then, make one more incision or several incisions if necessary.
Then, tie it off and cut it at the end of the incision near the knuckle. Draw it out, tie it off until it exits the second incision. Draw it to the upper incision and do that until you draw it from the highest of all incisions. Once it is all drawn out, cut it.
If you find it difficult to pull and tie, insert a two-pronged needle with a strong thread. Tie it off and pull the needle out while sliding a reed under it. Move your hand in all directions until it exits. Make sure it does not break, because if it breaks, it will be very hard to tie off.
The afflicted person will suffer from it, so if he has a wound, place on the location of the wound moist wool in vinegar and rose oil or olive oil and treat him until he recovers. If the wound is swollen with convulsions, it tends to turn towards various directions.
And if it is not upright as we mentioned, then it must be cut at every angle and place of its convulsions, then attach it with ligatures until all are gathered together. Be careful when cutting it not to cut the vein or wound it, for that would make it difficult for you to gather, so protect your effort.
Image of the needle used to puncture the wound:
Image of the black sutures:
It should not have a knot like other sutures, and its end should not be sharp so as not to wound the vein, but rather it should be thick and soft. If it is thin, it will cut the vein with its edge; instead, it should have a thick end as we mentioned.
Chapter One Hundred Nineteen.
In suturing the vein.
This vein is found in the legs in hot countries like Hijaz and Arab lands, and in hot open areas with little vegetation. Sometimes it may also appear in other parts of the body besides the legs, and it grows from a swelling that occurs under the skin.
As discussed in the case of living beings and insects, it is the larva that emerges between the skin and the flesh. The sign indicating the beginning of this larva's appearance is a severe burning sensation in the leg, followed by swelling in that area, after which the larva begins to emerge from the swollen place.
It is as if it were the root of a plant or an animal, so if its end protrudes, it should be wrapped around a small piece of lead weighing between one and two kilograms, bound securely, and left hanging from the leg.
Whenever something emerges from it, wrap that part around the lead and bind it. If it is long, cut a piece of it off and wrap the rest, but do not cut it from its root until all of it has emerged. For if you cut it, it will reduce in size and enter into the flesh, causing infection and putrefaction in the place, and an unpleasant ulcer.
Therefore, it is necessary to be turned and gently pulled little by little until it emerges completely from the body, with nothing remaining inside. This larva can emerge in some people up to ten inches long.
"It has been reported to me that for a man with twenty shrapnel, if it breaks during his treatment, then insert cotton into the hole and pack it tightly with a long strip of cloth along with the body until all its contents are expelled, and try to heal the place with medicines daily.
"Then treat it with the treatment for wounds, and this wound may have many roots, especially if it appears in the joint of a man or in the man himself, so it will cause him many exits, and from each exit a root comes out. Treat it as we mentioned in the division and what precedes.
"Chapter Two Hundred and Ninety-Nine
"In the cavity under the rib, where the calf of the cow is born, it is called the abscess of the cow.
"This disease is called in some of our countries 'the abscess of the cow' because it often affects cows, and it is a small single sac that develops between the skin and the flesh and spreads throughout the entire body, both upwards and downwards.
"It is noticeable to the touch as it moves from limb to limb until it bursts, where it burts in the skin forming a pustule from some mixtures, similar to what affects cysts, worms, and roundworms in the abdomen.
And it is expected from its injuries that if it sinks into the body and rises to the head and reaches the eye, it may open in it and exit, causing blindness, and this is often seen. So if you want to treat it and remove it, it will be when its tip appears for sight.
It is necessary to tighten what is above it and below it with a strong ligature, then make an incision on it and remove it. If it sinks into the flesh and you cannot find it, place the hot iron on the spot until it burns it. The greatest damage to the eye is expected from its corruption as we mentioned.
If you see that it has reached the head near the eye, tie tightly below it on the forehead, then make an incision and remove it. It is necessary for the patient to commit to cleansing his body with easily mixed medicines and preserving from foods that produce putrefaction.
Chapter 39.
On making an incision in the disease known as elephantiasis.
This disease that is called elephantiasis in our country is a pain that appears in some limbs, then moves from one limb to another, and I have seen it as I described it to you.
I was called to a sick woman in one of the villages, and when she uncovered her arm, I found an inflammation that had entered into the vein of her arm. After an hour, I saw that inflammation rising with the blood, just like the beetle ascending, quickly reaching the armpit as fast as possible, like mercury.
If you move from one place to another, the pain leaves that place and settles in the armpit. Then, after an hour, it spreads throughout the body until it reaches the other arm. After that, she told me that her whole body was turning as I witnessed.
I was amazed at the speed with which the disease spread from limb to limb, and I had never seen this illness before in such a form except that I had seen a group who found pain spreading from limb to limb, but I did not see it as I saw it in this woman.
I could only attribute this to the fact that the woman was from the countryside, with a dry and exposed body. Thus, the moving wind could be perceived more easily, and it would not appear in this manner among city dwellers with moist and hidden bodies.
If you intend to treat it and the patient feels pain, then if it appears as described, tighten above and below it with a tourniquet, and cut until that trapped wind is released and the place heals.
If you do not see it, then treat it by inducing vomiting and using remedies that expel winds, such as mint seeds, caraway seeds, and similar drugs.
Chapter Forty-Nine.
On Extracting Arrows.
Arrows differ according to their types and the parts of the body in which they are embedded. As for their variations in type, some are large while others are small; some have hollow glass tips, others solid glass tips, and some have three or four barbs.
Some have tongues, others have feathers; and as for the parts of the body in which they are embedded, they fall into two categories: either the affected part is a hollow organ such as the brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, bladder, intestines, and similar organs. When an arrow strikes one of these hollow organs and the signs of imminent death that I have described to you appear, it is best not to remove the arrow from such a place, for death will likely overtake its bearer. When these ugly signs do not appear and the arrow is not stuck in the hollow of the limb, then take it out and treat the wound. The signs of brain injury are: if an arrow pierces the bone and wounds the soft part on top of the brain, a severe headache and vertigo result from this.
When these ugly signs do not appear and the arrow is not stuck in the hollow of the limb, then take it out and treat the wound. The signs of brain injury are: if an arrow pierces the bone and wounds the soft part on top of the brain, a severe headache and vertigo result from this. There is redness in the eyes, redness of the tongue, dizziness, confusion, one episode of vomiting, and sometimes blood comes out from the nostrils or ears. Sometimes speech is lost and hearing goes away. From the place of the wound, a white, watery discharge like pus comes out, resembling meat in its consistency.
If these signs appear to you, then refrain from treating the patient and removing the arrow if it has not already been removed. As for the signs of an arrow wound: if the heart is pierced and it is near the left shoulder and you can feel that it is lodged in something hard, not in something hollow.
And sometimes the arrow has a pulsation like the pulse, and black blood flows from the wound, followed by coldness in the extremities, cold sweat, and pallor. Know that death is imminent. The sign of an arrow wound if it injures the liver is the effusion of thick blood from the wound.
The thyroid that is below the neck becomes swollen, and the patient's color changes, and they breathe deeply and seek cold air to inhale. If the arrowhead has reached the diaphragm, it will be close to the small ribs, and breathing will be severe with intense pain.
The patient becomes restless, and all the limbs of the afflicted side move. If the arrow has reached the liver, this will be followed by severe pain, and blood resembling the liver in its redness will flow from the wound. If the arrow has reached the intestines, food may sometimes come out undigested.
The patient's condition is evident. If the arrow has reached the abdomen and exited, something from the intestines or bladder may come out of the wound, such as pus or a broken vessel. There is no hope for treatment or removal of the arrow. If the arrow has reached the bladder, urine will flow out.
Something will protrude from the wound, and pain will intensify for the patient, indicating that they have died. As for the rest of the body parts such as the face, eye, ear, shoulder, arm, and similar parts, it is generally accepted.
When the arrow did not encounter a vein or nerve, and was not poisoned, I will inform you of some observations regarding these arrows to aid in your treatment. For instance, an arrow fell into a man's eye socket at the root of his nose.
I extracted it from the other side, under the temple of his ear, and he was cured with no adverse effects on his eye. I also removed another arrow for a Jew that had struck him in the socket of his eye beneath the lower eyebrow. The arrowhead was bent, and only its small tip, which fits into the wood, remained attached to it.
The arrow was large, made of the square, soft iron used for quivers with no barbs. Therefore, the Jew was cured, and nothing bad happened to his eye. I removed another arrow from a Nasranite’s cheek; it was an Arabic arrow.
It had barbs, so I split it between the bones and since it had pierced his cheek, I handled it carefully until I extracted it. The Nasranite recovered and was cured. I also removed another arrow for a man who had been struck in the abdomen; we thought he would die from it.
When he remained for thirty days or thereabout, and nothing changed in his condition, the arrowhead broke and became dislocated on him, and it was extracted, and he recovered without any unfortunate event occurring to him. And I saw a man whose arrow fell into his back, so the wound closed on him.
After seven years, the arrow came out at the base of his thigh. And I saw a woman who had an arrow fall into her abdomen, and the wound closed on her, leaving the arrow inside; nothing changed in her condition, nor did she find any harm in any of her natural functions.
I saw another man who had an arrow fall into his face, and the wound closed on him, leaving little pain. And many are similar to this. And I extracted two arrows for a man from the commanders of the Sultan; one of them had fallen into the middle of his nose, leaning slightly towards the right side.
The arrow completely disappeared, so I was called to treat him after the arrow fell for three days; I found that the wound of the arrow was very narrow, so I probed it with a thin wire but did not feel it. He had swelling and pain under his right ear due to the fracture.
The arrow's head was not found in the location of the wound, so I compressed the area with a pledget that had drawing power. Then I probed the area to see if there was any indication of the arrow, but nothing happened, indicating that the arrow had reached its target.
I bandaged the wound with a pledget for many days, but no event occurred. I then cauterized the wound, and the patient remained unable to remove it for some time until he felt the arrow in his nose one day. He informed me of this, so I applied an astringent medication to the wound for many days.
Until it opened and healed, I felt the thin tip of the arrow that remained attached to the splinter. Then I increased the opening of the wound with that astringent medicine until the tip of the arrow appeared clearly to us, and it took about four months for me to remove it along with it.
Then when the wound expanded and I was able to introduce forceps into it, I tried to pull it out but it did not respond to coming out. So I kept probing it and using different instruments on it until one day I managed to grasp it with forceps that fit its shape as depicted at the end of the chapter.
The physicians used to say that his nasal polyp should not be cauterized, so I cauterized it and the wound healed, and the patient was cured completely without any pain or discomfort thereafter. And I will tell you how to remove some arrows, making this a measure and proof of what I have not mentioned yet.
Because the parts of this craft and its detail cannot be grasped by description, nor can a book encompass it; rather, the experienced cauterizer measures little by much, what is present by what is absent, and he invents a new procedure and a new instrument for each unusual situation.
If I were to depart from this craft, I would say that arrows are only removed from the limbs into which they have penetrated in two ways: either by pulling them out from the point of entry or from the opposite side, and those that exit come out from where they entered.
Or the arrow may be protruding in a fleshy area, so it is pulled out and removed. If it does not come out at its time of entry, you must leave it for days until the flesh around it rots, making it easier to pull out and remove; likewise if it has penetrated into bone.
You should not leave it for the exit, so also do it daily and repeat it with attraction and movement every day, because it will come out. If it does not come out after days, then it is necessary to drill around the arrow in the same bone from all sides with a fine drill until there is room for the arrow, then attract it and take it out.
If the arrow is in the bone of the head and it has been softened in one of the cavities of the brain, and some of those symptoms that I mentioned to you have appeared from the patient, then do not attract the arrow and leave it until his condition improves after days.
Then take hold of attracting the arrow and taking it out, if it is deeply embedded and does not come out, use drills around the arrow as I have described to you, then treat the place until it heals. But if the arrow has deviated into a place in the body. And it disappeared from the wound, so he probed for it with a probe. If he felt it, he drew it out with some of the instruments that are suitable for drawing it out. If he could not do this because of the narrowness of the wound and the distance of the arrowhead in the cavity, and there was no bone or nerve or vessel (in its path).
So he incised it until the wound widened and he could grasp the arrow with his hand, then drew it out. If there were bone fragments holding on to it, he freed them from both sides using all possible means. And if he couldn't free the bones in the fracture of the shoulders, he dislocated them until they were freed.
If you tried to extract the arrow from any location, use your hand along with the clamps in all directions until it is freed. Be very gentle so that the arrow does not break and become difficult to grasp and remove if you cannot do this at first attempt.
Leave it for days until those surrounding tissues decay, then try again. For at that time, it will be easier to remove. If you encounter bleeding, use the treatment we mentioned in its chapter. Protect your effort from cutting a vein or nerve or artery, and employ skillful means.
You can free the arrow in any way possible, but it should be done with care and skill as I have described to you, and it is necessary for you to use (a method) that causes the patient to return to the position he was in when the arrow fell, and then he will be safe.
If you cannot do that, then use whatever method is available to you. As for the arrow that comes out of the opposite side, it may have protruded something outside or you may feel the tip of the arrow close to the surface of the skin and see it coming out.
Cut around it and let the cut be as wide as a lead pencil, then pull it out, for it will make its exit easier. If it is stuck in bone, move your hand in a rotating motion until the arrow affects the bone and enlarges itself, then pull it out.
Otherwise, leave it for days until it comes out on its own. If there is a fletching (feather) attached to the arrow and you want to use it for pushing, then insert the hollow tool so that its hole enters the feather, then push with it.
If the arrow is hollow, push it out with a tool that fits into that hole, for this will make its exit easier. If the arrow is poisoned, you should cut off all of the flesh in which the poison has penetrated if possible, then treat it appropriately.
If the arrow is in the chest, or abdomen, or thigh, or side, and it is close to what can be felt with a probe, and you can cut on it, then cut, and be careful not to cut a nerve or sinew, and remove it.
Then draw the line of the wound if it needs stitching, then treat it until it heals. Image of the caltrops that attract arrows:
The ends of it are like the claws of a bird, made so that if it catches an arrow or anything else, it does not let go. It can be made in large, small, and medium sizes according to the size of the arrow, whether big or small, and the width and narrowness of the wound.
Image of the hollow shield:
Image of the embalmed body:
This is the end of the hollow arrow, like a reed, to facilitate its entry into the hollow arrow and push it out.
Chapter Fifty-Nine.
On Cauterizing Blood Vessels.
There are thirty blood vessels that have the habit of being cauterized in the body, among them sixteen in the head: two pulsating blood vessels behind the ears known as the "sensitive" ones, and two channels in the visible cheekbones, and two channels in the sockets of the eyes known as the "observant.
The vein that stands in the middle of the forehead, and the veins at the tip of the nose, and the two jugulars in the neck, and the two veins in the upper lip from the mouth, and the two veins in the lower lip, and these veins are known as the jugulars, and the two veins under the tongue.
As for the veins that appear in the arm and hand, they are five veins: one of them is the cephalic, which is from the outer side, and the common people call it the head vein; another is the basilic, which is the middle vein, composed of a branch of the basilic and a branch of the cephalic, and the common people call it the body vein.
The basilic, which is located on the inner side, is also called the epitrochlear, and the common people call it the abdominal vein or the arm ligament. It is placed on the ulna, to which it adheres, and it appears above the elbow prominently as the biceps.
It is the vein that runs between the calf and shin, having two branches; in the leg and foot, there are three veins: one of them runs under the calf from the outer side, another is the saphenous, whose position is near the ankle on the inner side, and the third is the nasal vein, whose position is near the heel on the outer side.
In the other leg, there are three similar veins. As for the two veins behind the ears, it is beneficial to tie them off for chronic and painful conditions, head wounds, and chronic head injuries, and how to tie them off as I have described.
It is that you shave the patient's head and tie a thick thread tightly in the place of the veins, then strangle the patient with a rope until the veins appear behind the ears in the lower part of the head. You feel them with your finger, where you sense their pulse under your finger, here is the method to learn.
Then take a sharp knife, which is known as the scalpel, and insert it under the vein into the skin until the blade reaches the bone. Then lift your hand with the vein and the skin upwards and cut the vein along with the skin in one continuous piece, and its length will be two spans.
Or, according to the amount of blood you want to release, then bind them with bandages and leave them until they heal. It was previously mentioned in the beginning of the book how to cut and tie them. As for the two veins in the cheeks, it is beneficial to tie them off for chronic pain, severe headaches, constant dizziness, and painful hemorrhoids near the eyes.
How to make them touch the way I taught you, the patient will grasp his neck with a cloth until the artery becomes apparent. You will feel their pulsation under your finger. Then, learn by pressing and lift the skin from above the artery upwards with your index finger.
And the inserter enters from below, raises the artery above and cuts it as you did with the other two arteries. Let some blood flow according to your need, then tie the patient's artery and place your finger on the artery for an hour.
Then place a cloth and bandage on it, tying it firmly from above. Leave it until it heals. Previously, I mentioned their mention and cutting in the beginning of the book. As for touching the forehead artery, its benefit after touching the carotid artery is for illnesses of the face such as freckles, ulcers, and severe redness.
And how to make him touch as I taught you, the patient will grasp his neck with a cloth until the artery appears, then take the instrument called the spear, and this is its shape:
Place the hook at the tip of the spear on the same artery and strike it from above with a hammer or something similar, allowing the blood to flow as much as you desire. Then tie off the patient's artery and bandage it until it heals.
He may open with a wide probe, except that it should not be sharp-tipped like other probes; rather, its tip should be slightly broad and blunt to prevent injury, because the bone is close, so the probe might break if it is thin.
As for the veins that are in the temples, their benefit is for eye ailments such as trachoma, redness, and conjunctivitis, and diseases of the face. As for how to cut them, it is by having the patient extend his neck with a cloth, then you cut them while standing over his head, and let the cut be slightly towards length with a small, slightly broad probe.
The place has no flesh, so if the probe is thin-tipped, it might break. Then send out as much blood as you need and place cotton on them, tie them for one night, then release them. As for cutting the nose vein, it is beneficial against severe headaches.
And severe headaches, and from the diseases of the face such as red conjunctivitis that appears in the nose, especially if it is chronic. As for how to cut it: make the patient extend his neck, then grasp his nose with your left hand and take a thin, long probe.
"You should cut it in the middle of the nose between the sides of the nostrils, standing straight, because the sweat does not appear there. For the blood will flow from its vein. You should then wipe your hand a little with a cloth and send the blood away, then bandage it at night, for it heals quickly.
"As for the warts, their benefit is to alleviate shortness of breath and start ulcers and blackish diseases that appear on the skin surface such as black pustules, carbuncles, bad ulcers, and boils. The way to cauterize them is for the patient to place them under his neck with a bandage while the operator stands on the patient's head.
"The patient should sit on a chair, then the vein is cauterized to a great length with a wide cautery slightly, then some blood is drawn according to what is deemed necessary, then the same is done with the other vein, then the bandage is removed.
"The two veins are bound moderately so that the patient does not choke, and he is left until the next day, for the wound will heal. As for the jugular veins, their benefit lies in being cauterized after the epigastric vein, as it helps with ulcers of the mouth, rotting of the gums, bad ulcers, and fissures of the lips.
What is in the nose and around it, and how to cauterize them so that the patient does not faint before you, but rather his neck is tied with a turban, then his lips are turned and you look at the two veins, one of which you see to the right of the lip and the other to its left, and you burn it from them.
And this is also because around them there are thin, black veins; you should cut them with a sharp incision. If it becomes difficult for you and you do not know which one to choose, approach the larger and more apparent of them, and act similarly with the two veins in the lower lip.
As for the two veins under the tongue, it is beneficial to cauterize them after cauterizing the tonsils for throat diseases that occur in the throat from oral diseases, and how to cauterize them is by having the patient sit between your hands with his feet towards the sun, raise his tongue and look under the tongue on one side there is a vein and on the other side another vein, both are black.
Cauterize them and be careful not to cut them too deep, for there are vessels beneath them from which blood may flow. As for the three veins that are cauterized in the cheek, they are the ones customarily cauterized among people, and their cauterization can be done in two ways.
And either stitch with a broad linen thread or cut with a lancet and this is the lancet [and here is its image]. Image of the broad linen thread.
It will be broad as you see, suitable for opening the visible, rough, and filled veins that contain thick blood like pus, and here is the image of the olive thread:
And this thread is narrower and more delicate, suitable for cutting the thin veins that contain thin yellowish blood, and here is the image of the silk thread:
This silk, which is suitable for cutting, comes in various widths and delicacies according to the capacity and narrowness of the veins. It can also be used as a substitute for others, and it is well-known among craftsmen.
And as for the basilic, which is one of these three veins, it is beneficial to cut it because it attracts blood from the illnesses that are under the heel and the neck that reach the chest and abdomen. It is fitting for the cutter, when cutting, to be cautious and on guard, for under it there is an artery. If he errs and adds to the thread of the suture, he will cut that artery.
In the case of a hemorrhage, it is necessary that its bandage not be made with wool, but rather with linen, because if balsam does not appear clearly, then one should avoid it and turn to something else or request some of its (linen) threads.
Or, if you want to bandage it with the arm band, know that it is clearly apparent and squeeze it with wool as we mentioned before. If you intend to bandage it directly on the vein, it is necessary, before tightening the arm, to feel the place until you recognize the pulse, then learn from it with a tourniquet.
Then tie the arm and squeeze the vein with a woolen tourniquet, as we mentioned earlier. It is forbidden to hit where the veins are located. If you see swelling in the place that you marked with the tourniquet while tightening the bandage, then know that this swelling is the inflation of the veins, so avoid it.
If you see the blood oozing like the urine of a boy, and the blood is thin and red, know that it is from the veins. Then immediately place your finger on it for a long hour, then remove your finger. If the bleeding stops, then tighten the arm.
And leave it, and warn the patient not to neglect it and let it be on his neck, and do not move him for any days until he is cured. If the bleeding does not stop and you are overcome and there is no remedy available to you at that time, then cut off the vein, because its ends will slacken and the bleeding will stop.
Or take the peel of a fig and cut it, and take half of it and press it firmly on the bleeding site with a bandage and ligatures for another day. If the bleeding stops, otherwise treat it as mentioned before with the use of styptic herbs for the wound, and stopping its blood flow is not difficult in most cases.
For a small wound and if the bandage is effective on the arm, then inform him, but regarding the styptic herb, its benefit in stopping bleeding is that it draws blood from the top of the head and the bottom of the body because it is composed of one part of basilic and one part of kyphal, as we have mentioned.
And it is necessary for the styptic to be on the neck because there are nerves under it. If it tightens too much, it will press on the nerve and cause a paralysis that is difficult to cure, and perhaps it will not heal at all. This nerve often appears in the area of sensation.
And if it is hidden in some people and is thin, not easily distinguishable, you should make your incision with the razor, avoiding the tendon, for if the vein is between two tendons, split the vein lengthwise; and as for the vein of the ankle, it is beneficial to cut it because it draws blood from the head.
And it is beneficial for diseases of the eyes and it is necessary in this vein, especially if you want to cut it; to cut it with an olive oil thread or a wide silk thread because it submits all the veins since there are no arteries or nerves under it.
However, it is necessary for you when cutting to avoid the tendon head only and look for a soft place. And if the first strike does not hit it, it can be repeated with the cut several times, except that sometimes it may hurt in some people if it is not cut in the first strike.
But that pain does not harm it at all. As for the method of cutting and its aftereffects, and what should be done to correct them, the first thing is to know that cutting can be used only to preserve health.
And as for its use in diseases and what is used to maintain health and prevent diseases, it should be purged from one of the three veins that are in the lung, meaning the trachea, bronchus, and alveolus, and this purging should be done at the beginning of spring if signs of illness appear.
And the purging should be done on Sunday or Tuesday after three hours of the day have passed, and as for the purging used in diseases, there is no specific time for it, but whenever necessity and urgency call for it, whether at night or day.
And in every hour and at any time, except that children should not be purged until they reach fourteen years of age, nor should the elderly who have passed sixty years of age be purged; so if anyone is forced to undergo purging for any reason.
And it is necessary to cleanse the bowel before purging with a gentle enema if there is much retained feces, lest it attract to the veins at the time of purging from the bowel a harmful odor that harms the main organs; and the emaciated, diabetics, and those with diarrhea should not be purged until that passes from them.
Be careful of ejaculation after intercourse, as well as excessive sex, exertion, exercise, staying up late, fasting, and all other bodily or mental stresses. Then observe the effect on mixing before that if the blood is thick.
With food, drink, and medicine if possible, then he should enter the bathhouse if nothing prevents him or perform some exercise so that his blood becomes thin and his ejaculation occurs in the morning as we have said. It is also recommended that he avoids all mental stresses that day.
Avoid all mental stresses such as worries, anger, fear, and physical stresses like excessive exertion, frequent ejaculation, etc. Prepare your seating area with items that people usually use, such as pleasant scents, incense, cushions, and the like, to whatever extent possible for each person.
Then the ejaculator sits on a higher seat than that of the non-ejaculator, then he extends his arm and the ejaculator strokes it with his hand twice or thrice, then he tightens the ligature with a strap and loosens it twice or thrice, ensuring moderate tension.
When the tightness is not balanced, either by excess in binding which prevents blood flow or if it is too loose, it also prevents blood flow. Then after the binding, it is appropriate that the patient presses both hands together with both palms.
Until the veins swell and become palpable, then the practitioner should rub a little of the old oil on the area to be opened. He should place his left index finger on the same vein below the spot he intends to open slightly, so that the vein does not roll away from the incision. Because some veins, when cut, roll away from the incision and are filled with air, so when the practitioner places the knife on them, they sink beneath the knife and deceive the practitioner, and the knife does not open the vein, and even if it is opened, it is only slightly.
Therefore, it is necessary for the practitioner to be cautious and consider these things carefully. Then he should let the knife descend. If the vein does not open from its first pass, he should try again under that spot slightly or above it with a wheel if the place has not become tough.
If the patient is bitten or stung, leave him for a day or two and do not tighten the bandage, as it may draw out hot venom, and he should not enter the bath. Then, if desired, he can repeat the cupping. If the wound was caused by a scorpion and the opening is small with thin flowing blood.
And if you fear that not enough blood will come out, then prepare the wound in the same hole on a vertical position and slightly enlarge the opening. Do this with haste before the place swells, for many people may swell at the small opening.
If you see that it has swollen, do not apply the cupping glass again, as it will not help. Instead, place on it something of the oil of cumin, for it facilitates the flow of blood and is better in this situation than the oil itself and other ointments.
Use the oil of cumin in all your cuppings for the veins when the blood flow is difficult, and this can also be done with the juice of radish or wild rue if one of them is placed on the site, for then the blood will become thin and dissolve if it is thick.
In the case of a large wound in the rectal area, it often happens, especially if one has not had an enema before, or if the incision was small, that the wound becomes swollen and inflamed. Therefore, immediately apply a sponge soaked in warm water with a little salt to the wound, and leave it on for an hour; it will soften.
And you should do that after the bleeding has stopped completely, either from the same incision or another one. If there is any residue of blackness or greenness left in the area after several days, it is not harmful. Therefore, if you wish, you can apply some patience and dissolved myrrh to it.
Or something from the juice of the fig and similar things, for it often happens that there is swelling and inflammation when the bladder is opened. If you find it swollen upon your touch, then beware not to apply anything we have mentioned on it.
For it sometimes exudes thick blood, but you should compress it with what is in it to harden the area, then treat it with the rest of the treatments until it heals. It is necessary for each person's blood to be expelled according to their strength and what appears as the dominant color in the blood.
If the blood is dark, let it come out until it turns red; similarly, if you see it thick, send it out until it becomes thin; and similarly, if it is coagulated, until its coagulation disappears. And it is appropriate for someone who is strongly filled with blood and needs to expel the blood all at once.
To widen the orifice and make the wound broad; but for a weak person, it is better to do the opposite and let it come out in portions, with the hole being narrow. And the best tool to use for widening the orifice is one that is curved, smooth, and without any burrs.
This blow from the wound is safe from infection and cutting a nerve, as long as it is broad and long; and it should be habitual at the time of deep incision. If one is accustomed to this at the time of deep incision, it is appropriate to give him something to eat before the incision, such as bread soaked in water from boiled almonds or carob beans.
If it is a wound and blood is drawn from it three or four times, then if he has a cold temperament, let him take before the incision bread soaked in mead or honeyed wine mixed with herbs or in good-smelling drink.
If excess blood loss occurs during surgery, the patient should be given meat broth and fine-scented drinks, and ointment should be applied with honey, rubbing the chest with it, and using everything else mentioned in the section on hematomas.
For evacuation, if someone wants to empty the blood from their arm and relieve the second time of bleeding, it is necessary for one who has undergone surgery with significant loss of strength that the blood be released little by little according to his strength over consecutive days.
And if someone wants to empty their arm and relieve the blood again, and they are strong-bodied, let them do so after seven or nine hours from the first surgery; but if someone wants to draw the blood from one part of the body to another, it is necessary for him to be relieved on the second or third day.
And if the blood in the body is abundant, hot and thickened, causing inflammation, it is necessary to remove the blood all at once and to expel a large amount, and to widen the opening until the hematoma appears, after ensuring that all conditions of surgery are met. And place your hand on his pulse at the time of bleeding, lest death occur in the place of the wound; this happens often if the surgeon is ignorant and negligence occurs, and it should not be done if you intend to release the arm and relieve the blood second.
And the mouth of the vein has closed and the exit of blood is difficult, do not prick on it with force or drag strongly, for that is very harmful. Rather, leave it until it is corrupted after a second, or draw with the sharp edge of the needle what is clotted in the mouth of the vein.
Or place on it something of salt dissolved in water, or place on it something of burning tar or pitch and prick it lightly until the blood comes out; if the vein is constricted, leave it.
Do not touch it until the inflammation settles; if necessity forces you to bleed again, then there is no choice but either to corrupt it above that place or to corrupt it in the other arm or vein.
As for corroding the cord of the arm, it is corroded as a substitute with vinegar or vitriol if they are not available or are scarce, because it is composed of them both. The way to corrode it is that the patient places his hand in hot water until the skin reddens and the vein appears clearly, then a ligature is tied around it slightly and moderately tight.
Then the vein becomes corrupt on slight twisting, neither long nor wide, and let the opening be wide. Its corruption for it will be a little above the wrist joint, so if the blood is delayed in coming out, prepare the hand in hot water and leave the blood to flow in the water.
Until you reach your need, for if it is in the summer days, you might not need to dip the hand again in hot water, and what makes the blood flow more in hot water during winter time. And this vein is more submissive than all veins. Because there is no pulsating vein or nerve beneath it, and as for the corruption of the cephalic vein from the right hand, it is beneficial for liver diseases, and its corruption method is to tighten the thumb of the hand with a band or your hand after inserting it into hot water until the vein swells.
Because there is no pulsating vein or nerve beneath it, and as for the corruption of the cephalic vein from the right hand, it is beneficial for liver diseases, and its corruption method is to tighten the thumb of the hand with a band or your hand after inserting it into hot water until the vein swells. And it is very clear to the sense, then corrupt it with a slight twist, and if you tie all of it, this does not harm it at all, and be careful not to touch your hand with the hot iron because there are nerves of the fingers under it and the place is lean of meat, then return the hand to the hot water.
And let it run with blood in it, for if you do not immerse it in hot water, the blood will congeal in the artery and prevent flow. If you have drawn enough blood, place on the artery grease and salt to prevent quick clotting.
And likewise you should do with every narrow branch, and as for the benefit of closing off from the left hand, it is beneficial for diseases of the liver, and you do the same in its closure as you did in the second one, either way, and as for closing off the spleen, its benefit is for the diseases that are below the navel such as diseases of the uterus.
And the retention of urine, and diseases of the kidneys, and chronic ulcers of the thighs and legs, and similar diseases; and how to close it so that the man's leg does not enter into hot water, and he carries on it a tourniquet until the veins constrict, then he places above the joint of the foot a bandage and an artery in its place near the anklebone towards the outside.
And it branches out in the foot with many branches, so close it in the widest branch of them or near the anklebone where they come together, for that is better and more reliable. For if you close it in the face of the foot, you will preserve the nerves below it on the face of the foot.
Make your cautery for him by altering it as if you want to burn him, and the burned area will be necrotic. If blood exiting is difficult, let his leg soak in hot water and leave the blood flowing until it is released, for the first time the cauterizer can err with the cautery.
Let him cauterize a little above, for if the place is healthy, there is no fear of it causing pain if the nerve is preserved as we said, and do the same with the vein on the other leg. As for the woman's vein, its location is as we mentioned at the back near the outer side.
The benefit of cauterizing it for pain from varicose veins, if that is from hot blood, and the way to cauterize is for the patient to enter the bath quickly and tightly bind his leg from below the varicose vein up to above the ankle with a thin, long bandage, for it will not appear except in this manner.
If it appears, cauterize it in any case. You can do this by altering (the cautery), which is best, or by burning it with a hot iron or cutting it deeply, for if the place is healthy, it will be almost imperceptible to most people.
"The sensation did not return, so part of the nerve was cut, which is the one that appears on the back of the foot near the ankle and heel, and it preserves the nerves. He sent from the blood the amount he needed.
"Then he removed the bandage and placed cotton on the site of the incision, and tied it down, for it will quickly heal.
"Chapter Sixty-Nine.
"On Cupping and How to Use It.
"Cupping glasses can be made of horn, wood, copper, or glass. The cupping glass has two types: one is called the bloodletting cupping with a hole for releasing blood, and the other is called dry cupping without a hole.
"And this type of cupping that does not have a hole also comes in two forms.
"And the cupping glasses for the neck are two places on both sides of the neck, and the cupping glasses for the chin are under the lower jaw from the mouth, and the cupping glasses for the shoulders, and the cupping glasses for the temples on the back of the head, and the cupping glasses for the elbows in the middle of the arms, and the cupping glasses for the calves." ‌
"And the bloodletting, it only draws blood from the thin, soft veins in the flesh, and for this reason, do not apply it to expel pus, nor should bloodletting be used with fire or without fire in any of the diseases that cause swelling until the body is completely cleansed.
"So if the need for bloodletting arises from a disease or habit, we use it at any time in the first half of the month, in the middle, and at any time.
"And this is because some people, if their blood increases to the point where they need to have it removed by bloodletting, find heaviness and dizziness in their head; among them are those who find swelling and redness in their face, head, and neck; among them are those who find wrinkles on their face, cheeks, and darkness and black spots under their eyes; and among them are those who feel the place of their veins.
"And among them are those whose laughter increases; and among them are those who taste blood in their mouth, who have a dry throat, and whose blood spurts; and among them are those whose sleep increases; and among them are those who see blood, redness, murders, wounds, and things similar to that in their sleep. Whenever we see any of this.
And specifically, if it is in the middle third of the month, we order bleeding after two or three hours have passed from noon. As for the benefit of cephalic bleeding, it benefits from heaviness in the head and water that flows to the eyes.
But it is fitting for this to be done after the body has been emptied of its contents, and this bleeding may serve as a substitute for phlebotomy. It should not be used by those who have cold brains or headaches, as it will cause them great harm.
Therefore, it is not advisable for the elderly and those with cold diseases of the head to use it, nor should those who are accustomed to it become pregnant, as this will cause forgetfulness in them.
Therefore, it is advisable that the bleeder be instructed to lower his hand with the bleeding cup a little towards the bottom, fearing the onset of forgetfulness. As for calf bleeding, it serves as a substitute for phlebotomy and saphenous vein phlebotomy.
Therefore, it is beneficial for asthma, shortness of breath, wheezing, and chest fullness and congestion. It is advisable to raise the calf bleeding slightly because if it descends too low, it will cause weakness in the heart and stomach.
The drawing of blood from the veins is beneficial for headaches, vertigo, toothache, and pain in the roots of the teeth, as a substitute for cupping. It is necessary to instruct the blood-letter not to insert his hand deeply with the needle lest he cut a vessel and cause hemorrhage.
As for phlebotomy at the wrist, it is beneficial for ulcers in the mouth, decay of the gums, and similar diseases in the mouth, and can replace cupping on the cheeks. Phlebotomy from the shoulders is beneficial for heat-induced delirium resulting from excessive drinking or fever.
As for phlebotomy at the ankles, it is beneficial for whatever cupping of the three large veins (basilic, cephalic, and median cubital) is beneficial for, such as bloodletting, hematoma, and pleurisy. This is because it draws blood from all those thin veins in the flesh and draws those thin veins from other veins thicker than them until the draw reaches the three thick veins.
It is necessary to instruct the blood-letter not to press with the needle, because the area is bare of flesh and below it are nerves and vessels. As for single phlebotomy that draws from the veins, it is beneficial for hemorrhoids and anal fissures.
It is necessary to command the cuppers that the cup be large and made of copper, for the place requires a powerful suction, and perhaps a glass cup may break, which has many conditions attached. As for the cups for legs, they lack fullness by half.
Because it draws blood from all parts of the body and benefits chronic pains in the kidneys, liver, bladder, and expels urine, and benefits hemorrhoids and nosebleeds, and establishes the position of the spleen and kidneys, except that it weakens the body greatly and causes coldness in most people. The benefit of cups for the spleen is close to the benefit of cups for the legs.
The method of applying the cups is to first place the cup empty and apply moderate suction, not prolonging the application of the cups, but placing them quickly and removing them quickly so that the blood flows into the area evenly. You continue this until you see the area turn red and open up.
When the redness of the blood appears, then it is necessary to apply suction gently and repeatedly, then observe the state of the bodies. If a person has thin flesh with wide pores, it is necessary to suction them once only, lest the place become inflamed.
The barber is commanded to widen the wound slightly and adjust the suture in movement and gentle motion, for if the blood is thick, it is necessary to suture twice: first, to open a path for the thin blood and its water, and second, to ensure the removal of the thick blood.
If the blood is very thick, the suture is repeated a third time to achieve fullness. In summary, if we want to remove little blood, one suture will suffice; but if we want to remove much blood, we suture more, especially if we judge the blood to be thick.
It is necessary to suture with a deep stitch, and the average depth of the stitch should be just the skin. The following are advised when applying ligatures: Avoid using ointments, water, or anything that might irritate the wound, especially if the skin is thick, hard, calloused, and the pores are small.
It is necessary to anoint the sites of the ligatures with soft, thin, and mild ointments. If it is summertime, use ointments such as alkheira oil, benzoin oil, sweet almond oil, or henna seed oil.
And as for if it is in winter, then like the oil of narcissus or the oil of cypress or the oil of peony or the oil of anemone and its likes, so if the advantage is thick and cold, let the oil be oil of almonds or oil of pine nuts or oil of sesame or oil of linseed and its likes.
And if the patient has wide wounds, it is necessary to prevent the oil from entering them. These patients should wash their wounds after cupping with rose water or cold water or water of wild grapes or water of myrtle or water of iris and its likes; but if their blood is very moist.
...their wounds should be washed with vinegar or water of ashes and sumac and its likes; but if their humors are thick, they should wash their wounds with old wine or water of almonds or linseed decoction or peony and its likes. And it is necessary to avoid cupping in the bath and after the bath.
Rather, it is necessary to use cupping an hour or two after leaving the bath, and no one should sleep after cupping, for whatever is harmful to the patient and the cupper before and after cupping.
You should first observe whether the patient is anemic or pale, and if bleeding and inflammation predominate. In such a case, he should take cooling foods like pomegranates, apricots with vinegar, cucumbers, eggplants, lemons, and similar foods, and his diet should include fried meat of the turtledove and similar dishes.
And if his temperament is cold, it is necessary to drink honey drink or the syrup of unripe eggplants, and to eat moderately scented wine that is between old and new, and he should be ordered to limit food, and his diet should include fried partridges, quails, thrushes, and pigeon breast. It is necessary for the drink to be more on the day of bleeding and purging than food.
And it may be necessary for some people to drink in some cases a certain infusion or musk medicine or shilajit before bleeding and purging, or after it, to strengthen the main organs and thicken the blood, but those who are prone to bleeding should not drink it.
As for bleeding that is without a bandage, it is the type placed on the liver, spleen, breasts, abdomen, pelvis, and the kidney area, because these organs do not tolerate being bandaged. This method aims to draw blood from one part of the body to another.
We place the cupping glass on the breasts during fever or use it to extract a cold odor from the limb in which there is pain, just as we place the cupping glass on the abdomen and chest, for it warms the limb and removes the pain by releasing that odor.
It can also be placed on the kidneys if they have swelling or stones, for its drawing power may open the blockage or remove the stone from its place. Similarly, it acts in this way when placed on the liver and spleen if there is a bad odor in them. These cupping glasses are sometimes used empty except for their seal.
It can also be used with fire, or filled with hot water in the case of swelling, by filling the cupping glass with boiling water alone or with water in which some suitable herbs have been cooked.
Then it is placed full on the area and secured, then removed and repeated as needed. This is the shape of the cupping glass used with fire:
Its mouth will be two open fingers wide as we have illustrated and its depth will be half a finger. On one of its sides, halfway up, there will be a small hole just large enough for the needle to enter. This needle is made of thick Chinese copper or yellow copper.
A flat, smooth pad so that the member is not injured when placed on it, with a hole in its center where the wax candle is inserted into the fire, and this bandage can be made larger or smaller depending on the disease.
And we use it for children and women, not for men or pregnant women, because the way to place this bandage in the fire on the member is to ignite a cloth or small wax candle from cotton, and place it on the center of the hard penis that is in the middle of the bandage.
The fire should rise to the bottom of the bandage so that the patient's body does not burn, then place it on the member and put your finger in the hole we mentioned until when we hold the bandage, we do not need to remove the finger.
The steam will come out from that hole and the bandage will soften in its place, then ignite the cloth again and repeat it if needed. As for the bandage used for the disease of scabies with water, there is no hard penis or hole in it.
It is only used by filling it with water and placing it on the limb alone, and this is its shape.
The more capacious the bag, the better it is for holding a lot of water.
Chapter Seventy-Nine.
On Ligation of Blood Vessels.
The blood vessel is used in most cases for the limbs on which the ligature cannot be placed, either because of their small size, such as the lip and the gum, or because the limb is devoid of flesh, such as the finger and the nose.
Its use is such that you should take from the blood vessel that is in clean, pure water, then leave it for a day and night in fresh water until it becomes dry and nothing remains inside it. Then the body is first purged with purgatives or by bloodletting, and then the affected limb is washed.
Until it becomes red; then the ligature is placed on it. If it swells and falls off, and if it is possible to touch the place with the bag, this is best for benefit. Otherwise, wash the place with vinegar, then with a lot of water, and squeeze it, for if the blood flow persists after the ligature falls off, this was oozing; so dip a piece of cotton in cold water.  />
He will place it on top until the flow stops; if there is excessive bleeding, he will sprinkle powdered alum or eggshells or similar substances from the cups until the bleeding stops, or half a peeled pomegranate will be placed on the spot.
Let it sit until the pomegranate adheres to the spot, for then the bleeding will stop. If another binding is needed, do not use that same bandage if possible; rather, if the bandage resists being tied again, wash the spot with fresh blood.
Or a needle may be inserted into the spot until it brings out some blood; if this is done, it should be left in place. If something of the blood adheres to the spot, it will fall off by itself. But if you wish to hasten its falling off, sprinkle on it a little sumac or salt or ashes, for it will then fall off at once.
Chapter Three.
In the section on fractures.
This chapter also includes what is needed in the practice of medicine, namely, setting broken and dislocated bones.
Know, my sons, that this chapter may be derided by the ignorant among physicians and the common people, as well as those who have not previously delved into the books of the ancients or read a word from them.
This art has become obscure in our country, and I have never encountered anyone proficient in it. I only learned from him what I have learned throughout my reading of the earliest books and by striving to understand them, until I extracted that knowledge from them. Then I devoted myself to practice and experimentation throughout my life.
I have illustrated for you in this chapter everything that my knowledge encompasses. My experience confirms this after I have brought it close to you, liberated it from the branches of prolixity, and summarized it to the utmost brevity; I have also made its meaning as clear as possible and provided you with many illustrations of the instruments used in it.
For this is an increase in explanation, as I have done in the preceding chapters, and there is no power but with Allah, the Exalted, the Great.
The First Section.
Before we begin describing the broken and dislocated bones, it is necessary to mention in the beginning of this chapter some general statements and sections. First, you must understand and comprehend them, as well as those who are eager to learn this noble art besides you.
I say, whenever it happens to anyone with a fracture, dislocation, or fall, it is necessary to hasten first to evacuate or discharge, or both. If the obstacle to doing so is weakness of strength, or if what happened was a child or an old man with hernia, or if it was very hot or extremely cold weather.
Then, he should restrict his food to cold porridge, bird meat, and grapes, and avoid drinking, fatty meats, overeating, and any food that causes blood flow until the worm is safe and there is no possibility of the mass moving to its place.
At that time, the patient should return to his original diet which he was used to. If the broken bone is in the stomach, then it is necessary for the patient to eat foods that are abundant, fatty, and substantial, such as herrings, rice, raisins, dried figs, and sheep's trotters. And eggs, dried fish, and thick drinks like this. With this diet, the bone will heal faster and better. Know that if the broken bones are in strong men or old people, they will never reunite and heal according to their original nature.
The bones and their density, and some bones may adhere and fuse together to such an extent that they become as soft as the bones of young children. However, nature grows on the fractured bone from all sides something resembling a hard shell that sticks to it and tightens it until parts of it become interlocked with each other.
And it connects parts together until it reaches the utmost strength and stability as it was initially, so that nothing hinders its functions.
Therefore, it is necessary to provide the patient with food that contains strength, softness, and hardness, as we have mentioned. And know that fractures vary according to the differences in limbs, for a fracture of the shin bone differs from a fracture of the skull, and a fracture of the ribs differs from a fracture of the spine.
Similarly, all the limbs differ from one another, and we will discuss each type of fracture in detail within its own chapter, distinguishing it from others. The type of bone fracture can also vary within itself.
Because a fracture can be a clean break without any fragments, or it can be a long bone fracture with or without displaced and undisplaced fragments. The fracture can also occur with a wound or laceration in the skin, or the fracture can be a greenstick fracture.
For each type of fracture, there is a specific method of reduction, which will be mentioned in detail in its place. What is called a bone break: swelling around it, tenderness, sensitivity to touch, and shaking upon touching it with the hand.
When there is no swelling, shaking, or sensitivity in the area when pressing on the bone and the patient does not feel much pain, it is likely that there is no fracture but rather a sprain, a minor fracture, or a wandering hematoma. In this case, it should not be moved by stretching or continuous tapping.
Instead, apply the medicines mentioned later on to the area when it is suitable, then wrap it with a soft bandage, and know that if the bone splinters or crumbles without any swelling occurring, it means that every part has separated from its companion.
It is necessary for you to hurry from your place to its alignment and straightening before it becomes hot with inflammation. If it does become hot with inflammation, leave it for days until the heat of the inflammation subsides, then align it in any way you can manage with gentleness and skill.
"Know that straightening and setting it is easier than the bone in which a fracture has occurred, then it will be difficult to handle what will be mentioned afterwards. If there are splinters in the bone, it is necessary to extend the broken limb from both sides, whether it is a hand or a foot.
"If it is a small limb, do this with your hand; if large, use two cords or a cord and your hand together. Place the limb on a flat surface in its natural shape until the broken bone fragment extends, at which point remove those excess parts from their places with all possible care and skill.
"Strive to ensure that you do not cause the patient pain, discomfort, or injury through your actions. Make sure one bone is aligned with its counterpart in the best possible manner. At this time, it is necessary to touch and feel them both with your hand. If you see anything amiss, correct and straighten it to the best of your ability.
"Avoid excessive extension and strong pulls, as many of the ignorant do, for they often cause burns or bruising in the limb, as I have seen them do repeatedly.
Then after the alignment, practice, and strengthening of that limb, rest, immobility, and caution are required to prevent the patient from moving it during waking hours or sleep, and during turning and all movements to their full extent, and that he should not attempt for the position of the limb to be one that ensures safety.
And that is because when he feels pain or discomfort in the limb's position, he should move it to a different position where he does not feel pain, and he may prefer for his position to be level and upright.
So that there is no discomfort in the limb if it swells, and as for how to strengthen a broken limb, I will describe it to you: know that broken limbs differ in their smallness and largeness and types, so whatever of them is small like the arm, finger, or ankle, etc.
So it is necessary that the bandages be broad and soft for a slender limb, and if it is rough like the thigh, back, or chest, then the bandages should be firm because wide bindings are required to secure the large limb and strengthen it from all sides with even pressure, without any gap.
Then begin after finishing the leveling by carrying the suitable plaster for that. In a soft bandage over the place of the fracture, then begin by wrapping the bandage in the same place of the fracture three or four turns according to what the limb requires, and tighten your hand slightly with the bandage, then go with it to the upper part of the fracture site.
Slightly less tightly than the fracture site, then separate the turn slightly from the fracture and gradually reduce the tightness a little until you take something right from the correct place, then take another bandage and also wrap it on the fracture site.
Wraps, then go with the turn to the lower part of the fracture, and your action in tightening the turn and wrapping it should be as we mentioned in wrapping the upper first, then place between the layers of soft bandages or cloth what is suitable for the swelling of the fracture.
If there is swelling, place nothing in it; otherwise, do not put anything in it. Then wrap another bandage over it and cover these turns with the firm splints of your garment if the limb has no inflammation or warm wound.
If there is swelling or inflammation, place upon it what will soothe that inflammation and remove the swelling, and leave it for several days; then bind it with the appropriate bandage, and let the bandage be made from half of the stalk of the plant known as 'al-'urad', prepared with skill, or let the bandage be made from the wood of the 'gharbily'.
Which is made from the fig or palm leaves, or aloe, or colocynth, and similar things that are available; and let each bandage be of this form and shape exactly as shown.
Except that the bandage placed on a fracture should be thicker and slightly wider than other bandages, as for the length of the bandage, it is made according to the size of the broken limb, whether large or small. The shape of the bandage is as follows:.
Then, another bandage is bound on top of the previous one in the same manner; then it is tied at the top with strong strings, as mentioned, that the binding should be tighter at the site of the fracture. And each time you move away from the fracture, the binding becomes looser.
And the strings should be of medium thickness and softness, and they should be made of wet cotton, especially because if the strings are thick like what you see the ignorant people doing, making their strings from strips of unraveled cotton, it is a great mistake.
The string is not suitable because it does not reach what you want, and it should not be less than a finger between the knots.
If the patient is hurt by the ends of the strings after being tied in the correct places, place soft cloth or fluffed wool under them so that nothing hurts him from it. And if the fracture is with a wound and there is a tear in the skin, we will mention its treatment separately.
Know that not every broken bone should be tied with strings from the first day, and this is because if the bone is large, it is not advisable to place strings on it except after five days or seven or more, depending on how confident you are about the occurrence of inflammation.
This is the nature of the bandages that were used by the ancients for fractures, dislocations, and sprains; a generally useful, concise bandage that fixes the fracture and suits most cases, especially children and women, because it does not overcome cold or heat.
He takes flour dust from the mouth of the mill during the rotation of the millstone, kneads it without straining it with egg whites, making his dough neither thick nor thin, then bakes it.
Another kind of plaster compels fracture, dislocation, and dislocation to heal. It is made from alum, vitriol, aqua fortis, rosemary, verdigris, and mercury, each a hundred dirhams; and from marjoram and patience a hundred dirhams; and from olive oil twenty-two dirhams; and from Armenian or Roman clay twenty dirhams. All the ingredients are ground and mixed with olive oil or egg white if the patient's temperament is hot. Then this plaster is used, for it has a good composition that quickly compels fractured bones to heal and is suitable for most people due to its moderation.
Another plaster that is also beneficial for fractures and dislocations: Take verdigris, alum, and white vitriol, each ten dirhams; marjoram and patience, each five dirhams; aqua fortis six dirhams; Armenian clay twenty dirhams. Grind everything finely, mix well, knead with water or egg white, and use it.
An ointment for joints and displaced bones, which causes a persistent pain in them and in the fracture and break of the bone. Cotton wool is taken, soaked in vinegar and cooked oil, and placed on the spot; this ointment does not have the power of compulsion.
But it is excellent in relieving burning pain and driving away particular pains; another ointment compels the broken bone, taking the leaves of the deaf fig and the wild almond tree, grinding all together and making a paste with them wet; another condensed ointment is used when there is an outpouring of bone fracture.
If you desire to dissolve the remaining pain, take equal parts of chamomile root, wild peony, hemp seed and poppy seed, grind them all together and knead with honey. If the limb is not inflamed, knead it with vinegar water or plain water and use it.
Another stronger ointment for dissolving [pain] is used when hard pain occurs with bone fracture, taking equal parts of chamomile root, hyacinth bean seed, flaxseed, liquorice, hemp seed, and peony root, grinding them all together.
The general practice is to bind and bandage with cold water, fresh water, or lead. All this depends on the heat of the limb and its rest, and as for splints, it was not mentioned in his book that they should be placed on a broken limb when setting it.
Except for the cerate made from wax and oil, which is described as being of moderate consistency between thick and thin, Galen recommended that in setting a broken limb, materials containing cavities should be used along with something warm like honey, syrup, or milk, and so on as we have mentioned.
A plaster for warmth and pain relief is beneficial. It is made from the gall of a castrated person or a bird's feather, gum mastic, salt, and water. It should be mixed, kneaded, and bandaged with it, and as for the amount that should remain in the bandage.
Then it is to be loosened, for if there is no pain or crackling and the broken bone does not move from its place, do not remove it after many days. But if it causes severe crackling or intense pain or swelling in that place.
In the text, it is emphasized to begin the treatment promptly in its appropriate time and not delay this matter, as neglecting it would be disastrous. Then, take a soft cloth or a moist marine sponge and soak it in cold water. Use it to wash the affected area until the pain subsides and the discomfort is relieved. Afterward, leave the limb to rest for an hour.
Then, place the wool soaked in vinegar and oil or rose oil on it, and secure it with a bandage for the night until the hot worm subsides and the swelling of the limb diminishes and its pain eases. Afterward, return it to a gentle and light bandage, not tightening it as much as before.
Continue treating it until it heals completely. If you observe that the worm, redness, pain, swelling, and all symptoms have disappeared and the limb requires bandaging and tightening again, then bandage it as you did initially. However, if no issues arise in the limb, as mentioned earlier.
Do not bandage it except after three, four, five, or seven days; it may even be left for twenty days, all depending on the condition of the limb as we mentioned earlier, until such time that the fracture demands and approaches the union of the flesh upon it.
He also increased it then in the swelling, more than the first swelling entirely, and he also increased it in irritating the food of the patient as mentioned before. So if you see the place of the fracture has become dry and hard beyond what is appropriate, know that the food is prevented from reaching it.
Wash it with clean water every time you dress it, and do this every three days. Reduce the swelling a little, for by doing so the nourishment will reach the limb and it will heal quickly. As for what the ignorant do by forcefully breaking the limb again.
If he was not properly set in the first place and is forcibly reset to a different position, that is an error on their part and a great delusion. Even if it were correct, the ancients would have mentioned it in their books and practiced it, but I have not seen any of them doing so. The correct thing is not to do that.
Chapter Two.
On fractures of the skull.
The types of fractures of the skull are many, their shapes varied, and their causes diverse. Some fractures occur due to a sword strike and may either heal completely or extend to the membrane beneath the bone. As with walking on wood.
And therefore this type of fracture is called a walking fracture. Or if the sword cuts off part of the bone and its surface only, without completing the cut to the other side, then this type of fracture is called a simple avulsion. The wound in these two types of fractures can be either large or small.
Among the fractures, there is one that can be blunt or crushed, and its cause may be a blow with a stone or falling on a stone or something similar. This fracture may either be an open fracture near the periosteum beneath the bone, or it may be in the bone itself.
And the wounds in these two fractures can also be either large or small. Among the fractures, there is one that may be hidden within the bone in the hairline and it is a sliding fracture.
And for this reason, this type of fracture is called a hairline fracture. Among these is a fracture that occurs from a fall or the impact of a stone and similar things, where the bone plate enters inside and becomes a depression in that place, just as copper shows when it is struck, part of it enters inside.
And this is most common in the soft bone of the head, such as the crowns of young children. All these types of fractures can have fragments that are detached and not detached, and we will mention their treatment in its place. All these types of fractures are known by the term "exposure.
And examine it with probes, and remove the rotten flesh from it. As for the sinewy type, it is recognized by uncovering the bone and wiping and tapping on it with a hammer, as the fracture appears black. As for treating the fracture, one should first look at the symptoms of the patient.
For if you see from his symptoms any obvious sign of fear, such as cold sweats, trembling, loss of consciousness, mutism, anxiety, severe fever, and the like, do not approach the patient or treat him, for death is inevitable with these symptoms in most cases.
And if you see symptoms that do not alarm you and you hope for his safety, then begin his treatment, which is: If the wounded person comes to you immediately after being wounded and this happened during the winter days.
It is necessary to make an effort to remove the bone before the fourteenth day, in any case, and if it is during the summer days, then hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, lest what is under the bone, the covering, becomes infected, leading to those symptoms that we have described.
It is necessary to cut off the damaged and infected part, as I have described to you, by amputating the head of the wounded person.
And expose the bone in any way you can, according to the shape of the wound and what is hidden from the patient. If you see bleeding or hot pus upon exposing the bone, it should be treated accordingly.
And that is to wash the area with vinegar in water and oil, and cleanse the wound until the pus settles and the bleeding stops. Then proceed to reinforce the bone and remove it, which can be done in one of two ways.
As for the first method, it is to cut the bone with a fine, sharp saw, as shown in this figure.
Then, use another cutter after this one, slightly wider than it, as shown in this figure.
Then use another cutter that is also wider than the previous one, and it should be from a set of various cutters with different widths and lengths, and their edges should be extremely sharp, made of Indian steel or good iron.
To use the saw on the section, so that you do not shake the head and hurt it; if the bone is hard and solid, you should bore around it before using the saws called non-curved saws, but they are called non-curved saws.
It does not exceed the bone of the skull beyond it, because the drill has a circular edge at its tip resembling a small ring or circle, which prevents it from sinking and penetrating the brain.
And you should take many of these saws, each one suitable for the thickness of that bone, until you have for every skull a saw suitable in length and width to the thickness of that skull. This is the image of three types. Of large, medium, and small saws:
As for how to bore around the fractured bone, it is to place the drill on the bone and turn it with your fingers until you know that the bone has been perforated; then move the drill to another place and make a hole at an interval between each bore equal to the thickness of the marrow or similar.
Then cut with the scissors what is between each of the two holes, and do that as much as you can manage on it, as we said, until the bone breaks, either by hand or by something else from some of the tools I have prepared for that purpose.
Like the scalpel and the blunt scissors, it is necessary to be extremely careful that nothing touches the hole or the cut from the hair, because if the bone is broken and freed from the hair, if it was attached to it, then it should be extracted and skinned.
And smooth the remaining bone with another tool that resembles the scissors, except it should be finer and more delicate than the other scissors, for if there is something left of the small bones and splinters, then remove them gently with what tools you have available.
Then treat the wound after that with lint and bandages as mentioned, and as for the other aspect of the work, it is a straightforward task far from error, as Galen mentioned and praised greatly, saying this: It is necessary for you to first begin by uncovering a part of the bone from the place where it broke until, when you have uncovered that part, you will see underneath it this oval cut and here is its image:
The lens part of it should be soft, not cutting anything, and the sharp part of it on its sides that go along the length as you see, so that the lens part is supported by the eyelid, and the face of the cutter is sharp on the bone, then strike the cutter from one side.
With a small hammer, until all the bone is cut completely as it turns, while you are safe from the covering, nothing bad happens to you. Even if the surgeon does not know the people and deceives them, yes, even if he was stupid.
If there is still something of the bone cover left in some places of the bone, scrape it off with the same lens part of the cutter and remove it completely by turning. It removes it without harm or fear.
As for if the bone fracture does not extend to the covering, and what was cut from the bone is its face, and there remains in it softness and spicules of bone, then it is necessary to scrape off that softness and remove those spicules with a bone rasp of various sizes, so that you can use them in every place according to its need and repair it as the work requires.
The bone and its shape, and it is advisable to use in your sawing first a wider blade for the bone, then use after it one thinner than it, and do not stop doing this until you reach using the thinnest and most precise of them all.
As for the rest of the small hairline cracks and fine fractures, it is advisable to use in each a treatment suitable for its healing, which is not hidden from those who have any knowledge in this craft, according to what we have written and clarified regarding large fractures.
If the covering remains exposed after cutting the bone, it is advisable to take a cloth of cotton according to the size of the wound and soak it in rose oil and place it on the mouth of the wound, then take another piece, either double or triple-layered. Then soak it in a drink and rose oil and place it on the first cloth, doing this with as little weight as possible to avoid making the bandage heavy; then use over it a wide bandage and tighten it only enough to hold the wound in place.
Keep it with this treatment for a day or two until the inflammation subsides; then remove it and use after that the medicines which have beneficial dryness, such as the roots of sows, wheat flour, and ground cardamom, and similar things. This is done by making pastes from these medicines.
It is preferable to leave the wound dry and as a whole, so use for it a medicine that heals without irritating. And be careful in your effort to treat the wound that it may be clean, not containing oil or pus, and do not let the hair gather in it, where dirt accumulates.
Because the hair, if it gathers on the surface of the brain, corrupts and spoils it, which causes the patient great harm. It may also appear on the top of the head when the bone is exposed, especially if neglected in treatment.
If blackness appears on its surface, and the patient shows the symptoms we mentioned, know that death is inevitable. Even if the blackness is caused by a medicine applied to it, and this medicine has such potency to cause this blackness.
Take one part honey and three parts rose oil, mix them well, and soak a bandage in it. Then place the bandage on the wound and treat it with various methods until it heals.
Chapter Three.
If the nose is broken, it must be set.
You should know that from the nose only the upper jawbones fracture entirely or one of them, because they are bones, while the lower part is cartilage and does not fracture; rather, it swells and bruises.
If one of its jaws is fractured, it is necessary for the little finger to enter through the nostril and straighten that break from inside with your index finger and thumb from outside until the nose returns to its natural shape. Let this be done gently so that no pain occurs to the patient due to you.
If the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and the finger cannot reach it, it must be straightened with a blunt object a little thicker than the finger. If the fracture is in both directions, do the same. And he should begin to treat it on the first day after the fracture.
If possible, otherwise after the seventh or tenth day when the inflammation has subsided, then enter a linen thread into the nostril if the fracture is in one direction, or two threads if the fracture is in both directions.
And let the thread be thick enough to fill the nostril opening. Some early physicians mentioned that the thread should be greased with fat and changed every day, but I do not see this as necessary. Rather, the thread should be dipped in egg white mixed with flour dust.
Then leave the tampon until the bone is solidified and the swellings have subsided, and you can insert into the nose tubes of wool threads after they are softened by boiling, so that their restraint for a nasal fracture is stronger and lest the patient finds it difficult to breathe.
And this is not necessary, if you wish you can make it or you can make tampons. If the nose swells during your work due to a hot iron, then narrow the nose with a cotton swab soaked in vinegar and rose oil or something from the ointments of Dioscorides.
If it does not swell from a hot iron, then it is necessary to narrow it from outside with finely ground flour and candied sugar mixed with egg white, then place a soft bandage on it, and do not bind the nose with anything tight, for if the nasal bones are fractured in small pieces.
Or if it shatters, then it is necessary to drill into it and remove it with the appropriate instrument, then suture the hole and treat it with what binds and adheres from the ointments suitable for that, for if there is an internal injury in the nose, it should be treated with a tampon and silver tubes should be used. Until he is healed.
Chapter Four
If the lower jaw is broken.
If the lower jaw is broken without a wound, and if it breaks only from the outside and does not break in two places, and splinters into pieces inside, its diagnosis is easy.
If the break is on the right side, the thumb of the left hand should enter the patient's mouth and do likewise if the break is on the left side, using the thumb of the right hand to raise the fragment from within outwards.
The other hand, placed outside the bone, controls its alignment. If the jaw fracture has broken into two parts, it is necessary to use a splint from both sides for stability until alignment is achieved. If it occurs in the teeth, it may cause shifting.
Or, after splinting, fasten it with gold or silver wire, then place a conical cap on the broken jaw, followed by a double bandage. Place a large, tight weight or a piece of leather boot sole equal in length to the jaw over the bandage. Then connect it from above according to what you prepare for its connection, ensuring it matches the suture until it does not break, and order the patient to rest and be calm, and make his food soft and light. If you think that something has changed in the shape by one of the ways, then hasten to open it on the third day.
Then connect it from above according to what you prepare for its connection, ensuring it matches the suture until it does not break, and order the patient to rest and be calm, and make his food soft and light. If you think that something has changed in the shape by one of the ways, then hasten to open it on the third day. Then mend that which you have sutured with flour mixed with egg white or fine semolina after removing the splint from it, and place on the wound a light bandage. As long as that bandage adheres to it and the bone's condition does not change, leave it alone.
Do not open it until it heals and the fracture strengthens, for this fracture often takes three months to heal. If there is heat in the wound during that time, then use what we have mentioned repeatedly to soothe it until the heat subsides.
As for if the fracture is accompanied by a wound, and if you see that the bone has shattered into pieces or fragments, then be gentle in removing those fragments with whatever tool is suitable for their removal. If the mouth of the wound is narrow, then widen it with the scalpel to the extent necessary.
Then, if those fibers are removed and nothing remains of them, cut the wound in the mouth if it is wide; otherwise, place one of the suitable bandages on it. And let the wound heal until it clears up.
Chapter Five
Set the fracture if it is broken.
The bone most commonly breaks in front of the elbow, at the end of the humerus, and its fracture occurs in one of three ways: either it breaks and fragments into two pieces without displacement, which is the easiest to set.
And if displacement occurs in the fracture, it is the most difficult to set; or if the fracture is accompanied by a wound, the procedure is as follows: If the fracture is without a wound, two assistants are needed—one to immobilize the limb containing the broken bone while the other extends the neck towards the opposite side.
Then, straighten the fracture with your fingers until it achieves the correct shape without any bend or distortion. If more extension is needed, place a ball of cloth or wool under the patient's elbow.
And the bone will be as much as you need, and extend and raise the arm, and press the ball with your hand until the fracture is straightened as needed. If you cannot pull the end of the bone out because it has gone deep, the patient should lie on their side.
توضع تحت منكبه مخدة متوسطة في العظم، ويكبس الخادم منكبه إلى أسفل حتى يرتفع عظم الترقوة الذي في العمق إلى فوق. فعندئذ فأصلح الكسر وسواه بأصابعك.
فإن أحسست أنّه قد انكسرت شظية من الترقوة وصارت تتحرّك، فإنبغى أن تشقّ عليها وتخرج تلك الشظية برفق. فإن كانت الشظية محتبسة في العظم، فاستخدم أحد المقاطع التي أعددتها لذلك. بعد أن تصير تحت الترقوة الآلة التي تحفظ الصفاق، وهي آلة من خشب أو من حديد، وهذه صورتها:
ملعقة ليس لها تعقير، ويكون عرضها على حسب ما تحتاجه من كبر العظم أو صغره. وأمّا طولها فعلى حسب ما يمكنك العمل به، ولتكون ذات طرفين: كما ترى الطرف الواحد أوسع والآخر أضيق.
If the cut of the wound which you have sewn near the bone exit is wide and the hot worm has taken refuge, sew the lips of the wound with stitches, and if the cut is narrow or you fear the hot worm, cover the wound with wool and bandages to the extent that it cuts into the wound.
If there is a hot worm, soak the cut in rose oil and vinegar or wine and carry it on; as for tightening of the bone if it is not from a wound or a cut, then use a poultice made of flour from the mill with egg white. Place the soft splint on it, then place a ball under the bandage if needed; then take a long strip, its width being about a handbreadth or similar, and place two layers of wool on the splint and poultice, then take a sheet from a thin board. Its width is three handbreadths, and in length likewise; then insert it into a cut (slit), then insert that cut with the board into the place of the strip on the fracture site, then tighten the strip over the fracture as you turn it. And the tourniquet on his neck, and beneath the corrective bandage, and beneath the patient's bandage, and it was wrapped around all sides. As you saw, the tightness controlled the fracture tightly, which is clear to you.
And all this is so that the fat does not melt away from the broken bone. And therefore, the patient should be checked every day to see if the bandage has loosened and the fat has melted away. If so, correct this by tightening the bandage, then make the patient lie on his back during sleep, and place a small cushion under the bandage at night.
So that his limb is raised off the ground, raising the fracture along with it by raising the humerus or tie his arm to his neck. Do not unbind the bandage unless there is an event of inflammation or worms after twelve days.
Then renew the plaster if you see a need for it. And wrap it tightly and leave it until the humerus heals and the fracture consolidates, and it becomes stronger and more stable, especially in twenty-eight days. And some people may heal in less time than that.
Chapter Six
When the shoulder is broken in its wide part, only its head breaks. But when it is broken in any other place or if the break occurs in the middle, this is called a displaced fracture.
Set it and return it to its natural shape in any way you can, then apply on the place the dust of the mill with egg white and soft resin, and put on top a double layer of linen, then put on it a broad piece of wood.
A splint should be as wide as the shoulder or slightly wider, so that if there is a depression under the splint in any of the places on the shoulder, fill this depression with soft resin until the splint lies evenly, then bind it tightly from above with a long bandage.
Tie it firmly and secure the splint so that it does not move from its place, and check the bandage every day; whenever the bandage loosens, tighten it again and set the splint if it has moved from its place, and let the patient lie on his healthy side, and the shoulder heals in twenty days.
A day or twenty-five days; if this time has passed, the tendon will have healed and you are safe, for it is among the bones whose rupture and tearing are not feared. If a piece of bone protrudes from the bone and was under the skin, it will be broken off. And do as mentioned in the treatment of fractures to relieve the pain, if something like that happens.
Chapter Seven.
It is necessary to set a fracture of the chest.
The chest may fracture in the middle, and this does not usually cause much damage, but its edges are more likely to fracture and protrude. If it fractures in the middle, there will be a tendency to lean downwards, accompanied by severe pain, difficulty breathing, and coughing.
There may be bleeding, and the fracture will be evident in the broken bone. The patient should lie on his back with a pillow under his head, then press the ribs together and bring the arms close to the sides, adjusting as needed to make it straight.
And continue until the bone returns to its proper shape, then apply a bandage and splint on top of it. Place a board made of reed or similar material in the sole of the shoe after cutting a slit in it. And then it is skillful in tying it on the broken bone so that it does not slip, and pass the bandage around the torso to the back several times and tighten it firmly, then check the bandage at all times, and whenever it loosens, tighten it again.
And if the need arises to remove it when swelling, pain or inflammation appears in that place, hasten to remove it and cut the bandage and treat what has appeared from it according to its treatment, then replace the bandage if you see fit. And turn him and apply firm pressure until he recovers.
Chapter Eight.
In fractures of the fingers, know that fractures in them occur at rough places located behind the back and their edges facing forward; only the thumb does not show swelling for it is short. Knowing this is not hidden from touch during examination with the fingers.
And set it so that the fracture is aligned with the fingers on the possible face until the shape becomes balanced as needed, then bandage and tighten the broken bone with a splint if necessary, for if the finger fracture is inclined inward, pain will be severe to the patient.
And the fracture is like a fracture that presents with swelling, for the bone swells and also presents difficulty in breathing and coughing, as well as profuse bleeding, and this is difficult to treat, and various methods have been attempted in its treatment.
Some say that the patient's food should be made to produce gas and flatulence, so that the abdomen swells and expands, pushing the fracture outwards. But we reject this, as it might cause inflammation if none has occurred yet; if inflammation is already present, it will increase and intensify it.
Some say that a blistering agent should be applied to the area and then rubbed vigorously, as if measuring it; but there is concern that the agent might draw blood due to the weakness of the area. Others say that the area should be covered with wool soaked in hot oil.
A pad is placed between the legs until it fills up and makes the bandage even when tied around a cylinder; then the patient is treated with the same diet and medicine as for swelling, for if the patient is in great pain and cannot endure it. The bone was splintered, causing a painful and frightening perforation in the patient, so we must cut into the area and expose the broken shard, then insert beneath it the apparatus that preserves the preceding piece whose description follows, and cut the bone with a saw, and remove it.
Then we will bring the edges of the wound together if it is large, using stitches and treat it with poultices until it heals. If during this process a hot worm appears, hurry to gather the seeds of the rose in fat and place them on the wound, and also treat the patient with what expels the worm from within.
And he should be placed on his unaffected side until he recovers.
The Ninth Chapter.
In the case of a fracture in the back and neck.
As for the bones of the neck, if they are fractured, it is a minor affliction compared to what can happen to them, and worse than that is dislocation. Similarly, the vertebrae of the back; so if this happens to someone and you want to know whether he will recover or not. ‌ Look, if you see his hands have become weak, shriveled, and lifeless, and he cannot move them or extend or close them, and if they are cold or pierced by a needle and he does not feel it and there is no pain in them, know that in most cases he will not recover; he is lost.
And if he moves them and feels the bone and membrane, then know that the disease of the bone has left and the patient will heal with treatment. But if the backbone is affected like this, and you want to know whether it also heals or not.
Look at his feet; if you see that they have become numb and experience what happened in the hands, then when he lies on his back, wind and flatulence come out involuntarily. And if he lies on his stomach, urine comes out involuntarily. And if he lies on his back and tries to urinate but cannot, then know that he is dying, so do not bother with treating him. But if none of this happens, the condition is milder. The treatment for what has happened is to apply a poultice to relieve the heat in the inflammation.
To put on the sore, fresh oil of rose or with roasted egg yolk, three times a day until the heat subsides. Then apply one of the strong bandages, wrap it firmly with a bandage, and order him to rest and remain still.
And he should not sleep except on the side that does not have pain until he is healed. If there has been a fracture in the bone due to a fall, it is necessary to split the skin and remove that bone. Then, if the wound is large, join its lips by sewing them together, and treat with bandages soaked in salt until it heals. If another bone of the jaw, which is the lower jaw, is broken, a probe should be inserted from the left hand into the mouth.
And with the other hand, smooth out the broken bone as much as possible until it is straightened. Then place on it a pad and a splint if necessary, and bind it.
If you feel a fracture in it, split the skin and remove it, and treat the wound with the treatment mentioned until it heals.
Chapter Ten.
Treatment of a rib fracture.
Rarely do the ribs fracture, and if they do, the fracture is that they split at their ends and crack along their length, and they bend inward, exposing the cause of pain in the place, weakness, and swelling in the leg from which the fracture occurred.
Wrap it in your hand until you reach the break, then examine its shape; if the break is only at the ends, smooth that break according to how you can align it until it resembles its natural shape.
If the break is in the length or if it has gone inside, place the patient on his stomach until you can reduce that break; then, when you have aligned it, apply a bandage to it, and place on it a splint of wood or leather and tighten it firmly.
Do not fear the displacement of the break or the loss of the splint, and fill the spaces between the fingers with what will allow the tightening to take place uniformly. Advise the patient to sleep on his back or on the healthy side, for if he experiences heat.
Stop extending it and reduce it until the heat subsides and place on it what will soothe it, as mentioned earlier; then return to reducing it and tightening it as necessary. If there is a splinter in the bone or something detached from its ends, do not remove it.
Do not touch it, but align it from outside as we mentioned, and leave the tightening until it heals.
Chapter Eleven
On the setting of bone fractures.
If the bone between the elbow and the shoulder breaks, set it in one of two ways. One way is to take a flexible reed of medium hardness and shape it like this:
Then attach two ropes to its ends, suspend it from a high place, and let the patient sit on a chair. Then place his broken arm on the reed so that its end is fastened in the middle of the reed's curve. Afterward, hang something heavy over it.
Or have a servant hold it below, and then the physician will straighten the fracture with his hands until the fracture returns to its proper position. The other method is for the patient to lie on his back, with his hand hanging by a rope from his neck.
Then order two servants: one to hold the area above the fracture with his hands, and the other to hold below it. Each of them should pull in his direction. If you want a stronger pull, tighten a rope below the fracture and another rope above it, and let each servant pull in his respective direction.
If the fracture is near the shoulder, place one end of the rope under the elbow and the other under the fracture towards the arm; likewise, if the fracture is near the elbow, place the rope in that location and on the elbow itself.
Then, align the fracture gently until it is properly aligned and unified nicely. If there is no sign of infection, secure it; but if there is a sign of infection, leave securing it until the seventh day, then place on it a woolen cloth soaked in vinegar and rose oil.
Until the infection subsides, then secure it. The method of securing is to place a pad on the fracture, then place a new linen bandage over the pad. Then join the arm in the same manner as the hand, and place the hand openly on the shoulder.
Place the linen and the securing apparatus on the arm and hand so that the hand is in the position of a fist, unless something prevents you from doing so. And if nothing changes with the broken bone, then use a splint; but if you fear that something might change, then use a splint.
This is done by placing a splint on the fracture itself, which should be wider and stronger than other splints. There should be the width of one finger between each splint, and the length of the splints should be according to the fracture, with an addition of three fingers from both sides.
And then, apply the second traction on the jaws, which I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
And it is that your traction should be stronger than the site of the fracture.
And each time the fracture moves, the traction becomes less. If you see the position of the jaws and the traction as we mentioned at the time of your traction for the limb from your hourglass, then act accordingly.
If you fear the hot inflammation, leave the traction and the jaws until the seventh day as we mentioned, then examine the ligature every three days so that no swelling or distention occurs at the site, or food is prevented from reaching the limb due to excessive traction. All this is treated according to what we have mentioned.
If you are confident that none of this will happen, then do not remove the ligature until many days have passed. The patient should lie on his back with his hand on a pillow, and a moderate pack of wool is placed under the limb.
Check it every night or day to ensure that the shape of the fractured limb does not collapse, and the ligature does not become loose; all this is treated with your effort. And prepare the patient's food according to what we have recommended, that the food should be light at first so that if the bone wishes to heal, it will do so.
It is necessary that his food be bitter, for it is the custom of the toes and feet to become inflamed after forty days; then it is necessary to apply poultices and use the bath, and treat with the plasters that are suitable for this, if the fracture is twisted and swollen.
Do not apply a bandage to him for fifty days or two months.
Chapter Twelve
In the case of the arm being broken
The arm consists of two bones, one of which is called the ulna and is small, being in front of the elbow; the other is large, lying beneath the small one from below. Sometimes only the large bone breaks, sometimes only the small one, or they may break together.
When the upper small bone breaks, its setting is easy and healing faster; when the lower one breaks, it has a poor fracture and slow healing; and if both bones break together, healing is delayed if the broken bone is the lower small bone.
The physician should make the setting soft and smooth with care until it is aligned; if the large bone is broken, the setting must be firmer; and if both bones are broken, the setting must be very strong.
The hand should be placed when stretching and lengthening on a pillow, with the back of the hand raised higher than all the fingers, and the thumb lower than the rest of the fingers, and the patient sitting cross-legged on himself.
And the pillow should be with him in height so that the patient does not feel discomfort.
Then, an assistant stretches the arm from below either by hand or with a bandage, and another assistant stretches it from above in the same way. The doctor then aligns the bone until he returns it to the best possible shape. If there is a fracture of the bone, it will rupture.
Strive to return every displacement to its place, for if there appears in it a clean fracture and the skin does not allow you to straighten it, cut it open as we mentioned before, because if the break is with a wound, you have provided an exit for it.
Then, take the treatment from there, for if it appears in the first straightening and a hot burn occurs, make an incision with a lancet anointed with rose oil and white wax, and let it be moderate between the skin and the flesh, and tighten the bandage on it lightly until the pain subsides.
Remove the styptic and place the prepared cautery made from flour mill waste mixed with egg white. Then, carry the cauteries, and let the cautery placed on the fracture be a little wider and stronger. Know that the number of forearm cauteries is usually six.
The fracture was in the shin bone, either alone or in both legs together. Then make your bandage on the site of the fracture stronger and tighter, and whenever you tighten the bandage upwards or downwards, make the bandage slightly looser as mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
The bandage applied on the fracture should be soft and moist, not very hard. The thread used for tightening should be made of moderate thickness cotton between fine and coarse, as we described. Check the limb and the bandage after some days.
If something requiring correction occurs, such as a blister appearing on the limb, it is necessary to soak the limb in clear water until that blister subsides, and then leave the limb unbandaged for one night to rest. Afterwards, bandage again.
If the bandage has become too tight or the bone has moved or nearly so, you must correct it all with your effort. Also look if food does not reach the limb due to excessive tightness, then loosen it slightly and leave it for some days until nourishment reaches it, then bandage it again.
If nothing was applied to the patient from what we mentioned, it should not be uncovered except after twenty days or thereabouts. Then tie the patient's hand to his neck, and let his arm be moderate, and preserve his strength from disturbing movements, and make him sleep on his back.
Know that this fracture of the arm heals in thirty days or forty, and sometimes in twenty-eight days; all this depends on the patient's constitution and strength.
Chapter Eleven.
In Fracture of the Palm of the Hand and the Fingers.
The palm of the hand and the fingers are rarely affected by fracture, but swelling affects them frequently. So when the palm or finger is affected by fracture or swelling,
Then the patient should sit on his knees, with a chair placed in front of him at an equal height.
Then he places his hand on it, stretched out; and the servant of bones sets the broken ones in place, and the physician straightens them until they are joined together well. At that point, it is necessary to bear the splint and bandage, unless there is a hot inflammation. Then a heavy bandage is placed on top according to the location.
And he placed it in a soft bandage, so if the break is towards the inside of the wrist, make a half-ball from the bandage and tell the patient to squeeze it with the broken hand, then bind it with a long bandage.
And let the splint be made of soft leather, so that it can adapt to the skin with all the movements of the wrist, and bind it as needed. If the break is on the outside, it is necessary to make the splint from above and another splint from below in the wrist, so that the hand remains open and erect.
Then carry the bandage as the hand rotates and weave it between the fingers with a ribbon, for if the break is in one of the phalanges, then the splint should be straightened to its proper position, then bind it with the wrist. And if you want to make him an erect small splint to stabilize the break.
And do not move it if the break is in any of the other fingers, such as the middle finger or the little finger, or the thumb or the index finger. Then straighten and bind with the adjacent healthy finger, or bind all together on a splint, which is better, or place a small erect splint on them.
"As we said in the chapter on abscesses and examination, when you forcefully press or after pressing the hot swelling, if it is as it should be, then respond accordingly whenever such a thing happens.
"Chapter Fourteen.
"On the Forced Setting of Femur Fractures.
"The femur bone often fractures and is noticeable to the touch as it rotates forward or backward, and setting it involves placing a band above the fracture and another below it, with the patient lying on their back.
"Then, each band is pulled gently in its direction to achieve this, if the fracture is in the middle of the bone. But if it is near the end of the femur, a soft band should be placed, either from wool or similar.
"Near the end of the femur towards the knee, one band should be placed above and the other below the fracture. Similarly, if the fracture is near the ankle, the band should be close to the ankle so that the pull is downward. Then the doctor straightens the bone with both hands until it returns to its natural shape.
"The bone will heal well, so at that time it should bear the load and pressure if there is no hot swelling in the limb. If a swelling occurs, leave it for days until the hot swelling subsides, then return to treating it.
And as for tightening it, it is necessary to place a broad metal brace on the fracture, twice or thrice its width, with some excess, then bind the leg so that the ankle is at the base of the calf, and insert a long thread between the thigh and the leg near the ankle from below, and the ends of the thread should protrude from both sides.
Then wrap the remaining part of the brace around the leg and the thigh, then place the same splint on the thigh in the location of the fracture, making one splint on the shinbone, then fill the gap between the thigh and the leg with soft bandages to ensure uniform tightness.
Then begin the strong tightening from the middle of the fracture with three or four turns, and as you move away from the fracture site with the bandage, let your tightening be less, softer, and weaker.
Then turn to the ends of the thread that you inserted between the thigh and the leg, tie with it what is above it from the splints, then pass the ends of the thread to the bottom until they reach the ankle, also tighten with them the ends of the splints from the other side.
If the ligature slips from its place, then leave the compression on it as long as there is no swelling or inflammation or puffiness and so forth. If any of these occur, hurry to release it and correct whatever happens from that completely as we have mentioned repeatedly.
If there is a splinter stuck in the bone, it should be smoothed out if possible; otherwise, break it and remove it, and treat the wound as previously mentioned until it heals. This fracture may extend from the thigh without the addition of the shank by the ligaments.
As mentioned in the case of the toe and the finger, except that breaking it thus does not expose to danger the ligaments; even if it is broken alone without adding the shank, it is necessary for its owner to have a permanent limp.
Know that the thigh becomes severe after fifty days, or a little more or less, all of this depending on the difference in mixture and other conditions.
Chapter Fifteen
On fractures of the ankle joint.
The ankle joint is rarely exposed to fractures, but it is often subjected to dislocation. If it is exposed to a fracture, it will be either broken or separated into its parts, with or without injury.
And stand on that whole with skill, and force her to make level what is separated from its parts by the fingers until they meet and are connected according to the ability of making it level and smooth and perfect, then place the bandage and place on it a circular splint if needed.
And place another bandage on top of that, then treat all the conditions we described for other fractures, such as heat and similar treatments, by addressing each problem with what is suitable for it until it heals.
Chapter Sixteen.
In the Treatment of Fractures of the Shinbone.
The shinbone has two bones, one of which is thick and is called the tibia, while the other is thin and is called the fibula; both of them can be subject to fractures similar to those that affect the arm bones. Therefore, its treatment is the same as that of the arm, with one difference: if both bones are fractured, the leg will turn in all directions. If only the thinner bone is fractured, the leg will turn forward. If the thicker bone is fractured and this occurs from below, it is obvious to you.
Use extension and leveling, as well as binding with splints, in the same manner, except that if the fracture of the shinbone is a complex one with many splinters, the bandage should be lighter and softer, and you must exert less effort in its treatment.
In the leg, there is an additional task beyond the arm, which is that when you have straightened the splints and finished all your work on it, take two syringes from the reed used for plastering rooms placed between the planks or made of date palm leaves or similar.
Choose from it that which has little thickness and is not flimsy, and let its length be the length of the leg from the ankle downwards. Then wrap around each one a bandage twice along its length, placing one on the leg and the other on the opposite side.
And let it be from the ankle to below the foot, then tie the syringes in three places along their length: on the ends and in the middle. For with this bond, the leg is prevented from leaning to the right or left, and it sets firmly. Wooden pegs can also be used along the length of the leg.
And in it, place something to prevent movement, and this should be done especially in a fracture if there is also a wound. Then examine the leg daily and give it careful attention against infection or swelling or anything else like that. When something like this happens, treat it as appropriate until recovery. The bone of the leg will mend within thirty days or thereabouts.
Chapter Seventeen.
On the Fracture of the Bones of the Leg and the Fingers.
As for the heel, it does not commonly suffer a fracture of its bone, but as for the bones of the leg, they may suffer a fracture, and the fingers also rarely suffer a fracture; rather, they usually sustain a dislocation in most cases.
If the bones of the leg suffer a fracture and you see that some of those bones have protruded over others, let the patient place his foot on the ground as if he is walking, then rise and put your foot on what has protruded from those bones, then straighten and align them.
Until they return to their places, then take the splints and bandages from above and place under the sole of the foot a small thin board with two flat sides; then bind the foot tightly with them after unwrapping it from its covering and everything else needed.
After three or four days have passed, release the bandage, for you will find the bones level, whether they were broken or dislocated; then proceed as you see fit. But if one of the fingers is fractured, force and align it as described to you in the section on forcing the fingers of the hand.
Then make a splint for the broken finger along its length and slightly wider than it, then place this board under the foot which I have described to you and secure it firmly, for if it is broken from two bones or three or more.
And make on each finger a splint to its length, fitted into a soft bandage, and secure the board under the sole of the foot so that each end of the board protrudes from the underside of the foot for a good fit.
And it is necessary for you to remember not to neglect any of the treatments we have mentioned for all fractures and for each condition as appropriate.
Chapter Eighteen.
For the fracture of the woman's pelvis, the pubic bone, and the man's penis.
When a woman's pelvis is broken, seat her in a squatting position, then tilt her gently towards her back until she holds herself from behind, and then fill the vagina with cotton so that it becomes like a ball inside her vagina.
Then shake the woman, and her strength will rise a little at a time, for that cotton will come out until it is at the entrance of the vagina like a ball, and the bone fracture will return, then place a cushion on her back so that when she wants to urinate, she removes the cotton with the pad until she urinates.
And it is returned to the way you first entered, then return to its initial position. Do this for seven days or thereabouts, as it will heal. If you wish, take two small tubes of reed and insert them into her mouth, placing the entire tube in her vagina.
Then blow into the tube with force until the tube inflates inside the vagina, and the fracture will return. Then bind it with cotton and leave it for the number of days we described until it heals. As for when a bone is broken in the anus of a man or woman, this method should be used to set it.
This method should be applied as we described for a broken bone in the ankle, and do not neglect the correctness in these strange fractures that rarely occur, especially for those who have some experience and understand this book well. The fracture itself will guide you in most cases.
And understand the correct way to set and bind it, and as for a man's penis if it is broken, take a small tube of hazel wood and insert the penis into it, then place a bandage of linen over it and let it heal for three days or thereabouts.
Chapter Nineteen
In the setting of fractures with accompanying wounds.
It is necessary for one who has a fracture with a wound, especially if the bone is large like the thigh or shin, to expedite its setting as soon as possible, for it is assisted by the conditions of setting as we have presented.
If the wound is bleeding, it is necessary to quickly cut around it by drawing a powdered cautery over it, if nothing else is available. Then proceed with setting the fracture that day itself and do not delay it.
If there is no hot swelling, but if there is hot swelling, leave its setting until the ninth day so that the hot swelling subsides. Do not approach it on the third and fourth days of the fever, for he is subject to unpleasant symptoms.
If the broken bone is exposed to the skin, it is necessary to return and straighten it with your hand gently and moderately. If returning and straightening it by hand is not possible for you, then return it using this tool, which is made of iron, its length being seven or eight fingerbreadths long. Show it to the extent of the wound.
Therefore, it is necessary for the doctor to take from it three or four times as much as needed for treatment in each type of fracture, and let them be round, so that there is a little oiliness in them, lest they split when pressed during work time.
They should have sharp ends and be thick at the top and very thin from the middle to the bottom, and this is their shape.
And it is called in Greek "πηρος" (piros), meaning a small splint; therefore, its sharp end should be placed at the end of the bone and pushed with it once until when the bone returns to its position somewhat, then saw off the ends of the fracture evenly.
If the broken end is thin and the instrument did not grasp it well, it should be cut until the instrument can get hold of it. And if you cannot return the bone as described with the splint, then cut it according to the sections we mentioned.
Or cut it with one of the saws as best you can, then scrape off what remains in the bone from the skin and thin membranes. If after returning the bone the patient experiences severe pain, know that the bone has not returned to its natural place.
If you are able to return it to its natural place, do so, for the patient will benefit greatly from this. And if the bone is broken, soak a bandage in a solution of black grapes and especially if it is summer, do not apply any ointment or anything containing oil on the wound.
Lest it should putrefy or decay, then use aloe vera after you finish setting the bone and leave the wound exposed, cutting with scissors into small holes to match the size of the wound.
And be very careful not to close the wound with the fracture, for many ignorant physicians do this and cause their patients either death or a serious illness such as gangrene or tetanus. Therefore, suture the wound gently and in contrast to the closure of other fractures.
If the wound is small or if it is a large wound and you fear some of the unpleasant consequences that we have described, and you find the pain in the place to be disturbing, then it is not proper to apply aloe vera on it. Instead, make bandages from firm cloth in the place of aloe vera and close it with them.
And if after a day or two you see that the wound has begun to generate pus, remove the cloth soaked in the solution and then use honeycomb and cotton that we are accustomed to using for healing wounds such as honeycomb and similar, and it is appropriate for you to moisten the bandage.
The wound should be examined every evening and morning until it heals and clears, and the limb should be set in a position that allows the pus to drain easily downwards. If many days have passed for the wound and it has not closed or the pus has not stopped flowing from it, know that there are small bone fragments present.
It is necessary to probe the wound with a hook; if any of those fragments are free, remove them and extract them. If they are not free and the limb is swollen and painful, crush them, cut them off, and remove them by every means possible.
If the wound develops gangrene, a sore, or any other form of corruption and foulness, it is necessary to treat each of these conditions with the appropriate remedy that has been mentioned in its relevant chapter.
And what you should be aware of, and keep in mind, is that if a large bone breaks, such as the femur or the humerus, and similar major limbs, do not attempt to extract it or remove it. Because often death results from attempting to remove it, leave it until it is absorbed, which may happen after twenty or thirty days.
When treating a wound, if you see a place for treatment, then treat it; otherwise, leave it alone.
Chapter Twenty
In the treatment of adhesions that occur as a result of some fractures.
This adhesion often occurs after the fracture, especially if it is near the joints, and it distorts the shape of the limb, sometimes preventing it from performing its natural function.
If the adhesion is recent, use medicines that contract, such as patience, milk, honey, myrrh, aloes and similar, taking some or all of them and mixing with a contracting drink, egg white or vinegar.
And place them on the adhesion with irritation and bind them firmly, leaving the bandage for several days, then remove it and repeat another until the adhesion disappears, if God wills. Or bind a firm lead sheet to it.
For lead has the property of removing everything that occurs in the limbs, so if the adhesion becomes hard and the necessity to remove it increases, then cut into it from above and excise or cauterize the resulting lump until it disappears and treat the wound until it heals.
Chapter Twenty-One.
In the treatment of fractures, if it is reduced and the limb remains thin afterwards compared to its original shape.
If a bone fracture is reduced and the limb remains thin and weak afterwards, this can be due to many reasons. One reason is the excessive unraveling and tying of bandages in an incorrect manner, or the excessive tightening of bandages to the point where food cannot reach the limb, or excessive movement in the wrong time, or the scarcity of blood and its weakness in the patient's body.
The treatment for this is to nourish the patient and improve his constitution until blood increases in him, and to use the bath and introduce joy and happiness into him, then to place a plaster on the limb so that it draws abundant or continuous food to it, or to continually rinse it with cold water. Until the nutrition flows into it and it returns to its natural shape.
Chapter Twenty-Two.
In the treatment of broken bones, if they are reduced but do not perform their function as needed.
When a limb is exposed due to the absence of a bone or because of a broken bone, or due to swelling and inflammation, it appears in this way. However, the limb has not deviated from its natural function, so it is not appropriate to accept the opinion of those who claim that a limb can be broken from its base. For many ignorant doctors and quacks have done this in our country.
This act is highly reprehensible and leads to great deception, easing the disease. But if the swelling and inflammation are severe, it is necessary to apply water in which mallow leaves such as hollyhock and its root, and king's-spear have been boiled, and similar things.
It is compressed with the soft mucilage of the well-made diachylon or the root of hollyhock is taken and mixed with chicken fat and castor oil and it is compressed with it, or the leaves of unripe figs are taken and mixed with pigeon dung and similar drugs that break up tumors.
And the persistent thin silk that is available in the hands is used to dissolve swelling, and the movement of the limb in all directions during all times is utilized. If the swelling has advanced and intensified and hardened, and necessity forces its treatment with iron.
It is necessary to open the top, separate the bone connection, and cut what remains of the tumor or bone with thin sections, using care and effort in doing so. Then treat the wound with what was mentioned until it heals.
Chapter Three and Twenty.
A fracture is a dislocation of the joint from its place, which hinders movement and distorts the limb's shape, causing the patient severe pain. Therefore, as soon as someone suffers a fracture, it is necessary to hurry from that moment until he is treated.
One should not delay treating it, for if delayed, the location will swell and make returning the fracture difficult. Therefore, it should not be delayed or moved or extended when it swells, as it often causes the patient discomfort and severe pain.
But if this happens, it is necessary to hurry to place the patient in a sitting position and leave him until the swelling subsides somewhat. Then dip the limb in hot water and oil, and return it with care, treating each part as mentioned for its respective area.
The sections on fractures have also been arranged according to the location of the break from the top of the body to the bottom.
Chapter Twenty-Four
In the treatment of lower jaw fracture.
If the fracture is incomplete, it rarely heals completely; its removal will result in one of two outcomes: either the pieces will be dislodged slightly and heal with minimal scarring, or they will be removed entirely until healing occurs. Towards the chest, so that the patient's saliva flows and he cannot hold it back, nor can he speak clearly due to his tongue slipping; but if its removal is easy, it usually returns to its place more easily.
However, if the removal is complete, it is necessary to hasten its return with speed and not delay it; this means that an assistant holds the patient's head while the physician inserts his index finger into the base of the fracture within the mouth if the fracture is on one side.
Or he may insert both of his index fingers if the fracture is from both sides, and with the rest of his fingers from outside, he aligns it and instructs the patient to heal his fracture and let it go in both directions, while the physician aligns the fracture and pushes it until it returns to its place.
It is difficult to return it, especially if all the parts are together. Therefore, use water and oil with the paste until they become easier to remove. Do not delay their removal, as we said. If they return and are leveled and attached to the patient's mouth without breaking off, then place on them patches of leather along with a cone made from wax and oil and rose petals.
Then tie it with a bandage made of soft fabric, so that the patient sleeps on his back and his head is supported between two pillows to prevent him from moving to the right or left or exerting himself in chewing; rather, make his food very soft.
Until the pain disappears and the jaw is healed, let him eat whatever he desires, using a bandage for that purpose, and not open his mouth when eating, drinking, or speaking until the jaw is fully healed and cured.
If it is difficult to return the jaw, especially if it dislocates at any time and does not return to its place, then often swelling and persistent inflammation occur, and sometimes the patient's belly protrudes, or the testicles become hot with heat; if you see this, know that it has deteriorated.
"Many die from this condition within ten days.
Chapter Twenty-Five
"On the treatment of nasal fracture and injury to the cheekbone.
"As for the nose, it does not break from the inside due to its connection with the chest; however, it may break towards the outside, and this is evident by touch. It is necessary for the patient to lie on their back and extend their arms.
"Then press the area strongly with your palm, for it will return to its place; then place a compress and bandages on it, securing them well. As for the part of the nose that connects with the cheekbone, it rarely dislocates. If it does happen one day, it should be returned and adjusted as mentioned earlier, and prepared as you know.
"Then place a compress, bandages, and splints on it, and instruct the patient to keep still and quiet until healed. With this treatment, the cheekbone's fracture can also be returned to its place if it has moved.
Chapter Twenty-Six
"On the reduction of a fractured cheekbone.
"Know that the cheekbone only breaks in three ways: one, it may break towards the temporal region downwards; second, it may break towards the chest; and thirdly, it might break upwards above the cheekbone, which is rare.
It should not be directed to the back in the area of the shoulder, nor should it be directed forward towards the nerve. What is most likely to leak and exit is downward towards the navel, especially in those with little flesh, because it exits quickly in them and enters quickly.
As for those with much flesh, it is contrary to that; meaning it exits slowly and enters slowly. Sometimes a blow or fall may bruise the abdomen and cause intense heat, leading one to believe that it has leaked. It is necessary to examine this until you are certain of its soundness.
Then proceed with its treatment, and the leak is recognized if it is downward towards the navel by examining between the ruptured abdomen and the healthy one, for you will find a clear difference between them. You will also find the head of the intestine twisted, and below the navel when the head of the intestine is touched, it feels like an egg.
The patient should not be able to raise his hand to his ear or move it in all directions, and similarly, if the leak is towards the chest or above, you will find this clearly evident upon touch, as nothing can hide it.
"And this fracture may be easy to treat if it is simple or the patient is a child. The method of treatment is for an assistant to raise his hand above and you should bring your hand under the limb and lift the joint strongly upwards to its place, while the assistant raises his hand and extends it upwards.
"Then he presses it down, and it returns quickly. If it does not return as mentioned, and the fracture has been present for many days, it is necessary that the patient soaks in hot water and uses a poultice made from soft substances such as cooking the root of marshmallow, flaxseed, and cleavers in water and using it.
"Then the patient lies on his back, and a ball of wool is placed under the limb, which should be moderately soft. Then the physician places his heel on the ball and holds the patient's hand with his own hand and extends it downwards.
"And he pushes the ball with his foot, and it returns to its place. If you wish, you can treat it in this manner: Prepare a man taller than the patient and stand him on the side. He should insert his armpit under the patient's limb and raise the limb up until the patient is hanging in the air. And another servant draws the patient's hand down to his abdomen, for if the patient is light, it is appropriate to attach something else to him to make him heavy, for it returns the vomit from its time, and it may also return to another face.
It is that a long wooden stick is placed on the ground, its head being round like the mouth of a pitcher, neither thick nor thin. Then it is placed under the patient's navel after placing soft bandages on the head of the stick, and the patient stands on the length of the stick.
Then he extends his hand down from the other side, and he also bends his body from the other side with force, for the dislocation returns to its place quickly. If its return is difficult with all that has been mentioned, then this treatment should be used, which is to take a stick whose length is about two arms. And its width is four fingers, and its thickness is two fingers, so that it has a round head to facilitate its entry into the depth of the navel, like this image:
Then a soft bandage is tied to the round head so that the wood does not hurt the patient, then it is placed under the navel and the hand and arm are fully extended on the stick downwards, and the stick is tied to the wrist, the elbow, and the tip of the hand.
Then place the arm on a board. Apply traction with the board and extend the hand downwards, leaving the rest of the body hanging from the other side, for the joint enters through its socket. If it has entered in any way possible, a moderate-sized ball of wool should be placed under the bandage.
Then the prepared compress of flour ground from a millstone mixed with milk and egg white is placed on the wound entirely as it is wrapped, then the ball under the bandage is tightly compressed and bound with a ribbon above the compress, and his hand is hung around his neck.
He should not move his hand for seven days, and the patient's food should be made light so that the limb may gain strength, which will hasten its recovery. Then, after seven or five days, he should exercise it; if it holds fast and does not dislocate again, it is cured.
If the joint dislocates frequently due to excessive moisture or another cause, it is necessary to use a splint with three strips of cloth as described in the chapter on splints. If this is all done and the bandage is removed after seven days and the joint does not hold,
"The tendon and sinew were tightened several times, but it did not set; it fell and relaxed, and you could not raise it again. So know that the nerve in the head of the shoulder has been cut or stretched or relaxed, and then know that the joint will never set again in its place.
"As for the break that occurs near the chest and the shoulder blade to the back, it is set by pressing and stretching with the hands until it returns, and all the tightening and treatment are used in it until it heals. If after healing a swelling appears in the limb and movement becomes slower.
"The patient should use the bath frequently until that swelling softens and returns to its original state.
"Chapter Twenty-Seven.
"On the Treatment of Fractures of the Ribs.
"The rib fracture is slow to heal and also returns slowly, as it can fracture in all directions, especially forward or backward. Its fracture does not go unnoticed because it is evident under sight and touch in any form of fracture.
"If the broken rib is close to a healthy one, this will be evident to you by the swelling of the fracture, and it will not allow the arm to bend or touch its shoulder. It is necessary to hasten and return the fracture as soon as possible before pus forms.
It is because if a hot worm afflicts it, returning it is difficult, and perhaps the ulcer does not heal, especially if the ulcer is in the back. For it is the weakest of all types of ulcers, and the most painful, and death often comes with it.
If it can be returned, it is necessary for an assistant to hold the patient's hand with both of his hands and straight arms, while the physician holds from above the joint and below it. He then pushes the dislocation with all his fingers or with the palm of his hand until it returns to its place.
As for if the dislocation is in front, it may return by bending the hand once so that the palm strikes against the adjacent bone. If the dislocation does not return, then use a strong force with two assistants holding the arm.
The patient should also be held by two assistants so that he does not move when the force is applied. Then, the arm is rotated in all directions after wrapping a cloth or wide bandage around his hand. If the physician touches the dislocation with his hand, he should smear it with oil to facilitate its easy displacement.
Then, the dislocated part is pushed back with great force until it returns to its place. After it returns, a bandage containing compressive and drying agents along with egg white should be applied, pressed firmly, and the arm suspended from the patient's neck for several days.
Then, if the dislocated part has stabilized in its place, remove the bandage and leave it; however, if you see that the dislocation is not firm, then renew the bandage and leave it for a few more days until it becomes firm, after which you can remove it. If swelling occurs after the dislocated part returns and is removed.
If there is difficulty in movement, use warm baths and gentle massage until it becomes supple, or place a piece of fatty mutton on the dislocation, tie it securely, and leave it for a day and night, then remove it and enter the bath. If swelling occurs, drain the swelling with a moderate bleeding.
Then, apply the fatty piece on him again and again, up to three times with each entry into the bath until it becomes supple. If you wish, you can also place a moist cow dung mixed with oil on him and press it firmly; do this several times, for it will become supple and return to its original state.
The Twenty-Eighth Chapter
On the Treatment of a Fractured Bone
The bone of the hand often breaks, and its fracture is easier to reduce than the rest of the joints, except that one must hurry to reduce the fracture within an hour after it breaks before heat or inflammation develops in the place.
Reduce the fracture by placing the patient's bone on a board, and have an assistant hold his hand while the physician places his palm on the joint's tip and pushes it until it returns to its place. However, he must check if the fracture has gone into the depth of the hand.
Let the patient place the back of his hand on the board during stretching and reduction, and if the fracture is prominent to the back of the hand, let him place the palm of his hand on the board so that the physician's hand falls on the same joint tip. If it returns from there, and not, then tighten it with a bandage to alleviate pain.
And leave it, for it cannot be repeated, and it is not possible to reduce it again after days have passed except that the joint remains swollen, and it does not harm the patient except if the hand is paralyzed and unable to grasp anything.
When you learn that the nerve has been cut or crushed, there is no hope for it except to splint with a wooden stick; sometimes it helps and sometimes it does not help at all. So if the sinew is restored, put on it the dressing we described, then splint and leave for five days.
Then, it is unbound and the hand is exercised; if its movement is impeded or any stiffness appears in it, let it be bathed with hot water and oil repeatedly until it becomes supple.
Chapter Twenty-Nine.
In the treatment of fractured fingers.
If a finger is fractured in any direction, when it is fractured from the finger towards the back of the palm or its inner side, stretch the finger and push the fracture with your thumb until it returns, then bind the tip of the finger and suspend it towards the direction to which it was fractured.
Leave it for two days, then release and stretch it until it stands upright by itself that day; if it is at night, bind it as described above, but unbind it during the day and exercise it with movement, binding it again at night. Continue doing this for days until it stiffens.
If it sinks to the depth of the hand, bind it in a similar manner towards the same direction and treat it as you did the first time until it heals. Do the same if it sinks to any other part.
Chapter Thirty
In treating a hernia in the back
If a hernia occurs in the back or neck and it is complete, or if many hernias have fallen away from their places, there is no treatment for it, because death quickly approaches the patient.
The sign of this is that the patient's abdomen protrudes without control, and often his leg or arm, or one of them, becomes numb. However, if only one hernia falls away from its place, it usually returns.
It can fall in four directions: if it falls to the back, it is called a 'hernia'; as for its treatment, there is no treatment for it and no chance of recovery if it occurred from pregnancy. However, if it happened due to a fall or blow, etc.,
As for the treatment of hernia, it has been mentioned in various ways by many with long speeches that are not of much benefit. Some have summarized what is necessary from this. I will provide a brief account of what was conveyed to me, explaining and illustrating it differently than what they have shown and explained.
"I say that the swelling which occurs in front of the chest has no cure and cannot be avoided, as well as those on both sides. The only treatment is for that which occurs in the back, as I will describe: the patient should lie face down.
"Place a trestle near the wall and spread underneath it a wet cloth so that his chest is not harmed. Then place a vertical stick, stuck in a hole in the ground next to the head of the patient, and another near his feet on the opposite side of the trestle.
"And let one servant hold the stick and make it unstable in the hole, and another servant hold the other stick in the same way. Then they turn him onto his chest and tie his limbs with soft and strong cords, extending the ends of the cords to the stick near his head and tying them there.
"Then they bind his wrists and ankles with other cords, and near his elbows. Then all the cords are gathered together and tied to the other stick near his feet. Then each servant pulls on the cord toward the stick until both sticks remain in their fixed positions.
The only problem is that they are not fixed as we mentioned, and the physician places his hand on the string with force until it returns or he places a board on it, then stands on the board with his feet until it returns. If it does not return with this treatment, take a board whose length is about three spans.
And a hole is dug in the wall which we mentioned should be near the patient, into which one end of the board is inserted. Then place the middle of the board on the hump and the physician places his feet on the other end and pulls strongly until the string becomes taut.
And it returns to its place. If you wish, you can make it with a rope that is wound around the hand, as you dig two pieces of wood in the ground at the patient's head, each being an arm's length long, and likewise at his feet.
And there should be a space of one finger's width between each piece of wood. A hole is made in each piece of wood through which the rope passes, and all the pieces of wood are firmly fixed in the ground so that they do not move. Then insert a turned spindle—this is the rope that is wound around it—through the two holes in the pieces of wood.
In its side, make a hole in which you insert an arrow of the length that can be bent, and in the other two wooden pieces likewise; then tighten the ligature that you have tied on the chest of the patient at the end near the head, and the ligatures that you have tied on his leg at the end near the foot.
Then, a servant stands by each ligature, unraveling with his hand the reel which bends the ligature; and the doctor adjusts the board as we have mentioned. And this is the image of the ligatures, the reels, and the patient.
Then, after the swelling has subsided and the place is level, it is necessary to place a dry poultice with egg white, then wool, and above the poultice place a board whose width is three fingers or similar, and its length according to the size of the board.
And on some of the correct herbs, then tie with the ligature that is necessary; and let the patient use light food until he recovers. If there remains some swelling in the place at the end of the recovery, it is necessary to use drugs that cause sweating and softening along with using the board that we have described for a long time.
And for that, a leaden plate is used; and if there is another swelling on the back of the chest, it may be believed to be a broken bone, which has not come out, so do not expose it to this treatment, lest death occur.
Chapter Thirty-One
In the Treatment of Fractured Skulls
Know that the skull joint and the jaw joint are only dislocated, and nothing is applied to them like the slightest wasting or languor which is applied to the rest of the joints. The skull joint may be dislocated in four ways.
And that is because it dislocates inward, outward, forward, and backward; and most often it dislocates inward, while rarely does it dislocate forward or backward. The sign of its dislocation inward is that if you measure the sound leg of the patient with a ruler, it will be longer.
And the thigh will be shorter than the sound one, and the patient will not be able to lift his leg when standing; and the place which is near the knee will appear sunken and hollow because the end of the femur has moved there.
The sign of one whose jaw protrudes to the front is that his leg straightens completely, except he cannot bend it without pain in the knee, and even if he tries to walk, he cannot do so forward.
His urine will be retained, and his back will become humped. When he walks, his gait will be on his heels. The sign of one whose jaw protrudes to the rear is that they cannot straighten their knee or bend it before the ankle bends. Their leg will also be shorter than the other.
The spine will be curved, and the head of the thigh bone at the knee joint will be prominent. As for reversing this type of jaw, it is to gaze if the protrusion is old and has persisted with its owner without trying to reverse it and remains in that state, there is no cure for it.
It is not advisable for it to be exposed. As for the one whose protrusion is recent, and regardless of which of the four types of protrusion he has, he should hasten to loosen the joint and extend it inward and outward, moving it gently and softly, perhaps.
He returned, not needing any other treatment. If he does not return in this manner, it is necessary to prepare a strong servant who supports his leg from below, either with his hands or with bands tied around the leg above the ankle, and another servant supporting him from above.
He should insert his hand under the patient's hip, then tighten soft bands around the root of the thigh, and another servant should hold onto the end of the bands from the third side. The support can be either from in front, from the side of the navel to the side of the back, or from behind to the side of the spine.
All of them should support him together in one go until the patient is raised off the ground and remains suspended, for this type of support is common to all four types. If the dislocation returns as we said, then each type requires its specific treatment.
If the dislocation is inward, it is necessary for the patient to lie on his sound side, and then bands are placed around the root of the thigh between the top of the thigh and the place beneath the navel.
Then the rope is pulled from above, from the side of the navel to the highest part of the body to the side of the back. Another strong assistant then supports with his arms and embraces the hot place on the dislocated thigh, and pulls strongly outward, for it returns to its place.
This type is the easiest of all treatments for this limb, and if it is difficult for you to enter with this type of treatment, then you should tie the patient's feet together with a strong ligament on the heels and ankles.
And after each one, the length is four fingers, and the affected leg will be extended more than the other by two fingers. Then the patient hangs from a beam in the house, with his distance from the ground being two arms' lengths.
Then you order a strong young man to embrace the head of the thigh and another youth to hang onto the patient, and that other youth pushes strongly against the embracing youth on the thigh so that the joint returns quickly to its place, but if it is a dislocation outwards.
The patient should then lie on the plank as described for the patient with a hernia, and the ligature is tightened around his affected leg and chest. Then one board is placed at his feet and another at his head, and an additional board is inserted firmly in the middle of the plank.
It is wrapped with wet bandage so that the patient will not be harmed, and there will be a board between his thighs to prevent it from slipping down during treatment. Then each assistant pulls in his direction, and the physician straightens the bone with his hands. If there is a response to correction.
If not, place the board on it and press as we mentioned in the dislocation, except that the patient should be lying on his healthy side. And if the dislocation is forward, it is necessary to stretch the patient's leg once while he is in this position under the carpenter.
The physician places his right hand on the patient's ankle, then presses it with the other hand while extending the pressure down to the foot, and if the dislocation is backward, it is not necessary for the patient to stretch downward.
It should be raised from the ground, but rather placed on something solid, as his clothes and bandages should also be turned outward according to what we mentioned about his position under the carpenter while he is on his back with the bindings tightened.
On what we said about the anus, it is also necessary to use a bandage on the site from which the hernia protrudes. If the hernia returns to its place as it should and its return does not hide from you, then it is that the patient's leg extends.
If you see them both level and the patient is able to contract and extend the leg without difficulty, know that the part has returned to its proper place. At that time, bind the thighs together, place a bandage, and tighten it with a cord so that the hernia does not move in any direction.
The patient must rest for three or four days, then remove the bandage and the splint, and bind the leg with the other. If you see them both equal in size, know that the rupture has healed, and release the patient to walk. But if you see any swelling in it.
Then return and bandage it, tightening it as you did the first time, leaving it for another three days. After that, remove it, and he should walk on them gradually until he feels strong again, God willing.
Chapter Two and Thirty-Two
In the treatment of hip dislocation.
The thigh swells in three directions: it swells inward, outward, and downward, meaning to the back, and does not swell toward the front of the foot, and the sign of its fracture is that the patient is ordered to pull his shin to his thigh.
If it does not adhere to the thigh, know that the thigh is broken. All signs of its fracture are that the patient sits with his leg extended if he has the strength to do so, and a servant sits behind him holding his middle and gently drawing it back, then you sit on his thigh.
And you adhere your back to his face and place his leg between yours, then you hold his thigh with both hands and intertwine them on his thigh, then you pull its side with your hand with force, and another servant extends his leg until the thigh returns to its place.
And the sign of its return is that the shin adheres to the thigh with ease, not forcefully. Then you bind it and adhere the shin to the thigh, then tie them all together with three or four splints for three days or four, then release them. And he should only walk a little each day until it gains strength.
If it is difficult for you to return (it) with what we have described, then use the strong rope with the knots that were previously described for treating ulcers until (it) returns.
The Thirty-Third Section.
In the treatment of fractures of the ankle.
The ankle may swell slightly or completely dislocate, and the dislocation can be either inward or outward. A sign of its dislocation is that you will see the ankle prominently swollen towards the direction it has dislocated to.
As for the treatment of its swelling, it is easy to return it by stretching with hands and straightening until it returns. However, if it dislocates completely, it is necessary that the patient sits with a strong assistant holding from behind the back in the middle.
Then, hold his ankle with your right hand from above and with your left hand from below the ankle in the Achilles tendon area. Then pull his foot towards you with your right hand, then with your left hand twice, then straighten it with your left hand and push the heel of the foot towards the shin with your right hand without force.
Do this twice as described, then in the third time push the heel towards the shin while you pull on the Achilles tendon. If it returns in one or two tries this way and you see the foot is level, then stop. If not, repeat the process, for it will return.
If you cannot return it as described, then lay the patient on his back on the ground and dig a hole in the earth that is very secure so that it falls between his thighs. Then place a cloth over him to prevent injury to the patient, and then bind his thigh.
Then another assistant supports the patient's feet, either with his hands or with a band that he ties around the patient's neck. Each assistant then supports in the opposite direction of his partner, and a wooden wedge is placed between the patient's thighs to prevent his body from being drawn down during the support, then the physician levels the fracture with his hand.
And another assistant holds the healthy leg down, for the fracture returns quickly. If the fracture returns and its correct return is evident to you, carry the splint and the bandage, and strengthen it with strong bands, and tie the foot to the lower end of the bandage. Be cautious of the nerve that is on top of the heel at the back.
To avoid the bandage being too tight and hurting him, then leave it for two or three days. If the bandage loosens, strengthen it and release it on the third or fourth day, and prevent the patient from walking for forty days.
If the wound has been walked on before this period, it cannot be guaranteed that the bone will not fracture and corrupt, and after that, treatment will not be accepted. Therefore, if heat is applied to it, it should be treated with what we have described in another place for treatment and bandaging until it subsides.
Chapter Fourteen.
In the treatment of fractures of the toes.
It is necessary to straighten what has been broken from it with a short length without violence, and this is not difficult but easy. If the fracture is in some of the bones of the back of the foot, the patient should place his foot on a level spot on the ground.
Or on a board while standing as if walking, then you should place your foot on top of those joints and press with your foot firmly until it returns and you see that it is straightened and nothing sticks out in the place.
Then place a board under the sole of his foot that takes the whole foot, having two ends. Then bind it with a firm and secure bandage for three days, then unwrap it and prevent him from walking for many days until it heals and ensures recovery, God willing.
The Fifth Chapter
In the types of fracture that occurs with a wound, or with a fracture, or with both together.
When something like this happens and its treatment is delayed, it often results in death.
Therefore, it is not appropriate for someone other than one who is proficient in this skill, with extensive experience, precise, compassionate, and well-composed to undertake the treatment of such cases. Also, he should use in the beginning only those medicines that soothe hot swellings, and then hand over the patient.
O Lord, let not that which I hoped for safety from the disease be harmed by the slightness of the illness and some hope appeared to you in it, so return it quickly from your hands in the first matter before the hot inflammation occurs.
So if the limb returns to its original position, use the remedy that soothes hot swellings and treat the wound with what is suitable for it from dry dressings. But if the fracture is accompanied by a splinter or shard, remove it immediately. And in that, follow what we mentioned regarding simple diseases before, in their respective places.
Your effort and resolve will prevent you from entering the path of illusions, following my advice to you. Thus, you will remain on your way and submit to your destiny, God willing.
