He said, the author of this book, to you my children, after I have completed for you this book which is a part of the science of medicine with its perfection and reached the utmost clarity and explanation in it, I saw that it was necessary to complete it for you with this chapter which is a part of practical work.
Because practical work has been neglected in our land and in our time, to the point that its science is almost forgotten and its traces are nearly lost. And from it only remain faint traces in the books of the ancients, which have been worn out by time and errors, until its meanings are obscured and its benefits are lost.
Therefore, I saw it necessary to revive it and compile this chapter in the manner of explanation, clarification, and conciseness, and to provide images of surgical instruments and other tools of practice, for that is an addition to clarity and a necessity for what is needed.
The reason that a skilled craftsman does not exist in our time is that the art of medicine is lengthy and its practitioner must first master anatomy, which Galen has described. Until he is proficient in the benefits, names, temperaments, connections, and separations of the members; and knowledge of the bones, nerves, muscles, their quantities, exits, arteries, veins, and locations of their exits.
And thus Hippocrates said, "Indeed, doctors are numerous in name but few in reality, especially in the art of surgery." We have mentioned this in the introduction to this book.
Because anyone who is not knowledgeable about what we have mentioned regarding dissection will inevitably make mistakes that kill people, as I have often witnessed among those who practice this art without knowledge or experience.
I saw a foolish physician who cut into a pig-like tumor in a woman's neck, and he tore some of the vessels of the neck, causing the woman’s blood to flow out until she fell dead before him.
And I saw another physician who, in removing a bladder stone from a man that had pierced the urethra and was large, panicked and removed it along with a piece of the penis. The man died after about three days, and I had been summoned to remove the stone but saw the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, so I did not estimate it to be within his capabilities.
I saw another physician who was highly regarded by some of the leaders of our country for his medical knowledge.
He was treating a black slave who had a fracture in his leg near the ankle, along with a wound. The physician hastened to bind the fracture over the wound with splints and bandages, binding them tightly, leaving no room for the wound to breathe.
Then he sent him away to indulge his desires, leaving him for days, and ordered that the bandage not be removed until his leg and foot were gangrenous and on the verge of death.
He was summoned, and they hastened to remove the bandage, but the pain persisted and he did not recover from his condition. The gangrene had spread throughout the limb, and I could not save it.
The gangrene continued to spread in the limb until it killed him.
I saw another physician, who cauterized a cancerous sore with a hot iron after some days, until it became a severe injury to the patient. This was because if a cancer is caused by a mixture of black bile, it should not be treated with a hot iron.
Unless it is in a limb that can be amputated entirely.
Therefore, my sons, you should learn that the action of the hand is divided into two types: an action accompanied by safety and an action accompanied by harm in most cases.
Be warned about the work in this book, which contains deceit and fear; you should be cautious of it and reject it.
So that the ignorant does not find the way to criticism and faultfinding, take for yourselves diligence and prudence, and towards your patients, show kindness and steadfastness.
Use the best way leading to safety and a praised outcome, and beware of dangerous and difficult diseases.
And guard yourselves against what you fear may cause doubt in your religion and worldly affairs, for it will be most beneficial to you and elevate you in this life and the hereafter according to your merits.
For Galen said in some of his directives, "Do not treat an illness poorly, lest you be called a poor physician.
This chapter is divided into three sections.
The First Section
In this section are depicted burns, cauterization with hot irons, the arrangement of members from head to foot, and the tools and instruments used in surgery, along with everything needed for manual practice.
The Second Section  (Literally: "And the second section")
The Second Section deals with incisions, cupping, bloodletting, venesection, surgical operations, and the extraction of arrows, all illustrated and arranged accordingly, along with images of the instruments.
Chapter Three
"On the art of bone setting, extracting, and treating fistulae, as well as similar procedures, from the head to the foot, and illustrations of instruments.
Chapter One
"On incisions.
"Before mentioning the procedure, it is necessary to mention its benefits and harms, as well as in which temperament it should be used.
"I say that discussing the benefits and harms of incisions is a long discourse, precise science, deep secret, and many scholars have spoken about it.
"And they differed on the subject, but only a small part of their discussion has been summarized, fearing length.
"I say that incisions are beneficial in general for every imbalanced temperament, whether accompanied by matter or not, except for two types: the hot temperament without matter and the dry temperament without matter.
"As for the dry temperament with matter, there is disagreement about it. Some say that incisions are beneficial in it, while others disagree, saying that incisions do not suit a disease of heat and dryness because the nature of fire is heat and dryness.
"And it is impossible to be healed from a hot and dry disease with a hot and dry remedy. And the one who says this opposite also says that incisions with fire can benefit from a hot and dry disease that occurs in people's livers. When you add the human body and its moisture to the mixture of fire, the human body becomes cold.
And I say with his words, because experimentation has revealed to me that this is so, except that it should not be considered unless by someone who has persevered and knocked persistently on the door of knowledge. And he stopped at the differences in the constitutions of people, and the state of diseases within themselves, their causes, symptoms, and duration.
As for the other constitutions, you have nothing to fear from them, especially the cold and wet diseases, for all doctors agree on them and do not differ in their benefit from knowledge about them.
And know, O my sons, that among the secrets of treatment is knowledge by fire and its superiority over treatment with burnt medicine, because fire is a singular substance that does not exceed the action of the limb it treats, nor does it harm another connected limb except for slight damage.
And knowledge by burnt medicine may exceed its effect to what is beyond the limbs, and it may cause a disease in the limb that makes treatment difficult or even fatal. Fire, due to its nobility and dignity of substance, does not do this except if it is excessive.
It has become clear to us through experience, due to the length of our service and attention to the craft, and standing on the facts of the matter.
Therefore, I have dispensed with lengthy discourse, and were it not unsuitable for this book of mine, I would disclose to you a secret hidden in the fire and how to apply it to the bodies and expel diseases from them with philosophical arguments that will satisfy your understanding.
Know, my sons, that they have differed regarding the time in which cauterization is suitable, and they considered the best time to be the spring season.
I say that cauterization can be suitable in every season because the harm caused by the time is absorbed in the benefit obtained from cauterization. Especially if the cauterization is for severe, urgent, and dangerous pains that cannot tolerate delay due to the fear of consequences which are greater than any harm caused by the season.
Do not be deceived, my sons, by what is commonly believed and the ignorance of physicians that cauterization which cures a disease cannot recur or become permanent.
"The matter is not as you thought, for the cautery is just like a medicine that alters the temperament and dries out the moistures that cause inflammations.
"Except that the cautery is preferred over medicine for its quick success, powerful effect, and firm control.
"And it may happen that the disease returns at some time according to the temperament of the patient and his ability to contract the disease, as well as what prepares in his body from the accumulation of excesses in him and his negligence of himself in acquiring it from food, and similar causes.
"O Lord, may the disease for which cautery is used be subtle and in a limb with little excesses and moistures. "Like the cautery of a tooth for pain, and similar cases, it may happen that the pain does not return in it, and this will be the least.
"As for the common saying that cautery is the last resort in medicine, this is a true statement, except for what they understand by it, because they believe that there is no treatment beneficial with or without medication after performing cautery, and the matter is contrary to this.
"The meaning of 'cautery is the last resort in medicine' is that when we use various treatments for a disease and those medicines do not heal, then we use cautery, and it heals. From this, it results that 'cautery is the last resort in medicine.' The meaning that has been widely accepted and by many ignorant physicians.
And it was mentioned earlier that cauterizing with gold is better than cauterizing with iron, and they said this because of the balance of gold and the nobility of its material. They also said that the site of the cautery does not become infected. This is not absolutely true.
For I have tried this and found that it only works in some bodies, not others. Cauterizing with gold is better and more effective than iron, as they said. However, if you heat the cautery in the fire made of gold, it will not be clear to you when it reaches the degree of redness you desire for the gold.
Because it quickly cools down even if you increase the heat in the fire, and it melts in the flame. Therefore, the maker is often distracted by this, so cauterizing with iron has become faster and more accurate for us to work with, God willing.
This chapter on cauterization has been arranged in sections, which I have organized from the head to the foot to make it easier for the student to find what he seeks, God willing.
Chapter One.
For cauterization of the head, one cautery.
This ointment benefits from the dominance of moisture and warmth on the brain, which are both causes of migraines, frequent nosebleeds from the head to the eyes and ears, excessive sleepiness, toothache, and earaches. And in summary, for all diseases that are caused by warmth, such as pleurisy, gout, and similar diseases.
The image of this ointment is that the patient should first be instructed to rinse their head with a clean and gentle medication for three or four nights, according to the strength, habit, and nature of the patient.
Then instruct him to shave his head with a razor, and have him sit in front of you leaning forward with his hands on his chest.
Then place the tip of your little finger on the tip of his nose between his eyes, and where your middle finger reaches, mark that spot with a line.
Then anoint the marked area with olive oil ointment as depicted here.
Uncover the bone to the depth of a hair's breadth or a lentil seed, then raise your hand and pass it over, or prepare your hand with the same iron or another if it is cold. Until you see the bone as I have described to you, then take some salt and dissolve it in water, dip a piece of cotton into it, place it on the spot, and leave it for three days.
Then, place on it a cloth soaked in oil and leave it until the inflammation from the fire subsides, then treat it with castor oil until he is cured, if God wills.
And they said that an open wound, as long as it remains open, promotes healing and is best and most effective.
And some mentioned that the skin should be stretched to the bone and held in place until part of the bone marrow burns, then after that it should be scraped off whatever has burned from the bone and then treated.
And others said that one should make an incision deeply enough to affect the bone strongly, so that a piece like a grain or a small pebble falls from the bone, and they claimed that this causes sweat to flow from that spot, and the wound is left open for a long time.
Then it is treated until it heals by second intention, and I do not see these two types of incision except in some people and on the path of error, and I leave them better with safety if they are, for the head will be affected as soon as its natural connection is broken, as we have seen in other limbs.
Especially when the patient's head is naturally weak, and the first type of incision is safer and better in my opinion. One should use this approach.
The second chapter.
On the head also.
If pain persists in the head and continues for a long time, that is due to the cause, and remedies such as bandages, plasters, and compresses are used, especially if only one temple hurts, as we have described, and nothing from these helps him, look. If the patient's head is naturally strong and not weak, and he feels severe coldness, then open another temple a little above that one. Then open a temple on each corner of his head until the skin becomes thin and exposes the bone to the extent we have described. Then open a temple in the back of his head, in the place known as the occiput. Be gentle in this and do not expose the bone, for the patient will feel severe pain from it, unlike the pain from all other temples on the head, which I will mention in its place.
The temple that is opened in the front and back of the head should be more gentle than the one used to open the middle of the head, and this is its illustration.
The third chapter.
In the case of a non-inflamed neighboring (tooth).
If pain occurs in the temporal region with swelling, and the pain extends to the eye, then the patient should be treated with cleansing drugs for the head, and all other treatments mentioned in the section on diseases should be applied. If this does not heal, it is necessary to make an incision in two directions. Either by incising with a sharp, heated drug or with iron.
As for incising with a heated drug, it is done by taking one clove of garlic and peeling it, then cutting its edges from both sides. Then, make an incision in the painful place on the temple with a wide-bladed scalpel until a space is created under the skin large enough to accommodate the clove.
Then it is placed under the skin until it disappears, and a tight bandage is applied to it for fifteen hours. After that, it is removed and the garlic is taken out, leaving the wound open for two or three days before dressing it.
Then it is treated with a cotton swab soaked in oil until the place heals, and then it is treated with honey until it recovers, God willing. If you want, you can do this with some of the heated drugs that I mentioned in the eighteenth chapter on heated drugs.
"And as for cauterizing with iron, it is done in this manner: heat the cautery that looks like this:
"The hollow cautery is so called because its tip resembles the shape of a screw, with some grooves and a small hole in the middle.
"Then place it on the painful spot and hold it with your hand while you slowly turn the iron, and the amount burned from the skin will be about half of its thickness. "And you should lift your hand so as not to burn the veins beneath, which can cause bleeding; then soak a cotton cloth in salt water and place it on the spot and leave it for three days. "Then apply oil to the cotton and treat it with warm compresses until it heals, God willing.
"And if you wish, you can close this opening with the smooth edge of the cautery and protect against cutting the veins in this opening except intentionally.
"Chapter Four.
"Open the intended incision.
"If the incision has been treated as we have previously mentioned and according to the divisions of diseases, but if the treatment does not heal, and you observe something that cannot be addressed by the initial opening with medication or burning. The needle must be heated until it turns white after learning the place of the pain with a line length of half a finger or thereabouts, and leave your hand once and hold it firmly until the blood vessel is cut and reaches near the bone.
It is important for you to be cautious of cutting the muscle that moves during chewing, as it may burn the nerve or muscle that controls it and cause numbness.
Be cautious and watchful of the blood from the vessel that you cut, for in its cutting is danger. Especially for those who do not know what they are doing, and are not experienced practitioners, it is best to leave the work.
And the method of controlling excessive bleeding from the vessel on its surface at its location will be mentioned in the book, God willing. If you see something that this key does not cover, do not proceed with it.
If you see the body of the patient as suitable for this key in the middle of the head as we have described, then treat the wound until it heals, God willing.
If you prefer, you can use the key that we mentioned in the chapter on cauterizing vessels with the needle of two blades, for it is a better and more beneficial key than this one.
The Fifth Chapter
About the Pains of the Ears
If there is pain in the ear due to cold, treat it with warm compresses and other treatments we have mentioned in the section on division. If the pain does not subside, burn a piece of cotton called "the point" as shown here.
Then, after burning it, apply the cotton around the entire ear or around both ears if the pain is in both of them. Keep the cotton slightly away from the base of the ear, after you have placed it in its proper position with a needle. Let the cotton be about ten points for each ear or thereabouts. Then treat the areas until they are healed, God willing.
The Sixth Chapter
About the Head.
The head that is treated with cotton is only of the type caused by phlegm, as I mentioned in the divisions of diseases.
And cotton should be avoided for the type caused by dryness and nerve constriction.
When this type of headache is treated with injections, poultices, and plasters and the treatment does not work, it is necessary for the patient to be cauterized with three cauteries. One at the base of the ear, the second slightly below its nape, and the third at the meeting point of the lips.  />
Make a cake from the opposite side of the affected part, for comfort occurs only in the part that appears correct.
The shape of the cake should be like a small piece placed under the top corner of the ear, another in the cheek, and their length should be equal to the length of the temples.
Descend with the cake until it burns half of the thickness of the skin; this is the shape of the punch, and it is a kind of scimitar that we have already presented its form except that it is slightly more elegant as you see. It is necessary for the scimitar to have a slight edge of roughness, then treat the place with what was mentioned until it heals, God willing.
Chapter Seven.
Treating the hidden hernia.
If the hernia is persistent and you treated it with what we mentioned and your treatment did not heal, and there was no benefit from it, then make four cakes for him. Make one cake on each temple of the head, and one in the center of the forehead as mentioned before, and another on the back of the head.
The formula for the cake is as mentioned before. It can also be made on the lower jaw, so it reaches the stomach, then treat as mentioned.
Chapter Eight
Forgetfulness
He who has phlegm should be given large doses of aerugo and clean grains first for the brain.
Then, his head should be shaved completely and placed on his neck the ointment of roasted walnut mentioned in the treatise on unguents; he should apply it many times, for it is a cure for forgetfulness.
And do that on the occiput and nape which was mentioned earlier, for it is effective with this; if not, then he should drink three doses in the nape of his neck, to be poured from the top of the head down to the nape.
And place a thick finger's width between each dose; then treat the forgetfulness with what was mentioned before. If you wish to increase it and the patient is able to bear it, then drink the middle dose.
If you wish to increase it, then drink on the temples; then treat him until he is cured, and the poultice should be made of olive oil as described before.
Chapter Nine
Forgetfulness and paralysis of the whole body.
It is necessary to precede with cleansing the head with aerugo and what we mentioned, then shave the patient's head, then give him a dose in the middle of the head, and a dose on each temple of the head, and a dose on his nape.
ثلاثة على فقارات العنق، فإن احتجت في علّة استرخاء البدن إلى أكثر من ذلك وكان المريض محتملًا لذلك والمرض قويًا مستحكمًا فاكه أربع كيّات على فقارات ظهره. Three on the pharyngeal constrictors; if in the illness of body swelling it requires more than that, and the patient is capable of it, and the disease is strong and persistent, then make four incisions on the back.
Chapter Ten.
Incise for gout.
The patient suffering from gout should first have his head purged with large clysters and the other treatments we mentioned in the division, if the patient is strong and capable of taking medicine.
As for if the patient is a child unable to tolerate medicines, then apply cupping and cleanse the head with leeches beforehand for several days along with improving his diet.
Then shave his head, and make one incision in the middle of the head as mentioned in the method, and another incision at the back of the head. On the head of each century, a girdle; if the patient is strong and capable of tolerating the girdles mentioned in the treatise on treating wounds and caring for the body over the throat pits and back pits, then let the girdle be made of olive wood according to the previously described method.
And if the patient is a child, then make the girdle delicate in this manner.
The Eleventh Chapter.
On the girdle of almond oil.
If the cause of almond oil is rotten wetness and thick phlegm, then tolerate the girdles that we mentioned in the treatise on wounds.
If the cause of almond oil is a tendency towards black bile, and the patient's body is wet, then wash his head with what purifies the brain as mentioned in the division.
Then wash the patient's head, then make a tight band from linen like a circle and place it in the middle of his head while he is sitting with both feet on the ground holding each side, then take one pound of ancient mutton fat.
Then heat it over a moderate fire until it reaches the temperature that the finger can tolerate if inserted into it, then pour it onto his head in the center of the circle and leave it until it cools. Do this with the patient every week along with the rest of his good treatment until he recovers, God willing.
And if you want to puncture it, many small ones without your hand holding the needle, but rather bleeding freely, for this type of cautery wets the brain moderately.
Then place on it a piece of cotton soaked in oil or chicken fat.
Chapter Twelve.
In the cauterization of water falling in the eye.
If you notice the onset of water falling in the eye by the symptoms mentioned in the previous chapter, hurry to protect the patient from anything that might wet his head and keep him away from all moisture, and let him take a hot bath daily.
Then shave his head and cauterize the middle of his head, then cauterize two times on each temple, whether the falling of water is in both eyes or in one eye alone.
Then cut with the needle all the veins and small vessels under the skin, and let the cauteries be in length like the width of the temples, and be careful not to cause bleeding.
For if you see anything of it, cut it in its place by any means possible, and we will come to the wisdom of tying the vessels and cutting them and being careful not to cause bleeding.
In the heel beneath the bones are two prominent veins.
Chapter Eleven
About lacrimal ducts that have become blocked.
If the tear duct is constantly blocked and was from before, due to the coldness of the phlegmatic temperament in the head outside the skull, then open the duct that you described by your eye at the beginning of the descending water. There is a duct in the middle of the head, two ducts on the cheeks, and two ducts in the heel beneath the bones. If it requires more incision, then make an incision in each side from the corner of the eye towards the edge of the eyelid with a small probe.
Chapter Fourteen
About the ducts of the nose.
If you treated it with what we mentioned in the division and the treatment did not work, then quickly make the patient drink quinces for three nights, then shave his head and open the middle duct with an olive stick. Then open with a spiral probe two ducts above the eyelids under the hair, taking care not to cut the vein, and this is the form of the spiral.
Chapter Fifteen.
In the treatment of cataract of the eye.
If the cataract of the eye is treated due to a disease or dampness, then take one dry couching needle with this crescent-shaped instrument.
And if you wish, take two short needles on each side above the lids and keep them away from the eyelashes, and let the length of each needle be equal to the length of the lid.
And do not exceed with the needle but only as much as it will burn a third of the skin, and let the shape of the instrument be like this.
Chapter Sixteen.
In couching the eye.
If the lashes are turned inward, the eye is narrowed, and the couching is performed on it in two ways. Either the couching with fire or the couching with a burnt medication, and as for couching it with fire, order the patient before that to leave his lashes if he is one of those who plucks them until they grow long and straight.
And if it is narrowed at its root, then bandage his eyes with a compress so that they do not move until they grow; and when they have grown and straightened, place the patient's head on your stone, then learn to couch the eye using the couching iron, marking the sign in the shape of an oak leaf.
The marking begins near the tonsils, then a cotton swab soaked in egg white or Bazerjukon paste is placed under the jaw, and this container is heated according to its shape.
Then, it is heated to the shape taught a little at a time in many times until the surface of the skin, which is like the entire surface of the leaf of the laurel tree, burns and the health of your work is indicated by seeing the jawbone swell and the hair stand up from the meat of the eye.
Then raise your hand at that time and leave it for three days, then apply a cotton swab with oil until the scab comes off, then treat it with myrrh until it heals, God willing. If any hair grows back after some time and the jaw swells again.
Then repeat the cautery in that place as you did the first time, for if the hair is on the lower jaw, burn it until it returns to its natural place and does not affect the eye's hair. As for the cautery with the burnt medicine, it is to order the patient to leave the tonsils until they become long and straight.
Then make a shape of a laurel leaf from dough, then take equal weights of soap and unslaked lime, each about one dirham or similar, grind them together well with a mortar so that it does not dry out. Then simplify it on the plaster that you made like a sheet of paper, and place it on the lid of one or both eyes, and place under the eye a piece of cotton soaked in egg white and the head of the patient on your stone.
Place your finger over the medicine and press it slightly, and move it whenever the patient feels the burning of the medicine because he finds its pain like fire. As long as he finds the pain, leave the medicine alone and keep moving it with your finger; if the pain subsides, remove the medicine and wash the eye with water.
And look, if you see the lid has swollen as it does when burned by fire or cut, then do not repeat the medicine on the place where it did not work and did not darken until your work is completed and the eye burns. Then place cotton with oil on it until the burnt crust falls off.
Then treat it with date palm juice or another until it is cured, and it is necessary for you when working to be extremely careful that nothing from the medicine falls into the eye, because if the lid swells after a few days and something is feared in the eye.
The medicine is prepared in that place which was affected by the sore, specifically as you did first, then treat it until it heals, and this is a picture of the sheet of Asa.
And know that people's eyes may differ in size, so accordingly let your suture be, and it is not hidden to the correct path for one who has experience in this craft.
Chapter Seventeen.
In the treatment of cataracts that appear in the pupil of the eye.
If the cataract is not treated with what we have mentioned in the classification of diseases, then your treatment has not succeeded, and it is necessary to proceed with this method.
The patient is instructed to place his head on the stone and an assistant holds his head between your hands, gripping it firmly so that it does not move or shake.
Then place a soft cotton ball in the white of an egg or on the eyelids, then apply heat to the heated spoon shown in this image.
It will be like a tube in the shape of an eagle's beak on one side, where the cataract is located. If you wish, it may be open on the other end, or if you prefer, it can be closed like a reed. But this hollow instrument is better for your work, God willing. ‌
Then, if the nasal cavity is open, squeeze it and expel its contents; if not, then open it and extract its pus. Then place a probe on it at that time, which is very helpful, and grasp it with your hand until you reach the bone.
Then slightly move your hand away from the eyelid towards the cheek to avoid any error or frightening the patient, causing the probe to enter the tear duct and damage it. If you reached the bone in the first attempt, then well done; otherwise, prepare the probe again for a second attempt if needed.
Leave it for three days, then apply a cotton pad with oil and treat it with dry myrobalan until it heals. If forty days pass and it does not heal, then apply astringent medicine to it until the bone is exposed, and scrape it as will be mentioned in its chapter, if God wills.
Another method of nasal probing mentioned by some earlier authors involves reaching the location of the nose, incising it, and then inserting a thin cylinder into the same incision.
Then pour into it the weight of a dirham of melted lead and grasp the cylinder firmly with your hand, ensuring that the patient does not move. To prevent the molten lead from flowing into his eye, place a cotton pad soaked in egg white or water over the patient's eye.
The lead burns the place of the nose and heals it with an amazing healing, so if the nose is healed by what we mentioned from cauterization and treatment, otherwise there is no choice but to pierce the nostril and bring the nose back to the course of the nostril as will be explained in its specific place.
Chapter Eighteen
In cauterizing lip fissures.
Often, fissures occur in the lip, known as 'fissure,' especially in the lips of children, for it is common. If this fissure is treated with what we mentioned in the incision, and the treatment does not heal, then a small knife-shaped spoon is very important in this form.
Its hollow is on the blade of the knife, then it is placed protectively with a wheel in the same fissure until the cautery reaches the depth of the fissure, then it is treated with ointment until it heals, God willing.
Chapter Nineteen
In cauterizing the fresh nose wound in the mouth.
If it occurs at the root of the tooth or in the throat or at the roots of the teeth and is inflamed, swollen, and ruptures, causing a nose wound, and if treatment does not heal it, then a spoon should be heated to the extent that fits into the nose.
Then you insert a protector into the nasal opening and hold it with your hand until the iron wire is protected to its length and end, and do this once or twice. Then treat it afterwards as we have mentioned in the treatment until it heals, God willing.
If the splint breaks and he recovers, no further action is needed. Otherwise, it is necessary to expose the area and remove the rotten bone as described in its chapter, God willing.
Chapter Twenty.
On the Removal of Teeth and Loose Gums.
If the gums become loose due to moisture and the teeth move, treat them with medication, but if they do not improve, place the head of the patient in your lap, then apply a cap as shown after this, after inserting a tube on the tooth.
And you insert the protective cap with the wheel, and hold your hand a little until the patient feels the heat of the fire has reached the root of the tooth, then lift your hand; then repeat applying the cap as many times as you want, after which the patient should rinse his mouth with salt water.
He should hold it for an hour and then spit it out, for the moving tooth will become stable, and the loose gum will strengthen, and the foul moisture will dry out.
Chapter Twenty-One
On toothache.
If the toothache is due to cold or if there is a worm in it and it does not respond to medicines, then one should treat it with two methods: either cauterize it with oil, or cauterize it with fire.
As for cauterizing with oil, it is done by taking butter, melting it in an iron pot or in a pan. Then take some cotton and roll it on the end of the needle and soak it in the melted butter. Place it on the aching tooth and press until it cools down.
Then repeat this process several times until the heat reaches the root of the tooth. If desired, you can also dip a piece of wool or cotton in cold butter and place it on the aching tooth, then cover it with a heated iron plate until the heat reaches the cavity of the tooth.
As for cauterizing with fire, it is done by taking a copper or iron tube and in its tip there should be some thickness so that the heat of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient. Then heat the tip of the instrument according to its shape and place it on the same tooth and press with your hand until the instrument cools down. Repeat this process several times.
The pain will pass either that day or the next, and after it, the patient should fill his mouth with good fat and hold it for an hour before spitting it out. This is how to make a cup.
You can make a tube on either end as you like and according to what is possible, and this is the shape of the tube.
Chapter Twenty-Two
In the treatment of hernias.
If the hernia is caused by fat and cold humors, and has not been irritated with medicines that promote inflammation, but you wish to bring about rapid inflammation, then heat a hollow tube, such as this one whose ends are open.
...and let the smoke exit from the other end while placing it protectively over the same spot twice or more as needed until it reaches the depth of the tumor. If the tumor is small, make the tube according to the size of the tumor.
Then leave it for three days and place a cotton wick soaked in fat over it, until what was burned by the fire disappears. After that, treat it with myrrh and bandages until it heals, God willing.
Chapter Twenty-Three
In the neck, due to swelling in the throat and difficulty breathing.
If the humors have overcome the spinal cord, especially if that is accompanied by a cold temperament, it is necessary for the patient to be first purged with light medicines. Then, a cautery should be applied on the nape of the neck at the base of the skull in the lower part.
Be careful not to let the cautery reach the brain, and do not burn more than half of the skin. Then, apply another cautery on the cervical spine at its last prominent vertebra, making the cauterization a needle-like shape as previously mentioned.
Then treat him with what was mentioned earlier until he recovers, God willing.
Chapter Twenty-Four.
In the treatment of diseases of the spinal cord and the brain.
If the brain and spinal cord disease is due to cold humors, and if the patient has not had a fever or inflammation, and the disease is chronic, then apply two cauteries on the calves in the lower soft parts, and another cautery in the middle of the chest between the breasts.
And the cauterization should be needle-like in shape as mentioned before. If desired, it can be a lancet, with a cautery called "the point," whose image was shown earlier for treating earache, and the point should be done thirty times.
Then treat it with what was mentioned earlier until it is cured, and a needle can be made with three threads on this figure, and the nail can be accelerated with it because you make three nails with it in one go. This is the figure of the needle.
Chapter Twenty-Five.
In nailing the finger.
If the tip of the bone was pulled out due to slippery moisture or was not set when it was replaced after being dislocated, until it becomes a habit and comes out with the slightest movement as we have seen, it is necessary to replace the joint first. Then the patient lies on his back or on the healthy side, then the skin inside the finger is lifted up with the fingers of your left hand if the joint has dislocated inward.
Then heat up the needle with two eyes, which is depicted here.
Then nail the skin with it until the needle exits on the other side, and the shape of the nail is four nails. A needle with three eyes can also be used, in which case the shape of the nail will be six nails, and the threads will be on the palm side.
This is the image of the trepan with three ridges.
And one more may be added to this number, making the stitches eight. Then place on the sutures the crushed balls mixed with salt. Then bind the patient's head and do not move the member until it is strong, and rarely does it happen that way.
Suture one thread over the bridge of the nose, or many threads that constrict tightly because the joint becomes strong and the moisture is removed, and the patient recovers.
Chapter Six and Twenty.
In the stitching of the stomach.
If the stomach has a cold and excessive moisture, to the point that it is out of balance and the discharges increase, and it does not improve with the methods of treatment, then it is necessary for the patient to lie on his back and extend his leg and hand, and then sew three stitches. A stitch under the sternum with a measure of one finger using a trepan, and two stitches below on either side of the single stitch so that the shape of the stitches is triangular, and keep them distant from each other to avoid touching if they swell, and let the depth of the stitch be a third of the thickness of the skin.  And this is the shape of the stitches.
On this figure and on this extent without increase.
If you wish, make one large incision in the middle of the stomach on this figure.
And the cut which is made with this incision should be in the shape of a circle on this figure.
And the stomach has been cut in a circular manner for those who are apprehensive about this incision, which is that you learn on the stomach a point on the extent to which you want with the blade, then make an incision with a pointed scalpel and treat it with the treatment mentioned until it heals.
Chapter Twenty-Seven.
In cold incision of the liver.
If the liver exhibits pain due to coldness and wetness or due to a violent wind, to the point that it has gone beyond its natural composition in an excessive manner, and the patient has been treated with what we mentioned in the section on division, it will not be cured by that. It is necessary for the patient to lie on his back and learn with the blade three incisions in this shape and quantity, specifically on the liver below the ribs where the human appendage ends.
And each incision should be followed by another incision, the length of a finger, and it should be straight along the body, and do not hold the scalpel tightly.
When the flesh is burned, it should be no more than half of its thickness. The patient should stand on their feet; if not, they should lie down with one leg extended and both arms raised. This is the pose for cupping.
You can use the lancet cupping method if you have a skilled assistant who is adept at the craft, but be careful not to burn all of the skin or it may penetrate to the abdomen and reach the intestines, as the skin there is thin.
Chapter Twenty-Eight.
In the case of pain and inflammation of the liver due to cupping.
If there is a discharge in the liver and you want to know if it is inflammation in the liver tissue or its capsule, then know that if it is in the liver tissue, the patient will experience heaviness and severe pain.
And if it is in the capsule of the liver, there will be severe pain with limitation. You will notice that doctors have failed to treat it. Therefore, the patient should lie on their back, and then cauterize the warm spot with a hot iron.
Then, heat the cupping glass in the fire; this is the cupping glass that resembles a thimble, and here is its shape. "Cauterize it with one cautery until all the skin burns, and complete the cautery to the depth of the flesh until all the disease comes out, then treat it with treatment for wounds until it heals.
"And this type of cautery should only be used by one who has long practiced the art of medicine and handled these diseases with experience, for then he will proceed to work like this and leave it better than I have described.
"Chapter Twenty-Nine.
"In Cauterizing the Anus.
"The initial cautery for cold haemorrhoids is done in this manner: Take a single, long, dry reed stem, the longest you can find, about as thick as your little finger. Dip it in oil and set it on fire. "Then cauterize it with one large cautery between the connection of the neck and the throat, and two small cauteries slightly below the groin, inclined towards the side beneath the ribs, and two large ones above the breasts, between the third and fourth rib.
"And two more between the fifth and sixth ribs, inclined slightly backwards, another in the middle of the chest, another above the stomach, and three at the back: one between the shoulders, two on the sides of the spine below the one that is between the palms.
And it is not fitting that your hand with the hook penetrates deeply, but rather it should be just under the skin, and some of the early writers mentioned that there are people who use an iron hook resembling a needle, which they protect and insert between the ribs until it reaches the same worm.
And the hook will come out as we mentioned in the case of liver worm, and in this process with the hook there is danger either that the patient dies immediately or a swelling appears in the place which has no remedy.
Chapter Thirty.
Hook for the Lung.
If you treat lung disease with the treatment we mentioned in the section, and your treatment does not heal, then the hook in it is on three fronts, each of which is correct: one of them is that you make three or four hooks along the length of the lung.
In the shape of liver hooks, which we previously described its form, and between each hook there should be a distance equal to the thickness of the finger or slightly more. The type of hook should be the same type we mentioned for liver hooks, and do not let your hand with the hook penetrate deeply; rather, let the patient lie on his back.
And the other side in the flap and raise the skin that is near the shoulder where the patient's flap ends, and raise the skin that is near the shoulder where the patient's left flap ends, and it will be your raising of the skin on the width of the body so that the stitches run along the length of the body.
Then you introduce the needles well-protected until they come out on the other side, then you remove the needle so that the stitches are four. If you want, you can also use another needle with three sutures.
Then you treat the place of suturing after leaving it to heal for many days, as it is better than any other treatment mentioned.
Chapter Thirty-One.
In the stitching for fistulas.
The stitch is only beneficial in the case of a narrow fistula, especially if the patient has been treated with the types of treatment that we mentioned in the division and your treatment did not succeed, then it is necessary to suture him with four stitches around the orifice and one stitch on the intestine.
And another stitch on the liver, and one on the shoulder, and two behind his back between the ribs, one towards his chest and the other towards his intestine. The depth of the stitch should be close to the thickness of the skin. Then leave the stitch open to heal for a long time.
And do not leave the patient without treatment after cupping, as needed, so that his caregivers can quickly gather around him to bring about his recovery. The shape of the cup used for cupping the back is cylindrical, as depicted in its image, and the one used for cupping the sides is olive-shaped.
Chapter Two and Thirty.
In cupping the feet and calves.
If they become painful in the ankles and fill with yellow water, it is necessary to cup over the back of the foot at the point between the anklebone and the heel.
Place your hand on the cup and do not twist it, then lift your hand without returning it abruptly, for this causes the yellow water to drip, and the cup will be in this shape.
Then cup the calves with two cups on each calf, and the cup should be placed at the concave side of the vessel. The cupping should be along the length of the calf, one below the knee and another approximately in the middle of the calf, and likewise for each thigh, with two cups on each.
Leave the cup open without any treatment for a long time to allow the water to drip, and then treat it as mentioned before.
Chapter Thirty-Three
On the Treatment of Hemorrhoids
If the hemorrhoids are due to cold and moisture, which weaken the contracting and absorbing powers in the intestines and the rectum, then treat this with various forms of treatment. If he does not recover and you see that the patient is suitable for surgery and has strong constitution, then perform a large hemorrhoidectomy on him. As mentioned earlier, for the hemorrhoid of the intestine, use a circular ligation with four ligatures around the base to cut off the feeding vessel, and then apply a large or two medium-sized ligatures over cotton on the pile.
If you see that the moisture is abundant and the patient is suitable for it, then perform a ligature on the anus and one on each pile, and perhaps add two small ligatures near the large intestine. This is a successful treatment whose benefit does not fail, God willing.
Chapter Thirty-Four
On the Ligature of Piles of the Anus
If in the anus there are many or one bulging pile, and it is from thick, cold, or foul humors, and if the treatment mentioned in the division does not work, then operate on the patient with three ligatures below the sacrum, a little under the coccyx, in the shape of a triangle.
وكيّة تحت السرّة بمثل أصبعين وإن قدّرت أنّ معدته قد بردت وطعامه لا ينهضم ورايت وجهه متورّما فاكوه على المعدة وكيّة كبيرة على ما تقدّم وكيّة على كبده. وأخرى على طحاله بمكواة مسماريّة واترك الكىّ مفتوحا زمانا ثمّ عالجه حتّى يبرأ إن شاء الله.
The Fifth and Thirtieth Chapter.
In the Cicatrix of the Spleen.
After cutting it, if the spleen has been cut, take a probe resembling a needle and insert it gently into the same cut spleen, pressing with your hand until the probe reaches the opening from which the blood flows; do this once or twice.
If there are many spleens, place a cicatrix on each as described, then treat them with suitable ointments until they heal. If a large cicatrix is also placed on the cotton that was used, it will be most beneficial.
Chapter Six and Thirty
About the nasal polyp that is in the nostril and its surroundings.
If the patient is unable to endure the pain and the operation we described in its place, he should be treated with this: Perhaps he will recover from the polyp. If it happens in any of the nostrils and remains persistent, a pus-like discharge and foul odor come out of it. First, you should measure it with a thin probe.
Then determine the depth of its passage with a probe, then heat a syringe similar to a needle, and insert it firmly into the same nostril on the axis of the passage of the polyp and at the same depth as the probe penetrated, and prepare the polyp until all those foul-smelling bodies are burnt completely once or twice or three times according to your need.
And be careful not to burn the nerve if it is present, or a large vein; and if the polyp extends to the septum or the lacrimal bone.
You should be cautious of all these locations, and you only do this if the polyp is in a fleshly location and you judge it to be incurable. Then treat the place until it heals. If the place is sealed off and its material is cut off and it remains so for some time, then know that it has healed perfectly.
If it does not separate from him, know that it is an outlet or in its cavity there is a bad bone or similar to what will be mentioned in its place.
Chapter Seven and Thirty
In the kidney's stone.
If cold or thick vapor causes pain in the kidney and diminishes intercourse, it is advisable to place on the patient's kidneys a heated stone made of magnet, one for each kidney, as described earlier. Sometimes we have used three stones at once, resulting in the greatest benefit.
Chapter Eight and Thirty
In the bladder stone.
If cold and dampness cause weakness and tiredness in the bladder to the point where the patient cannot control urination, place a heated stone at the base of the abdomen on the bladder where the pubic hair begins. Place another heated stone on the right side of the abdomen and one on the left side.
After the stone, on each side of the abdomen, place a heated magnet on the level of the navel. If necessary, use two magnets. Place another magnet at the base of the back or two if needed. Ensure the magnet is made as described before.
Chapter Nineteen and Thirty
About the womb.
If there is a cold and wet substance in the womb that prevents conception, spoils its nourishment, or causes pain at the time of menstruation, it is necessary to apply three poultices around the uterus as we mentioned in the chapter on the rectum. A poultice on cotton below the back or two poultices, and let the bandage be spiral.
Chapter Forty
Concerning the removal of haemorrhoids.
Moistures may accumulate around the anus, causing it to protrude from its place. Its sign is that one leg extends over the other if they are pressed together. The site of removal will be found empty. It is necessary to apply a circular poultice on the affected area itself.
After learning how to tie around the anus as it circles, let the same anus fall into the center of the circle. The bandage is the one whose image we showed in the chapter on the stomach. If this bandage is not available, apply three poultices with a large olive oil bandage.
And make a deep cut for the poultice to the thickness of the entire skin, then treat it until it heals, God willing.
Chapter Forty-One.
On the suture of women.
If there is pain in the groin and its cause is cold and moisture, and if the patient was treated as mentioned in the division and did not benefit from the treatment, then it is necessary to make the patient drink thin liquids such as honey or carob juice and the like.
Then let it be cauterized, and direct the cautery towards it with two methods: either by cauterizing with burning medications or by cauterizing with fire. The cautery with fire should be performed on many surfaces, one of which is to cauterize three times on the same groin in a triangular shape as follows.
The depth should be moderate, and there should be a distance between each cautery similar to the thickness of the finger, and the cauterization should be olive-shaped. It is also possible to perform one cautery in the middle on top of the groin itself, making it four cauteries. If you wish, you can cauterize with the circle previously mentioned for removing the testicle, using one cautery.
The circle should surround the entire groin and burn all the skin, this is how to cauterize in suturing women if the pain is persistent in the groin itself and does not extend to the thigh or leg.
If it extends to the thigh and leg, make two cuts on the thigh in the place indicated by the patient as painful, and one cut above the ankle towards the outer side, about four fingers in length, and the cut should be sharp like a knife, and the depth of the cut should only be the thickness of the skin.
And if he indicates that the pain extends to the toes of the foot, cut in the indicated place with a point three or four times, or more if necessary. And if he points to pain under the ankle towards the leg, cut there one sharp incision.
And be careful in all cuts not to reach the bone so as to burn a large nerve or vein, which would cause the patient a severe injury or disability.
And I have seen one and a second among those who cut above the ankle, and in the cut reached the bone, until it caused the leg to stiffen to the point of perforating the entire foot, and all the foot was destroyed, then paralysis and death occurred afterwards. Therefore, if there is pain in both sides, treat them both in this manner simultaneously.
"Some scholars have mentioned that the cautery should be made in this manner: it is made to resemble a cup, with iron, and its diameter should be half a hair's breadth, and at its mouth it should be wider than the tip of a date stone or slightly less, and inside this cup there is another cup and a third.
"And the distance between each pair of cups should be the thickness of a thread, and the cups should be open on both sides, and their height should be about a span or two spans, and a handle of iron is taken for them which is fitted in the cups, and this is its shape.
"Then it is heated in the fire until it becomes red hot, and the sharp edge is thrown away. Then it is placed on the cautery wound and the patient lies on the correct side so that three circular cauteries are made around the wound at one time, then it is left for three days, and it is covered with fat, and the wound is left open for several days.
"Afterward, it is treated with a poultice until the patient recovers. The author of this book says that this type of cautery has rarely been used because of its pain and its ugly appearance, but it is one of the best types of cautery for those who can endure it and have been afflicted by it in its place.
And as for the cauterization with burned drugs, it is that you make two cups similar to a ring, into which a drop of a solution made from iron or steel falls.
Its height between the two should be about the size of two knuckles, or close to it, and there should be a distance between them like the width of a thumb. The bottom should be open and the top open, and some of it should be tied together in this way.
Then place it on the affected part while the patient is lying on his sound side, and tie your hand firmly with a strip of cloth; then pour between the two circles very hot water, which has been slightly heated by fire, and keep it for an hour of sand, and the patient must endure its burn, for he will find it burning like fire.
Until the burn cools, then lift your hand with the instrument and wipe all the hot water off the affected part with cold water; then leave it for three days and apply oil to it until the blackness of the burn disappears, and leave it as many days as the pus flows, for this is most effective.
Then treat it with poultices until it heals; if the pain extends to the thigh or leg, make for him a mold that holds water according to what was made for the affected part, and this is the nature of hot water, and I have proven it in the treatise on correcting drugs.
From the salts of qilâ and unslaked lime, take a part from each and grind them together, then place them in a new pot that has been pierced with one small hole at its bottom through which the liquid can pass, and place another smaller pot underneath to catch it.
Pour water on the salts and lime until they are thoroughly soaked, then leave the pot until the strong water settles at the bottom of the container. Collect all that water and pour it over fresh salts and lime.
It is then very strong and effective in many medical procedures and for all parts of the body, as it acts like fire itself. Among the medicines that help with cauterization are also thapsia, honeycomb from the beehive, lime mixed with soap, both crushed.
Galen told the story of an ancient man who treated burns and scalding, and highly praised his method, claiming that nothing else was needed for treatment, and that he would be cured from one application.
He sometimes entered the baths with it on and came out cured, for he would take green vinegar. If the green was not available, fresh vinegar was taken and mixed with some oil, then applied to the burn, whether on the hand or the leg or the thigh.
And it is sprinkled and left for three hours or according to what the patient feels as a respite from the burn, then he enters the bath. If his body swells, he enters the pool, because the pain goes away and he recovers, God willing. If he does not recover, the dressing is renewed after ten days again.
He will recover, God willing. Know that none of these remedies should be used except after the body has been evacuated. Dioscorides mentioned that the juice of the wild asparagus, if distilled, is beneficial for menstrual cramps.
The plaster is made as follows: wool is taken and soaked in old oil, then placed on the deep part which is between the palm of the hand and the ulna, and it is closer to the ulna. Then take dried juice of wild asparagus.
It is then ignited with fire until it becomes a lump, and this lump is placed on the wool and left until it cools down. Then take another one and continue doing so until the sensation reaches the middle finger, and the pain subsides, God willing. This type of plaster is called "the asparagus plaster.
Second Section and Forty-fourth
In the Treatment of Sciatica.
Sciatica may occur due to many causes, such as a fall, a blow, or excessive exercise, and the like. It may also result from contact with cold, wet matter. This type of sciatica falls into its own category alone.
That which results from contact with cold matter requires that, after the patient has exercised by running or the like, he should be cupped over the painful part of his back for three rows the width of a finger each, after determining the location with pinching in each row five times or more, according to the patient's strength and condition.
Cupping may be done with a pointed cup, and if desired, it can be cupped three or four times with an average-sized glass tube in this manner.
Third Section and Seventy-fifth
On the Cupping of Headaches
This disease often afflicts young children, and its beginning in the child is indicated by shortness of breath upon standing and movement, and you will find at the end of the vertebrae of his back a pimple that has emerged, protruding above the other pimples.
If you see that and want to stop it, then use a circular cautery iron on this figure. If you want to use a cautery iron, take it on every side of the ulcer equally, and if you wish, apply it around the ulcer with two or three lines of cautery, making sure the marks are close to each other. Then treat the area until it is clean, as we have mentioned.
And be careful not to use cautery on the swelling that comes from inflammation of the nerves.
Chapter Four and Forty.
On the cauterization of cramps and joint pains.
If the joint pains are due to cold moistures settling in any part of the body, such as when it occurs in the feet and is commonly called "gout" by physicians.
If the cold gout is cured by the method of treatment that we have mentioned in the division, and yet the pains do not disappear, then cautery will remove them, which is to apply it after emptying around the joints of the feet with many small cauterizations. The iron should be olive-sized and moderate on this figure. على الإنتظار أوامركم
And if you need to cauterize on the face of a man, do it with a pointed instrument. If the pain ascends to the joints or to other members and this happens frequently, then place three or four ointments of olive oil on each joint with that pointed instrument.
If the cauterization needs to be deeper than this, apply it and do not insert your hand with the cautery but let it be just enough to penetrate the skin. If the pain ascends to the abdomen or back, use what we mentioned of the cautery in its place.
If the pain is only in the hands, cauterize around the wrists as if going around two lines. If the pain remains in the fingers, then cauterize them on each joint and on the palm of the hand. If after some days the pain ascends to the forearms or upper arms.
Then place ointments on them from each side, and the patient should not be deprived of good care and taking medicine. For if he has the best food and empties his bowels, then with this cautery, God willing, he will heal.
Chapter Forty-Five.
On Cauterization of the Anus.
If a tear in the anus occurs and some feces and urine leak into the vagina, which is initially close by, it is necessary to order the patient to abstain from food for the day and use enema to expel the feces from the rectum.
Then he should lie on his back between your knees, and you should tell him to hold his breath until the urine or feces protrude, then push them back with your finger. Then learn with a flat hand under the anus onto the coccyx bone a mark resembling half of a circle, its edges towards the upper part of the body.
Then press this mark with a hot iron in the shape of a branding iron.
Until it becomes whitish and pushes out the feces or urine, then push the feces or urine back into it. Then put a servant's hand on the place so that the feces does not protrude, as I have made an opening between the patient's thighs and placed under it a cloth and another servant ties it to his thigh.
And another on his chest holding his hands, then place the iron on the mark in the same way and your hand on the iron, standing upright. Hold it until it reaches the bone or press it again if it did not reach the bone with the first attempt.
Protect your effort from the formation of pus, so that it does not burn and cause death or great damage to the patient. Know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work has failed. The cautery for children should be delicate according to their size, and for adults according to their size.
Then treat the cauterized area after three days with oil until the scar of the fire goes away, then treat it with the rest of the ointments until it heals. The patient should lie on his back for forty days until the wound closes.
It is important to make his food during the treatment period light so that pus does not appear when it heals and opens. If, after forty days, he wishes to stand up, then use a tight bandage and hold it for another forty days. Avoid strain and overindulgence in food and drink and excessive shouting.
For if this treatment is used in this manner, he will be cured completely, God willing. I shall mention the treatment of a fistula by cautery at its opening, God willing. As for the fistula that occurs elsewhere in the abdomen and has just begun, if you wish to prevent it from increasing, then cauterize around the fistula with a round cautery appropriate to its size. "If you burn a third of the skin, then treat it as we have mentioned, it will not increase, God willing. Some of the early doctors recommended scraping the scar with a triangular scraper in this manner.
"After learning the scar with a file and making the line across its width at the top of the scar, and the other line below it, let your hand descend in the middle with one spiral stitch, and the first stitch is easier and better, God willing.
"Chapter Sixty-Four.
"In suturing the lip.
"If pain occurs in any limb due to a fall or blow, and that pain persists for a long time and does not heal with medication, then it is necessary to scrape the area with a scraper and to suture each limb according to its size, smallness, weakness, and strength.
"And if the pain and swelling subside, then he is free from the first suture; otherwise, it should be repeated on him because it is common for these pains to spread from one limb to another nearby one. Therefore, they must be followed with sutures until the patient is cured.
Chapter Seventy-Four
On the removal of boils.
As for boils, they can greatly benefit from cauterization, especially the type of boil that comes before the dissolution of pus and blackening.
If you wish to cauterize it, first inspect the boil; if it is just beginning and has been treated according to what we mentioned in the division, but does not rupture or stop, and there is fear that decay may spread over all of his humors, then cauterize it five times on the head. One cauterization in the middle of the recognized head, and the second below it near the forehead at the end of the hairline; two on the temples, one behind on the nape of the neck, and press your hand with a little cautery until it leaves a slight impression on the bone.
And from it, scales should be removed so that the thick vapors can easily escape from them; also cauterize it with another cautery on the same spot as before. But if the boil has persisted on the patient and shown a clear sign, then these cauteries that we mentioned on the head must be applied. ))) One cautery on the tip of the nose, two on each cheek, two on the sides of the neck, six on the back, one large one on the scrotum near the base of the penis, and another above it in the same region; two on the testicles, one on each. Two on each knee, one on each ankle; two on the thighs and two on the shins; two on the chest, each placed above a joint of his fingers and toes. Additionally, one on each heel of his feet and one on the tip of each finger.
And be cautious of the nerve that is on the back of the heels, so as not to burn it, and a cautery can also be placed on the bone of the ankle and another on the opening of the stomach, and another on the liver. Know that increasing the number of cauteries makes them more effective and beneficial.
And know that the patient will not feel pain from cauterization as the healthy person does, because his body is weakened. It is appropriate for the cautery to be of varying sizes according to the parts and joints, following the descriptions given earlier regarding iron tools.
Then treat the cauterized area with powdered frankincense mixed with honey and continue the treatment until recovery, God willing.
Chapter Eighty-Four
When a member has become weakened and is not cured by medicines, ointments or poultices, then cauterize the same weakened member with cauteries according to the size of the bone, whether large or small. And let the cautery be strong and deep in the skin, but slightly so.
Then treat it with honey until it heals, and some verrucas that appear on the hand and foot in the back's fissures near the nerve that moves that limb will go away.
And no one should attempt this except someone who is knowledgeable in dissecting limbs and the exits of the moving nerves of the body.
Chapter Ninety-Four.
In the treatment of fistula.
If the fistula advances and is not cured by any of the medical treatments, then make an incision in it to a shallow depth according to the thickness of the skin until the whiteness disappears and its color changes.
Then treat it with lentil flour, rose oil, pigeon's tongue, and pigeon's blood or duck's blood, each in equal parts, mix them all together and pour over a linen cloth, and bind the place until it heals.
Chapter Fifty.
In the incision of cancer.
If the cancer is in its early stages and you wish to stop it, make an incision around it as it spreads. Some sages have mentioned making a deep incision in its center, but I do not see this as beneficial because I expect it to ulcerate, which I have observed happen before.
The correct method is to make a circular incision around it, as we mentioned, or with numerous small incisions.
Chapter Fifty-One
In the incision of the hernia.
If a hernia occurs and its healing is delayed, either due to lack of sufficient nourishment for it or because the patient is an elderly person with little blood, or because of the passage of time and you want to hasten the healing of the hernia, then make numerous small incisions around it.
Then leave it, for it will heal quickly. If you want to flatten it with an incision, make the incision as shown in this figure.
And lower it into the center of the hernia until the skin opens and let the incision be towards the bottom so that it is easier for the pus to flow out, then treat it with what is appropriate until it heals.
Chapter Fifty-Two
In the incision of the fistula.
The fistula is only a decay that strives in the limb to consume it, just as fire consumes dry wood. So if you see a fistula in a place that can be incised with fire, make numerous small and large circular incisions according to what suits that place where the fistula is located.
Then wash it from every side until all the corruption is removed and nothing remains of it, then leave it for three days, and put powdered sulfur mixed with oil on the affected areas until all the scabs are removed and all the corruption.
Then treat it with a graft for the flesh, and if you see after three days that the flesh has grown healthy without any corruption, otherwise repeat the cautery on what remains of the corrupted areas, and the patient may be treated with a strong remedy.
For it stands in the place of fire, the quicker the benefit, and I have mentioned its treatment with a strong remedy in the section on [that topic], so take it from there when needed.
The Third Chapter and Fiftieth.
On the Cauterization of Straight and Crooked Wires.
Often this condition occurs in the soles of the feet, and it is a rough thing that hurts a person. Cauterization in it is done in two ways: either by cauterization with fire or by cauterization with hot water.
As for cauterization with fire, it is that the hollow scoop shaped like an eagle's beak, made of iron according to the size that can surround the wire from all sides and thin in thickness, then you put it hot on the wire, then turn your hand with the scoop around the wire until the scoop reaches the depth of the wire.
وتتركه ثلاثة أيّام يهمّ بالقيح ثمّ تضمدها بالخبازى البرّيّة المدقوقة بالملح وتترك الضماد عليها ليلة فإنّها تنقلع من أصولها ثمّ تعالج موضع الجرح بالمرهم المنبت للحم حتّى يبرأ، فإن كانت المسامير غير معكوسة.
It frequently happens on the surface of the body, especially on the hands and feet, that it is necessary to take a tube of copper or iron or eagle feather and put it on the thread or suture, then pour into the tube hot water in an appropriate amount.
And you hold the tube with your hand, turning it slightly with the movement of your hand so that the tube’s edge affects the base of the thread, and the hot water finds its way to the depth of the thread to the base of the thread, and the patient waits a little while on the heat of the hot water for an hour.
Then you leave it, for the thread will come out by its base. Do this one by one until all of them in the body have been treated, then treat their places after they have come out with what softens the flesh from the ointments.
Chapter Forty-five
On the Navel.
If any navel is affected by cold in the nerves, or by a quarter fever, or otherwise, it should be cupped four or five times on the small of the back between each vertebra and once on the chest. And a cup should be applied to his belly with an olive-sized cupping glass, for the navel will heal quickly and the cold disease will be cured rapidly.
Chapter Forty-six
On Cupping the New Boil in the Body
When the body develops ugly boils from cold, thick, rotten substances, it is necessary to apply a gentle cupping glass to the head of each boil as soon as they appear, with the mouth of the glass having been heated by fire or the root of long zarawand or an ocular cupping glass. ‌
And hemorrhoids can also be cupped in this manner at the onset, so that their beneficial effect is enhanced and the patient is cured of them, except that it should be done after the patient has been purged with a purgative.
Chapter Forty-seven
On Cupping the Fresh Ulcer after Cutting a Vein
Often, hemorrhage occurs from severed vessels exposed by wounds, or through a laceration or a cut limb, and the like, making it difficult to stop.
If this happens to anyone, hasten your hand to the mouth of the vessel and place your thumb on it, pressing firmly until the blood is constricted under your thumb and nothing comes out of it. Then place small and large olive seeds in the fire, a quantity of them, and blow on them until they become very hot.
Then take one of them, either small or large, according to the wound and the place where the vessel has been severed, and apply the hot olive seed to the same spot after quickly removing your thumb, and hold the olive seed until the bleeding stops.
If the bleeding resumes when you lift your thumb from the mouth of the vessel and the olive seed cools down, quickly take another hot olive seed from the prepared ones in the fire and continue doing this one after another until the bleeding stops.
And be careful not to burn a nerve, for this will cause another disability for the patient. Know that if blood flows from a vessel, it cannot be stopped, especially if the vessel is large, except by one of four methods: either by cutting as we mentioned, or by cauterization if it has not already been cauterized. If it happens that its tip has been shortened and the bleeding has stopped, then either tie it with a strong and secure knot, or place on it the drugs that stop bleeding and tighten with tourniquets firmly.
And as for those who attempt to cut it off with a ligature or by constricting with a cloth, or by applying burned substances and the like, this bettle is not severed by that except rarely. If anyone does so and a physician or medicine is not at hand, he should hasten to place the finger of Sabbath on the mouth of the wound as we have described.
And tighten it very hard until the blood is constricted, and place cold water on top of the wound and on the finger, and the finger does not let any water flow over it with very cold water always remaining cold until the blood freezes and coagulates and cuts off. During this time, you should look at what he needs from a cautery or medicine.
Chapter Two.
On Fistulas, Abscesses, Ulcers, and Wounds of that Kind.
Khalaf said, as we mentioned in the first chapter, that every disease which can be treated by cautery with fire and burnt medicine, its causes, means, instruments, and illustrations of the cauterizer's hand are depicted from the knee to the foot.
And I pass through this gate with that path, by its eye, to facilitate it for the student who seeks it.
Before I begin, it is necessary for you, my sons, to know that this gate contains more ambiguity than the first gate of the "Canon".
And because of this, the warning must be stronger, for work in this field often leads to shedding of blood, which sustains life, whether by opening a vein or artery, treating a wound, extracting an arrow, or other such procedures that all come with ambiguity and fear, and often result in death.
And I advise you against entering into what is ambiguous for you, for in this profession, groups of people with various diseases will come to you, some of whom may be very sick and near death.
Because of the severity of his illness, the length of his suffering, and the fatal nature of his disease, some will offer you their wealth in exchange for hope of health, while their illness is a battle against death. You should not assist those who come to you with these characteristics.
"But let your caution be greater than your desire and ambition, and do not proceed with anything of it except after a certain knowledge that confirms for you the praiseworthy outcome, and use in all treatments of your diseases the precedence of knowledge and warning towards what inclines to safety.
"For in that you have aid in gaining praise and glory, remembrance and thanks. May God guide you to right guidance, and may He not withhold from you the right path and success, for that is in His hands. There is no god but Him.
"And I have arranged this chapter into sections, as was done in the chapter on the knee from the foot to the thigh, so that you may understand what you seek from it, God willing.
"The first section.
"On treating the water that collects in children's heads.
"This disease often afflicts children at birth if the midwife presses the child's head with roughness, and it can also occur due to a hidden cause that is not known.
"And I have not seen this cause in anyone other than children, and all those whom I have seen with it died quickly for this reason. So I saw that one should not operate on it, and indeed I have seen a child whose head was filled with water and the head increased every day. The child does not feel until he sits on himself due to the swelling of his head, and the moisture increases until death.
This moisture is either between the skin and bone, or between the bone and the skull. If it is between the skin and bone, and the wound is small, one should incise in the middle of the head with a single incision the width of the wound, and its length should be about two fingerbreadths until the moisture is released, and this is the image of the abscess.
If the moisture is greater and the wound larger, make two intersecting incisions like this image:
If the moisture is beneath the bone and its sign is that you see the sutures of the head open from all sides, and if you press it with your hand the water flows to the inside, and this should not be hidden from you; then you should incise in the middle of the head three incisions as shown in this image.
After the incision, all the moisture is released; then the incisions are closed with stitches and bandages; then it is washed from above with wine and oil for five days; then the bandage is removed and the wound is treated with lint and poultices, and do not leave the binding of the head in moderation, and feed the patient with all dry food that has little moisture.
Until the limb strengthens and heals, another remedy for swelling is to observe where the bone of the ulcer appears and the water gathers, as it may be more in the back part of the head or at the front or on the right or on the left.
Seek the swelling where the ulcer and water collection appear, cut as much of it as you can without cutting a vein that might cause pus to form, killing the patient from that infection along with the moisture.
Chapter Two
Cut the veins behind the auditory meatus known as the tympanic membrane.
When someone experiences severe attacks in the eyes or chest, and this persists despite medication, treatment should involve cutting these two veins.
If you wish to cut them, shave the patient's head with a razor, then press the area with a rough cloth to make the veins appear. Then lift the patient’s neck with his shirt and look for where the pulse beats; they are the two lower places behind the ears. In some people, they may be hidden. ‌
Then measure them with the compass, then cut them with a sharp blade, cutting through to the bone. This should be done across the head. If you wish, insert the blade under the veins and pull it upwards while cutting until it reaches above the veins, making the incision about two finger-widths long.
The blood, if the vein is cut, will flow out in pulsating spurts, flowing forward and backward continuously. If the pulse cannot be felt, it should be estimated from the ear to a length of three fingers' breadth, then squeezed with the clamp and cut to the bone, as is necessary.
If the blood is sent in small, moderate quantities, or if it is more or less, all this depends on what you see from the strength of the patient and the fullness of his veins. Then look at the wound; if there is any flesh remaining on the bone, cut it off.
To prevent it from showing a hot swelling, bandage the wound with a piece of linen cloth and treat it with poultices until it heals.
Chapter Three.
Draw out the veins that are in the fingers.
If a person has chronic or severe inflammation in the joints, or intense pain in the fingers, or similar conditions, and they have been treated with various medical remedies but do not improve, we have tried in these diseases to draw out the veins from the fingers or cauterize them as we have described.
The method of treatment in this case is for the patient to shave the hair on the temples and aim at the visible vein on the temple, as it is clearly evident from its pulse, with little that can be hidden except in some individuals.
Or, if the cold is severe and it remains hidden from you, let the patient wrap his neck with a cloth, then press on the spot with a needle or pour hot water over the spot until the vein appears clearly visible. Then, take the cautery of this shape. Then, use it to burn the skin carefully until you reach the vein. Insert a thread into it and draw it up until it exits the skin. Clean it of any clots below it from all sides. If the vein is thin, pass the thread through it. Then, cut a piece from it according to how much it retracts and contracts without causing hemorrhage, for if it does not burst or break, the blood will not flow at all. Then, drain the blood six to eight times.
If the vein is large, it should be tied in two places with a strong double thread, either of linen or gut, to prevent gangrene from occurring before the wound heals, causing hemorrhage.
Then cut the excess between the two ligaments, and do this in that hour or after another time. And if you wish to cure it by inserting a scalpel into the bone until its edges separate, the position of this work will be as you see fit or better, as we have said.
But if the patient is suffering from fever or has a hot temperament, for the cautery promotes drying out of the humors, it will be useless in terms of benefit. And after suturing the veins, the place should be covered with clean cotton and firm compresses, and after the wound heals, it should be treated with dry medicines that promote flesh growth and with fat until it heals, God willing.
So, if bleeding occurs during the operation, rush to cut it off either with cautery or by filling the place with vinegar and pressing your hand until the bleeding stops. If you do not have anything for that, put your finger on it until the blood clots.
Cool the place with very cold water until the swelling subsides and press it as needed. And what is easier and simpler than suturing the vessels is to cauterize the wound with this double-bladed probe after covering both places with lint.
And a very strong sheath is lowered until it reaches the bone, and the nerve is cut in two places so that what is between its ends does not adhere. This is the figure of the syringe.
The edges of the knives are like the small scissors, except that they are less sharp than the knife by a great deal, because if they were as sharp as the knife, coldness would be quick to reach them, and the flesh would not be cut quickly. If there is some bluntness in them, the fire's heat will adhere to them.
The flesh is cut quickly, and this operation is better than all others in being less painful and easier. Let the space between the edges of the knife be as thick as the finger's tip.
Chapter Four.
On the treatment of persistent hot tears flowing into the eyes.
If the tears are persistent and their flow is from the vessels that are on the top of the head from outside, and it does not benefit from any medication with drugs, and I saw the face of the patient has turned red. He feels a pulsation in his temples like the pulsation of ants, and his eyes are sunken and wet, their margins having been eaten away by tears, and the edges of their lids have become thin from the flow of tears. So I was compelled to treat it with this method, which they call "treatment with the sword," that is, the patient should be commanded to shave the hair on his forehead.
Then, incise three parallel lines along the length of the forehead, each about two finger-widths long. The first line should be in the middle of the forehead and parallel to the length of the nose, the second slightly above the corrugator muscle, and the third on the opposite side.
And be careful not to cut the veins that are on the sides, and keep your hand away from the union of the jaws. The distance between each incision should be about three finger-widths, and have with you pieces of sponge or soft cloth soaked in blood.
Then, introduce the sharp pointed probe as shown in this figure. From the incision next to the corrugator muscle to the middle incision, use it to scrape off all the skin between the incisions along with the periosteum on the bone. Then do the same from the middle incision to the third incision, and then remove this probe. And insert into the first incision another instrument called a sharp-edged knife on one side and smooth-edged on the other, as shown in this figure.
And the sharp edge of it should be directed towards the meat attached to the skin, and the smooth edge towards the bone. Push it until it reaches the middle incision, and with it cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes without the cut reaching the surface of the skin.
Then do that in the middle cleft to the other cleft, and after the blood drains an adequate amount, squeeze the areas of the coagulated blood clot, then apply a bandage on each cleft with a cotton pad soaked in water or oil or vinegar and oil.
Do not cause heat irritation, and on the third day, remove the bandage and use plenty of cold water, then treat it with a poultice of basilicum oil and rose oil, and treat the rest of the wound as you would any other until recovery, God willing.
Chapter Five.
In the treatment of tears and nasal discharge into the eyes from within the head.
When someone experiences frequent, severe, recurrent nasal discharge, and their eyes appear sunken and small, with weakened vision, the whites of the eyes are inflamed, and eyelashes fall out. And there will be a severe, painful headache and persistent cough deep in the head, so know from these symptoms that those substances and discharges come from many deep veins. The best treatment for this is to have the patient shave his forehead, then make a single incision in the middle of the forehead.
And there will be a severe, painful headache and persistent cough deep in the head, so know from these symptoms that those substances and discharges come from many deep veins. The best treatment for this is to have the patient shave his forehead, then make a single incision in the middle of the forehead. And raise slightly with the width, and begin cutting from the left cheek to the right cheek, until you reach the bone, and keep your hand away from the moving muscles of the cheeks when chewing, so that when the bone is exposed and all the blood is wiped with a sponge.
Then separate the cut between the two cheeks with fine cotton or a piece of linen, then press from above with compresses, and soak the compresses in drink and oil, lest hot inflammation occur. And when it is healed and you see that the hot inflammation has ceased, it is necessary to feel the bone until the growth of the flesh begins.
Then treat it with dry dressing that promotes the growth of flesh, such as taking two parts of wheat flour and four parts of calendula, preparing from them a poultice, and using it in the growth of flesh in similar wounds.
The Sixth Chapter.
In treating what falls into the ear.
Everything that falls into the ear is one of four types: either a mineral stone or something similar to a stone, like iron and glass, or a plant seed, like beans and kernels, or something fluid, like water and vinegar.
And if it is an animal, when a stone or similar falls into the ear and does not grow in the ear, then expose the ear to the sun. If you see the stone has some oil from sesame or castor oil on it, then try to remove it by moving the head or blowing with the horn. And when the catarrh comes, first place around the ear a ring of wool or hair and raise the ear upwards, because often this treatment will expel it. If it does not come out by itself, then try to remove it with fine dust, like this shape.
If it does not come out with the dust, then try to remove it with a fine, dark pipe of little thickness. If it still does not come out, then make a tube from copper and insert one end of the tube into the ear hole gently.
And close around the pipe with greased wax, so that there is no path for air except through the pipe. Then draw it out with a strong breath. Often this will remove it. If it does not come out by what we have described, then take some glue from the glue pot or from prepared glue, which is used to catch birds, and put it on the end of a reed.
After placing a tight cotton swab on it, then inserting it into the ear hole with tweezers after drying the ear from moisture, if it does not come out with all that we described, hasten to the cut before the hot inflammation or suppuration occurs.
The method of incision is that the patient be placed in the supine position first and a sufficient amount of blood be drawn from him, then let the patient sit between your hands and turn his ear upwards, and make a small incision at the base of the ear where it curves downward.
And the incision should be crescent-shaped, reaching to the bone, then remove it with whatever tools you can, and then suture the incision quickly and treat it until it heals.
As for if the thing that fell into the ear is one of the grains that grow and swell, try to remove it with what we mentioned. If it does not come out, then take a thin, delicate stick like this.
Use it to cut that type of grain that has fallen into the ear, and you do this if you are sure that the grain has softened with the steam of the ear until it becomes small fragments. Then remove them with a black probe or with a thin tweezers or with cotton.
It is easy to remove it, as we mentioned. As for the water inside the ear, it is recommended that the patient use a syringe first, and after filling the ear with some cotton wool, he should lie down on that ear where the water is, and it will come out.
And if not, then take many thin and soft pebbles along the length of the fingers, warm them a little with fire, and the patient should insert one into the hole of his ear and stamp on it with one foot, and then strike another stone against the stone that is in the ear.
He should continue to do this with one pebble after another until all the water comes out. It is also possible for the water to come out by taking a feather or a piece of wool, inserting one end into the ear and burning the other end with fire until most of it burns, then replacing it with another feather or wool piece.
Do this repeatedly until all the water comes out, or draw it out with a syringe as mentioned in the case of the pebbles. As for removing an animal that is inside, if it is small like a louse, treat it as mentioned in the section on "division." And if...
If its body is large and can be felt, try to remove it with tweezers and probes, as this is the easiest of all that grows in the ear. But if you treat a worm born in the ear with what we mentioned in the section on the division of the tympanum and it does not cure your treatment.
You should look at the ear in the sunlight, and if you see any worms, remove them with tweezers or fine probes. If nothing appears to you from it, take this pipe that resembles its shape.
Narrow at the bottom and wide at the top, insert the thin end into the ear according to what the patient can tolerate, then press it firmly several times until all the worms come out. If they do not come out, seal around the pipe with wax as I mentioned in the chapter on boils.
If they do not come out with what we mentioned, use the syringes that I have described, which the ancients have used to kill worms, and you will find this in the chapter on syringes. You can pour ointments and medicines into the ear using this device, its shape is as follows:
You see, you make it from silver or narrow copper at the bottom there is a small hole and wide at the top, and if you wish that the plug in the tube's interior be made of hardened copper, then take a rod and wrap its end with tight, firm cotton.
Then you pour the oil or juice or whatever you want from these medicines into the tube, which is in the ear, then you insert the rod with the cotton from above and press it gently with your hand until the oil enters the ear canal and settles there.
The patient should keep it inside, and whatever is poured into the ear should be warmed a little in the fire, and beware that what is poured is not very cold or very hot, for the ear cannot withstand this.
Chapter Seven.
On treating the obstruction of the ear.
Some children come out of their mothers' wombs with their ears' ear drums not perforated.
Some people may also have an obstruction in the ear canal from a wound or swollen flesh, and this obstruction can be deep in the ear canal, not visible to the eye.
And he presented to the outside of the hole a little and it is seen by the eye, so that which is presented in the depth of the ear and is not seen by the eye becomes difficult to extract, and that which is seen by the eye should be placed in the sun. And observe it, for if you see the obstruction visible, open it with a delicate probe, and this is its shape.
Its tip should have a slight width, limited on one side, and the rest of the probe should be smooth on both sides so as not to hurt the ear. If the obstruction is due to flesh that has grown in the ear canal, hold it with a delicate forceps and cut it off completely with strong scissors.
If the obstruction is in the depth of the ear, take a thin, smooth probe and heat it slightly in the fire, then insert it into the ear canal. If you feel the obstruction along with what the patient feels as heaviness of hearing, crush its tip with forceps.
And be careful not to cut the auditory nerve, then apply cotton wool in the ear according to the size of the hole, having soaked it in honey. Do this for several days until you are sure that the wound has healed, or take cotton wool, soak it in water and sprinkle powdered zinc oxide on it.
Wash it, and if you see the ear has been inflamed with a hot worm, it is necessary to remove the wick and replace it with another that has been dipped in rose oil until the hot worm settles, then treat it until it heals.
If there is a nosebleed, soak a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear, then use the rest of the treatment that cuts off the mentioned bleeding as described in the chapter on cautery.
Chapter Eight.
In the treatment of pustules that appear in the eyes.
These pustules that appear in the corner of the eye may be wet or dry. It is necessary to grasp them with tweezers or a hook and cut them off at their roots, then apply powdered alum to the area.
If bleeding occurs from it, cauterize it with a fine lens-shaped cautery, and after cutting it off, anoint it frequently. It often recurs if anything remains of its roots; but if you cauterize by fire, those roots are burnt and do not recur.
Chapter Nine.
In the treatment of cold sores in the corner of the eye.
Much is presented in the scabs that resembles coldness in its intensity and hardness.
Therefore, it was named "cold" as it is the collection of thick fluid in both the upper and lower scab. Its effect is to observe: if the coldness is apparent on the surface of the scab, move towards all directions; its task is easy.
Then scrape it from all directions with a spoon until it is free, then bind it with a linen thread and cut it off. If you cannot prepare to cut it except after the scab has healed by cutting, this will not harm the patient at all. If the incision is large, gather it together with stitching and treat it until it heals.
And if it is small, there is no problem with it, for the membrane will push and adhere to it. If the coldness inclines towards the inside of the scab near the inner surface, then turn the scab over and bind the coldness with a linen thread without needing to cut, and scrape it from all directions.
If the scab heals by cutting, this will not harm at all. Then wash the eye after cutting off the coldness with salt water and treat the place with what adheres until the patient is cured.
The tenth chapter.
On the treatment of trichiasis that appears in the eyelid.
Trichiasis is a hair that grows in the upper layers of the eyelid, and it appears more often in children. It causes their eyes to be heavy and they suffer from tears during daylight, and they cannot look at the sunlight. Because the tears flow quickly.
And so you will see them constantly leaning on their faces, and they sleep in that position; their eyelids are wet under the bandages due to swelling, and the trichiasis is obvious to the eyes. When you press the place with your fingers, you feel the trichiasis between them, and the treatment is for the patient to put his head on your knee.
Then take a piece of linen and make a thread from it, and from that thread make a circle to fit around the trichiasis from every side; then place it on him and press with your fingers from every side to gather the trichiasis in the center of the circle.
Then make an incision in the center of that moisture with a hot needle, making a broad cut; and the cut should not be deeper than the cut that is made for cauterization, and it is necessary to cut all the way through the skin until you reach the trichiasis.
In most cases, the cicatrix protrudes from the scar in the form of a white fatty piece. You should grasp it with forceps that you have wrapped between your fingers and pull it out while turning your hand right and left until it comes out completely. Be careful not to increase the depth of the wound lest the burnt area fall into the eye and harm it.
If the cicatrix does not appear at first, it is necessary to deepen the wound slightly with a spoon until the cicatrix appears. Then grasp it as we have said, and soak the forceps in vinegar and water, place them on the spot, and press with a sponge. Some people grind salt.
And place it in the depth of the wound to dissolve any remaining moisture, then treat it until it heals. If a painful ulcer occurs in that area, treat it with soothing ointment until it heals.
Chapter Ten.
On the burning of the eye.
If an excessive amount of tears is secreted under the eyelids beyond the natural course, below the natural tears, and it persists, it harms the eye and causes diseases such as continuous weeping, dryness of the lids, whiteness, and opacity until it becomes a cause of blindness.
The cauterization of the eye is in four ways: either with a heated iron or with a sharp drug as mentioned in the chapter on cautery, or it may be by cutting and suturing, or by using a cane as I have remembered.
You should place the patient's head on your lap, then turn the eyelid with your left hand; if it turns out, well and good, otherwise insert a needle from below the lid with thread, and pass the needle through the upper part of the lid near the hairline, and pull the thread upwards over the lid.
Then rotate it with the marrow, and make a cut in the inside of the lid near the hairline with a pointed instrument made from the larger needle to the smaller one; then pass the thread under the lid and place a small piece of cotton or linen underneath, and tie the suture on the lid with the swab.
It should be like the shape of a date stone, except that it is necessary for the shape to be according to how much you want to lift the lid because people differ in this, some may need part of the lid to be cut off according to how much the lid has been pulled up.
And some may need to cut less than that according to how much the lid has been pulled up, then make a cut with the pointed instrument on the two lines you have marked, starting from the larger needle to the smaller one, and let the cut be near the natural hairline like the thickness of the marrow.
Then the needle enters one of the skin angles, then it is cut completely, then the two lips are gathered with a thread and fine woolen yarn, and the blood is wiped away, and what remains of the threads is attached to the turbans with some adhesive substances.
If you want to do that, it is up to you; otherwise, it does not matter. Then the suturing and threads remain for about three or four days, then treat it. If you prefer to leave the wound without sutures and treat it with something that dries and constricts, for tightening the wound when closing it is better than suturing.
This is one method of cauterization that was mentioned earlier, but it depends on the skill of the practitioner and is a good technique with no risk involved. Another method in cauterization is to shape the wound like the leaf of the as tree, as we have described. Then lift the wound with three needles that are either separate or grouped, as shown in this figure.
Then cut the remaining part of the wound with a small scissors, as shown in this figure, cutting carefully:
If you cannot hold the needles and do not have a threaded needle, then take another thread and insert it into the center of the shape, and insert another thread near the larger end and a third thread near the smaller end; gather the threads between your fingers carefully, then lift your hand with them in a moderate lifting.
Lift the graft with all its skin as we described, then join the edges of the wound with stitches and treat it until it heals. If there is a hot swelling after cutting or breaking, soothe that swelling with poultices and similar soothing ointments.
It is also possible for the lower jaw to turn inward, in which case you should use what we mentioned of cutting and stitching and cauterizing with fire or a sharp drug. Cauterize less and more gently on the patient than when cutting and stitching.
Cauterization with the reed is done in this manner: turn the jaw and break the fracture as described, then make two thin wooden rods or sticks, the length of which is equal to the length of the jaw and the width less than that of a finger.
And it is tied on both ends where the strings pass, then gently join them over what is preferred from the jaw of the eye and press the two rods firmly and strongly from both sides and leave it for several days, as the pressed skin dies and turns black and putrefies.
If it takes too long to fall out on its own, then you can use a pincer to remove it. After that, treat it until it heals. If the swelling increases and the eye does not improve, this is what the two types of splints look like, made in this shape and size, both in length and width, as shown here:
Chapter Twelve.
Removing the ingrown hair from the eye with a needle.
If it is one or two hairs, the method for this is to take a thin needle and insert into it a fine, soft silk thread, then gather both ends of the thread together and tie them with a very small knot, so that the length of the thread is about a finger's breadth.
Then place another fine thread in the loops, which will be shorter than the first thread. You can tie its ends if you wish. Have the patient put his head on a stone, and let it be near the sun so that the work can be seen clearly, as it is precise work. Then insert the needle with the threads into the base of the ingrown hair.
And pull it through the swelling with the wheel until it comes out above the natural hair, then draw the thread up over the loops and insert that hair into the loops, whether it is one, two, or three hairs, no more.
Then pull it with your hand until the hair comes out along with the roots in the gland with the natural hair. If you have pulled out the roots but the hair did not come out with them, pull the roots down with the thread that you had fastened into them until the roots come out of the hole above.
Then return the hair into it and pull them together, continuing this until they rise in the upper hole and can be seen by the eye. At that point, cut the roots and the thread and remove them, then close the eye and leave it closed for one or two days so that the hair settles back in its place and flesh grows over it.
If the hair is short, either add a long natural hair to it so that it rises with it, or leave it until it grows longer. Then raise it up.
The Thirteenth Section.
In the treatment of hair loss in the upper eyelid.
This is called alopecia and this hair loss can be either natural or acquired, with the acquired type resulting from injury, cut, burn, or similar causes.
The approach to treating this ulcer is to open it, separate its lips, and place a linen thread between them, securing it until healing occurs. It is not appropriate to use drying or constrictive substances in its treatment.
Then, if you do this, the swelling will return more severely than before. Instead, use moisturizing substances such as olive oil and water in which lupines have been soaked, along with cotton seeds and a little honey, and with this mixture, treat the ulcer until it is cured.
The treatment for it is to cleanse it with every means possible so that it does not adhere to its initial form, and the procedure we mentioned is only a correction of the swelling, not a restoration of the place to its original state according to what was.
The Fourteenth Chapter
For treating the swelling that occurs in the lower jaw.
This swelling that occurs in the lower part is called true swelling, which is natural and spreads widely; the spreading occurs due to a wound or an opening or similar.
The method of doing this is to take a needle with a double thread, and sew it in the flesh, and pass it through from the left cheek to the right cheek until the thread comes out at both ends of the flesh; then pull the flesh up with the needle and cut it off with a broad scissors.
If the shape of the cheek does not return to normal, take a piece of leather and place it over the cut area, then turn the cheek with it, and make two cuts on the inside edge of the cheek, with the ends of the cuts meeting at the corner that was cut, so that they form an angle. Until when they meet, its shape will become like this:
This is the Greek letter Lambda, then remove that piece of flesh as much as its straight side is below the cheek, then gather the scattered parts with two stitches sewn with woolen thread, then treat it with the ointments and tincture mentioned until healed.
If the swelling is exuding from the cut, stitching or scar tissue, it is necessary to make a simple cut without removing the hair of the eyebrows as well. Then separate the lips with tincture as mentioned before.
The statement in the treatment of hernia: if it is above or below, then proceed according to what you find suitable for you regarding the condition of the hernia, as its appearance can vary greatly; and the craftsman who creates the path can smooth out the channel from any direction that is possible.
until the shape returns to its natural form or approaches it; and the same disease indicates what is suitable for it in terms of work and instrument, in most cases.
Chapter Fifteen
In fusion, the eyelid is attached to the cheek or to the cartilage.
This fusion may present to many people with the eyelid attaching to the white of the eye, preventing it from easy movement and obstructing its natural functions; therefore, a needle should be inserted under the lid.
Then it is lifted up or extended with a hook, and the fusion is cut with a fine scalpel that is not sharply pointed, but rather slightly rounded, so as not to alarm the patient during the operation. The scalpel will then pass through without harming the eye, and your cutting will be like scraping off that fusion.
And wait until the swelling returns to its natural state and all adhesions are healed, then at that time, wash the eye with salt water or drip Znjariya syrup mixed with water into it, then separate the swelling from the eye with a cotton wool pad.
And place a wool pad soaked in egg white over the eye, and after the third day use medicated syrups until it heals.
Chapter Sixteen
In the removal of the foreskin and the cutting of the testicles.
The foreskin can be of two types: either it is nerve-filled, resembling a thin hard membrane, or it is not nerve-filled and resembles a white solid substance; if you touch it with iron or pierce it with a needle, it will cut.
And it does not contain a vein, and both types begin from the large glans and gradually decrease until they cover the observer and prevent light and eye movement. The way to cut it is for the patient to place his head on your stone.
Then he opens his eyes and you raise the swelling with your hand, then take the foreskin with a fine needle and stretch it upwards, then take a thread and insert into it a horse or cow hair and strong thread, and slightly bend the end of the thread and sew it in the middle of the foreskin. بمدة الخيط، فإن الذى يكون قريباً من صنّارة الظفرة تعجز عن تقطعه لعضم الصرف.
Cut it with a needle and tie the nail with thread, then extend it upwards and saw it with scissors on the side of the nail towards the tip as if you are sawing it with scissors to the end, then cut the rest at the root of the nail with a fine scissors or small shears, and leave the natural flesh of the nail.
In order to avoid the constant shedding of tears, the nail can be extended with silk or thread as mentioned earlier, then saw it with a soft scissors at this end:
And be careful that the scissors do not touch the inner membrane, as it may cause a crack, which could displace the nail. After cutting, place in the eye something of powdered salt or Zanjaric powder and leave it until the next day, then treat it with what is necessary until it heals.
If the nail is not sensitive and you cannot insert a needle into it or tie thread around it, this type of nail is often treated with medication to heal as described in the chapter on treatment. However, if you wish to cut it, open the eye of the affected person.
Take a fine, soft scissors with a thin blade like this picture: "I scraped the nail with it from above, gently. If you see that it is crumbling and breaking, then sprinkle in your eye from alkali zinc or red alkali or powdered salt, and close the eye until the next day.
"Then continue working on them until all are gone, unless it causes pain in the eye and a hot worm appears; if so, leave it alone and treat the hot worm until it heals, then continue with the scraping until it is cured. As for 'nit of flesh,'
"If the worm is causing severe pain, then tie that worm with a thread and cut off part of it, but be careful not to cause excessive tearing, then sprinkle red alkali or zinc alkali until it heals.
"Chapter Ten.
"Concerning the cutting of ingrown hairs and excess flesh in the eye.
"There may grow in the eyes of some people a red, fleshy growth that covers the pupil or comes close to it, or flows over the whites of the eye, and sometimes the whites turn outwards, resembling the rose of the oleander.
The work in it is that the patient places his head on your stone, then he opens his eyes and removes all of that red flesh with suitable forceps.
Or grasp it with a pair of scissors or tweezers, then cut the flesh bit by bit until all of it is removed by cutting, and take care not to harm the eye during the procedure. Your cutting instrument for this should be either the sharp knife that we described in cutting the wart, or a small scissor. Just as you use it to remove the eyelashes, as shown in the picture in the following chapter.
When the cutting is completed and all the blood vessels have stopped bleeding, fill the eye with finely powdered salt or drop some red vitriol and similar medicines into it, and place a compress of white linen over the eye from outside to protect against the hot worm.
If there is still some bleeding and you fear the hot worm, leave the eye alone and treat it with what cures the worm; then return to the procedure until it heals. Do the same for any excess flesh that protrudes from the eye of this type.
However, it is advisable for you to avoid treating any weak eye by cauterization or by protruding through work with iron, and do not involve your hand in any of these procedures until you see that the organ is suitable for this procedure.
Chapter Eighteen
On the removal of cataracts from the eye.
The cataracts are red veins that gather on the eye, obstructing vision and weakening it over time. First, examine whether the affected eye is strong and free of other diseases besides the cataract.
Then the removal of the cataract is performed by instructing the patient to place their head on your stone, and then tying those veins with one or two very thin threads according to your skill, as shown in this figure:
Or two threads can be doubled in one body as shown in this figure:
Then carefully cut those veins with a fine scissor, wiping away the blood occasionally until you see the eye freed from those veins and the bleeding has stopped. Be careful not to harm the eye with the edges of the scissor. Your work should be done at noon.
And be very careful in your work, so that you do not cut anything other than those veins. When you have finished, apply to the eye a cauterizing agent, either green or red, to consume any remaining cataract, for if you cannot remove it all in that hour, it will cause pain in the eye. ة
"Leave it for days until the pain subsides and the hot worm is assured, then return to work on her in this manner with the same eye until she is cured of this form of the scissor's pain.
"Leave it [with the head of the patient in the student's lap and the other end shedding tears, and the pupil of the eye is cut both from its front and back], remaining constant in your work that you open the eye with stitches or a triangle held by the student.
"Incise, with the patient's head in the student's lap and tears flowing, cutting through the pupil of the eye both from its front and back, and you have the choice to begin by excising from above the eye or below it. The first way is to cause two incisions in the upper eyelid, one at the end of the tarsus and the other at its beginning.
"Hold them between the middle and the tarsus, then place sutures below both. Then hold them between the two tarsi, and let your hand drop gently until you see that all the channels have been raised and cut off from the smallest part of the west, whether by scissors or a delicate hook.
And the tumor penetrates into its base, and all the paths are closed until it rises above the forehead, and do not cut the veins, for tears and blood will flow over you.
Then, cut with the scissors what is above and below the nail until there remains nothing but the corner of the nail. If possible, lift it from the corner of the nail, scrape it with the probe, for this is best, although it may cause some swelling in certain people.
If you cut it, the pain will remain in his nail for days. When the hot worm appears, begin work on it again.
Chapter Nineteen.
On Returning the Hair to the Nose.
Physicians call the hair "nasuor." If it is treated with cautery or a caustic drug, as previously described, and does not heal, there is no cure for it except to burn it at the site of the worm when it becomes dry, and remove all moisture or pus from it.
Until the bone is exposed. If, upon exposing the bone, you find decay or blackness in it, then scrape it with an instrument like this one [drawing of a scraper].
The tool is called a "ra's tasna'" and is made of Indian steel. Its tip is turned like a drill, and it has engraved on it a fine groove resembling the mark of the scab or scurf. You place this on the site of bone decay, then rotate it between your fingers while slightly compressing your hand until you know that the decay has been scraped away.
You do that several times, then force the area with dry astringent medicines. If the place is sealed and flesh grows in it and the flow of menses stops, and it remains for forty days without recurrence or stench or any incident occurring.
Know that he has been cured, otherwise there is no remedy except to return the nasal polyp to its opening in this manner, which is that you uncover the bone a second time with iron or a sharp medicine. If the bone is exposed, take a clamp like this:
The end of the clamp should be triangular, and its shaft conical, tapering to the end as you see. Then place it on the bone itself, and that will be near the nostril and a little distant from the eye. Then press with your hand until the bone pierces and the patient feels it.
And if he finds the air coming out of it when pressing his hand over his nose, then force the area with dry astringent medicines as I have instructed you. If the flesh grows and the place hardens, then the material that was protruding externally will return to the nostril, which will be easier for the patient, God willing.
"The Twentieth Chapter
Returning the eye to its place
If the eye comes out with its tendon and there is no damage or defect in the vision, it should be relaxed, then the patient should be made to vomit, then a bandage should be placed around the neck without any constraint, and a fine ointment should be applied.
Then a patch made of cotton, silk, honey, and myrrh is placed on the eye, and the eye is pressed from above with many bandages. The recipe for the bandages is to take plenty of soft linen, and each piece is stretched over four threads, making many of them.
Then one is placed on top of the other according to what the eye needs, and it is firmly bandaged with a hard bandage, then the ointment is reapplied without any constraint. After that, the bandage is removed and the eye is left bandaged for a day and a night.
If the bandage becomes loose during that time, it should be firmly re-bandaged, and then the bandage is removed after a day and a night as we have said. If you see that the eye has returned, well and good; otherwise, repeat the process of the bandages, the tightening, and the ointment until it returns.
Chapter Twenty-One
On the excision of a swelling in the groin.
If a swelling appears in the groin, then it breaks through and emerges outside of the abdominal muscles like a grape, and it resembles the human form due to this, if you want to cut it out, do so as follows:
You enter a needle into the base of the grape from below to above, then you enter another needle into it with a double-threaded thread from the side of the scrotum and pull it out, leaving the first needle in its place.
Then you cut the place where the double-threaded thread is intertwined, and tie some of the grape around the needle with it, squeezing it firmly. Then remove the needle and apply a wool pad soaked in egg white to the wound, leaving it until the threads fall out with the grape, then treat the wound as needed.
Until the wound heals, and the swelling may be squeezed from all sides with a ring of wool until the wound becomes firm. Then it is covered with a thin bandage reaching to the bottom of the wound so that the liquid egg white drains out and the wound heals in its place, then it is squeezed firmly until it heals.
The twenty-second chapter.
On the treatment of scabies.
This disease that is called scabies, it is nothing but a vein that collects in the eye, resembling water flowing down, but it is not. The way to treat this is for the patient to sit on a chair, then take their head with both hands.
And you move it until you see the vein come down to your eye, then it stops and does not flow, and light is released, and the patient sees things as he used to see them. If it does not come down, we know that it is water. So if the vein does not prepare to flow as mentioned.
Otherwise, have the patient sit between your legs. Then take a small thin blade and make a slight cut on the horny skin at the junction of the nipple with the areola in the armpit until the vein comes out.
Then, if it comes out, drip warm water mixed with honey or water in which a lupine seed and honey have been boiled into the eye, and then treat him with the rest of the treatment until he is cured.
The twenty-third chapter.
It was mentioned that there are types of water in the division, and which one is suitable for the cup with a clear explanation, so take it from there on health. At that time, it is appropriate for the patient to sit between your hands facing the light near the sun.
And connect the correct eye and press it firmly, then lift its eyelid with your left hand if the affected eye is the left one, or with your right hand if the affected eye is the right one.
Then place the end of the cup close to the lesion, pressing it into the white part of the eye from the side of the smaller artery; then push the cup with force while you rotate it with your hand until it enters the white part of the eye and you feel the cup has reached an empty space.
The cup should go as deep as the distance from the sclera to the black part of the eye, which is the lesion of the eye; for if you look at the copper in the same way the patient sees it, you will see the clear cornea. Then move the cup upward to the place where the water is.
Then press it down repeatedly; if the water descends from its place, then the patient sees what opens before him of his vision and the cup in his eye. Then let it settle for a while; if the water rises, release it without removing the cup.
If it settles and does not rise, remove the bowl with a spoon and stir it gently with your hand a little, then dissolve something of pure salt in water and wash the eye with it from inside, then place all of the outside of the eye with a compress or soft wool.
Anoint with rose and egg white, and bind it to the healthy eye. As for us and our contemporaries, we place finely ground cumin with egg white on it. If the bowl does not fit into the eye due to its firmness, because some people have very firm eyes. You should take the ointment called “beriad,” and this is its form.
Then you pierce with it the same eye membrane only, and do not touch the hole, but rather make for the bowl a fine place to enter, then insert the bowl as we mentioned. When your work is complete, prepare for the patient a firm bed in which he sleeps on his back in a dark room.
He should avoid all movements and sneezing, and his food should be made soft according to its nature. He should not move his head right or left, and the bandage should remain on until the third day, then it is removed in that dark room, and his vision is tested.
You will cover things, then bring the bandage back on the seventh day, and it is not appropriate to do this during treatment or after removing the cup from your watch, but rather you should avoid doing that before the water rises quickly with strong vision.
If the inflammation is hot, it is necessary to bandage the eye before the seventh day and this is achieved by something that soothes the inflammation. When it subsides, then release its vision and place on its face a dark hood that protects its sight from below for several days while in that dark room. Then
He will leave the house gradually and move about in its surroundings. Know that the cup is not sufficient for a student without observation multiple times, then he can proceed with the work. I have been told by some Iraqis that they mentioned making a porous cup in Iraq which absorbs water.
I have not seen anyone in our country make it, nor have I read about it in any of the ancient books. It may be a recent development. This is an image of various types of cups for one who is ignorant of them.
It is made of copper, specifically, and its tip is in this way with a triangular point.
The fourth and twentieth chapter
On treating polyp in the nose.
There are various types of polyps that can grow in the nose, some resembling a many-legged scorpion, others being cancerous and dark red, while still others are soft and not dark red.
As for the soft type of these polyps, they are not malignant or cancerous. The patient should sit facing the sun, and you should open his nostril, collect wax in that polyp, draw it out, then cut off what you have collected with a fine, sharp hook from one side.
Until you know that all the polyp has gone, for if there is anything left that you cannot cut off, scrape it with one of the smooth instruments until nothing remains. If bleeding or hot worms overcome you.
If it was malignant, quickly cauterize it until the bleeding stops and all the polyp disappears. After cutting, put salt water or plain water in the nostril, so that the nostril opens and the moisture drains to the throat.
"Know that he is clean, for if the moistness does not spread as it should, know that there is fatty flesh over the upper parts of the vertebrae which the instrument has not reached with its cutting.
"And you tie many knots in it, and make a distance of one finger or less between each knot. And the patient draws the end of the thread into his nose with a rod or whatever is possible after he has made it like a probe, and pulls it until it reaches the back of the throat.
"And it comes out of the throat, and this action is often performed by children in books, and it is an easy thing for one who wants to do it. Then gather the ends of the thread, the end that came out of the mouth and the other that remained in the nose.
"Then use the slicing of flesh with the knots in the thread, doing this until you know that the flesh has been cut by the knot of the thread. Then remove the thread and place it in the nose after wiping off the blood, having drunk a palmful of vinegar beforehand. Do this for three days or more.
Until he eats the marrow of all the remaining meat, then another thing in the nose is a lead pipe for days until he recovers, so if he needs treatment, dry bandages are used.
And this is a picture of the syringe with which adenoids and medications are dripped into the nose.
He places a small, candle-like object of silver or copper, open at the end and hollow inside.
And if you wish, the syringe can be made closed like a pipe, and the tip of the syringe should be flat.
It has a grip at the end, as you see, to hold it when the oil or any of the juices or hot things are in it.
Chapter Twenty-Five.
In the thickened part at the end of the nose.
Often, a polyp forms at the end of the nose; it increases in size over time until it disfigures the appearance.
Therefore, it should be cut off as soon as it appears and all of it cauterized, then a paste or a burnt drug that acts like a paste is placed on the spot. If its removal is delayed until it grows large, examine it; if it is hard and pale in color, it has little feeling.
Do not treat it with iron, for it is a cancerous tumor, and I have often seen that when this tumor is cut off, great swelling returns to its owner. If the tumor is soft in texture but dark in color, I found that cutting can be done throughout it. The patient should be discharged and the tumor cut off without hesitation or delay, and treat the area with something that will dry and constrict until it heals.
Chapter Sixteen.
On Stitching the Nose, Lips, and Ear. If its attachment is severed due to a wound or the like, know that when the separation of attachment occurs in any of these parts, very little benefit can be achieved from treatment except in some people.
If anyone is exposed to any of these, look whether the wound is full of blood. If it is, then bring together the lips of the wound with stitching and treat it until it heals. But if the separation has occurred so that its lips are separated and each lip is intact, it is necessary to scrape each lip with a knife until it bleeds.
Then stitch the lips together and bandage them, and place powdered resin and cheese on them, and put above the sutures a plaster of honeycomb or another sticky resin, and leave it for two or three days tightly bound, then unbind it.
The medicine is exchanged and left until the strings separate from it, then it is treated with the scissors until it is healed, and the sewing method is to gather the separation of connection either by thread as we described in abdominal suturing or by needle as you were taught there.
Chapter Twenty-Seven
For the removal of abscesses occurring in the gums.
Some people may develop small, hardened ulcers inside their mouths that resemble tooth decay in some cases and are smaller or larger in others. Therefore, the gum should be turned over and cut into each abscess and hooked with a scalpel.
And it is cut from all sides, and after cutting the place is packed with powdered lime until the bleeding stops, then chewed with vinegar and salt, and the areas are treated with what is in it until the wounds heal.
Chapter Twenty-Eight
On Cutting Excess Flesh in the Gums.
Often, excess flesh grows on the gums, which is called alveolar process by the ancients. It should be hooked with a scalpel or held with forceps and cut at its base, leaving it to drain pus or blood, then a powdered plaster is placed on the site.
And one of the contracting urgencies is the dry atrophied flesh, and if that flesh returns after treatment, it often returns, so cut it a second time and cauterize it, for it does not return again afterwards.
Chapter Twenty-Nine.
Extracting Teeth with Iron.
Sometimes, rough and ugly scales form on the surfaces of the teeth, both inside and outside, and between the gums, which can turn black, yellow, or green, leading to the decay of the gum and the corruption of the teeth.
The patient should sit between your hands with his head resting on the pillow, and you should extract the tooth and the adjacent tooth in which scales and something like sand have appeared until nothing remains, and do the same for the black, green, and yellow [areas] and others until they are clean.
If the first extraction does not remove what is there, repeat the extraction again on another day, a second and a third time, until you achieve your goal. Know that the tooth requires various types of scrapers of different shapes according to what you are preparing for your work.
Because the scraper used to extract a tooth from inside is different from the one used from outside, and the one used between the teeth is of another shape; these are various shapes of scrapers that should all be ready with you.
The Thirtieth Chapter
On the Extraction of Teeth
It is better to treat the tooth from its pain by all means and to avoid extracting it, because if you extract it, there will be no replacement for it since it is a precious jewel. If extraction is not necessary, do not extract it.
If the patient has decided to extract it, it is better that you wait until the tooth's pain subsides. Often, the patient is deceived by the pain and thinks that it is in the healthy tooth, so they extract it but the pain does not go away until the diseased tooth is extracted. We have seen this done repeatedly by barbers.
If the tooth's pain subsides, then at that time it is necessary to tie a thread around the tooth with some force in it until the gum becomes soft from all sides. Then move it with your fingers or fine tweezers, little by little, until it becomes loose.
Then you can use the two large forceps, which are quite effective. Place the patient's head between your knees and restrain him so that he does not move. Then draw the tooth upward to keep it from breaking. If it does not come out, take one of those instruments and insert it under it on both sides with a gentle pressure and wiggle it as you did before. ">
And if the tooth is perforated or eroded, it should be filled with a chip and sealed well with a thin layer of wax so that it does not break when pressed with pliers, and it should be cut around the gum from all sides with a lancet.
And be careful not to break it, leaving some of it behind, as this will cause greater pain to the patient than the original pain. Beware of doing what ignorant barbers do in their bridges and forward actions when they extract a tooth without using what we have described.
For often they cause people great pains, which would be better if the tooth broke and all or part of its root remained. And if the tooth is extracted along with part of the jawbone, as we have seen often, and then he chews after extraction with a drink or salt, if bleeding occurs from the site, this happens frequently, so at that time crush something from the glass and sprinkle it on the site.
And if the glass does not benefit you, then use a plier with long edges and short pincers, thick so that it does not slip when you grip the tooth with it, and this is the form of large pliers.
It should be as you see, the handles are thick so that when you clamp them they do not give way and the ends are short. And let them be of Indian steel or tempered hardened steel with sharp edges, and in their ends are teeth that fit into each other to make a firm and secure clamping.
And the ends can be made like a fork, so they are also strong in grip.
Chapter One and Thirty.
In extracting the roots of teeth and removing broken jawbones.
If, upon extracting a tooth, its root remains and is broken, it is necessary to place a cotton swab with oil on the site for one or two days until the area heals, then insert the probe or tweezers. That resembles the beak of a bird called the "balerja," and this is what tweezers look like:
They are made like a fork from the inside or like an escapefage, and if you cannot extract with these tweezers, it is necessary to dig around the root and expose all the flesh with the probe, then insert the tool that resembles a small chisel, this is its image:.
Short at the ends, slightly thick, and not to be made narrow, lest it breaks. If the root comes out this way, otherwise, use these other instruments that are pictured here. The first is triangular at the end with some thickness in it.
Another fine triangular figure:
And we have also used this double-pronged instrument, pictured here as well.
And with other instruments and saws that were mentioned in the extraction of teeth, we have also used this instrument which resembles a large awl, as pictured here.
Triangular at the end, slightly thick so that it does not break, and not to be made narrow. Know that the instruments for teeth are numerous, as well as other instruments, which cannot be counted. The skilled craftsman who works diligently in his profession may invent tools for himself according to what the work and diseases themselves suggest to him.
For some diseases, the first instruments have not been mentioned due to the variation in their types. If a bone from the jaw or one of the bones of the mouth breaks or decays, search for it in its place with what is suitable for it among these instruments and clamps that were mentioned in the extraction of roots.
And we rely on this shape for it.
It has some greasiness to help set the bone, so it does not slip until the bone comes out. We treat the place with appropriate medications. If the bone is rotten, we clean it of its rottenness and blackness until it becomes clean, then we treat it until it heals.
Chapter Two and Thirty
In the extraction of displaced teeth onto others.
The teeth, if they grow in an unnatural path, are disfigured by that shape, especially if this happens to women and the delicate. It is necessary to look at it: if the tooth has grown behind another tooth.
And if it is not possible to extract or break it, then pull it out. Even if it is attached to another tooth, cut it with this instrument whose shape is as follows:
And it resembles a small pincer and should be made of very sharp Indian iron, and its cutting will take many days because of the hardness of the tooth, lest it cause other teeth to shake. But if it is natia (a type of tooth), we can break it with an instrument from India, whose shape is as follows:
It will all be from India, and its composition is very delicate in carving, it becomes like the molds with which needles are made, cool it a little by little on the tooth for many days, with caution, lest the tooth cracks and falls out, then soften it lastly and grind it with some of the pumice stones.
If the tooth is broken and hurts the tongue when speaking, it should also be cooled until that fracture softens and becomes even, and then it should be smoothed so that the tongue does not hurt and the speech is not spoiled.
Chapter Thirty-Three.
For the teeth that are mobile to be stabilized with silver threads or gold threads.
If the front teeth shake or move due to a blow or fall, and the patient cannot chew anything for fear of them falling out, and they have been treated with astringent medicines but do not benefit from it.
The solution is to stabilize it with a gold thread or silver thread, and gold is better because silver corrodes and decays after days, while gold remains stable forever, not subjecting it to that. And the thread should be medium in thickness and thick enough to fit between the teeth.
The image of the binding, where a thread is taken and enters between the two healthy teeth, then it is sewn with both ends of the thread between the moving teeth, one or more, until the stitch reaches the healthy tooth from the other side.
Then return the stitch to the side from which you began, and hold it with skill and care so that the tooth does not move, and your thread should be tightened at the roots of the teeth to prevent loosening. Then cut both ends of the excess thread with scissors, gather them together, and twist them with silk, hiding them between the healthy tooth and the moving tooth.
To prevent the tongue from being injured, leave it thus tightly bound until it heals. If it becomes loose or breaks, bind it again with another thread and let it remain so for the rest of its life. This is the image of the teeth and the method of binding in two healthy teeth and two moving teeth as you see:
And it may be that one or two teeth return to their original position after falling out and are bound as we have described, and they remain. Only a skilled craftsman can do this. It is also possible to carve a bone from the bones of a cow into the shape of a tooth and place it in the location where the tooth was lost. He will recover as we said and will enjoy that.
The fourth chapter of thirty.
Regarding the cutting of the frenulum that is beneath the tongue and prevents speaking.
This frenulum beneath the tongue can either be naturally occurring from birth, or it may be an acquired condition resulting from a healed wound.
And the procedure is to open the mouth of the patient and place his head on your lap, then lift his tongue, after which you cut the nerve-rich frenulum across its width until the tongue is freed from its constriction. If it is tough and tight, indicating that it resulted from a healed wound, make an incision in it with scissors and split it lengthwise until the frenulum separates and the knot dissolves.
And be careful not to cut deeply into the flesh, lest you sever a vein and cause bleeding. Then have the patient rinse his mouth with rose water or vinegar and cold water after cutting. Then place a piece of cotton under the tongue for the patient to hold every night.
If bleeding occurs, place powdered alum on the wound, and if the blood dominates, wash the area with a sponge soaked in vinegar. Then he treated him with the rest of the treatments until he recovered.
The Fifth and Thirtieth Chapter.
On Extracting the Tongue-born Frog.
A small worm similar to a frog may form under the tongue, preventing it from functioning naturally. It can grow so large that it fills the mouth. The treatment is to open the patient's mouth towards the sun and observe the worm.
If you see it is reddish or black and hard, the patient will not feel it. Do not touch it, for it is cancerous. But if it is inclined towards whiteness and has moisture, make an incision in it with a scalpel, split it gently with a fine probe, and cleanse it from every side.
If blood overwhelms you while operating, place powdered alum on it until the bleeding stops. Then continue your work until you completely remove it. After that, he should rinse his mouth with vinegar and salt.
Then treat him with the appropriate treatments until he recovers.
The Sixth and Thirtieth Chapter.
On Treating the Two-Lobed Worm.
What grows in the throat among other worms may appear within the throat as glands similar to those that appear externally, known as "lobes." If treated with what has been mentioned in division, it does not recover.
Look, if the boil is hard like dark color, with little sensation, do not expose it to iron. If its color is red and its origin is thick, do not expose it to iron out of fear of blood spillage. Instead, leave it until it ripens, whether it is covered or bursts on its own.
If it is white in color and round, and its origin is thin, this is the one that should be cut. The action to perform is to examine before acting; whether the boil has completely calmed down or partially subsided.
At that time, have the patient sit facing the sun with his head on your knee and open his mouth. Take an assistant between you and press his tongue downwards using this instrument depicted here:
It is made of silver or copper, thin like a knife. If you press the tongue with it and see the boil, place your sight on it. Take a lancet, insert it into the almond (the boil), and draw it out as much as possible without drawing any of the veins with it.
Then cut it with this instrument, its depiction is as follows: it resembles a pair of scissors, except that the ends of each are like a bird's beak, and both are very sharp. It is made from Indian steel or Damascene iron.
If you do not have this instrument, then cut it with a portion like this picture.
One side is sharp and the other side is not sharp; after cutting one nut, the others are cut in this manner, then after cutting it is used to wash the patient with cold water or salt and water.
If blood oozes, wash it with water in which pomegranate peels or oak leaves have been boiled until the bleeding stops; then treat it until it heals. It may also develop other wounds besides the nuts, so cut them according to what was mentioned for cutting the nuts in the same way.
A woman was treated for a worm that had grown inside her throat, striking towards the esophagus with little feeling, almost completely blocking the throat. The woman was breathing with difficulty and could not eat or drink water.
She was close to death, and if she had lived another day or two, the worm would have extended branches until they exited through the openings of her nostrils. So she hurriedly took a hook and caught one of them, then pulled it out, and a good piece came out with it. ‌
Then I cut it where I reached it from the nose hole, then I did the same with what appeared from the other nostril, then I opened her mouth and pressed her tongue, then I passed the needle into the same ulcer, then I cut some of it off, and only blood flowed from it.
So the woman's ring fell off and she hurried to drink water, then she ate food, but we did not stop cutting from that ulcer repeatedly over a long time, and the ulcer persisted in growing back until it reached her jawbone.
The ulcer became hollow and formed a cavity inside the ring-shaped ulcer, causing it to stop growing. Then she left and I do not know what God did with her afterwards.
Chapter Seventy-Three
On Cutting a Scirrhous Ulcer
If it protrudes down to the scirrhous ulcer and becomes infected, appearing white and oblong, then it is called a column. But if it thickens at the base and becomes round, it is called a grape. If it is treated with what we mentioned in the section on division, the treatment will not heal.
I saw that the hot ulcer had subsided from her and she was delicate, so it is necessary to cut her, as well as what adheres to it roundly without length, and it is bloody or like the color of flesh or black, or has no feeling; it is necessary to avoid cutting it.
The patient is experiencing pain, so if you see the swelling as described by its whiteness and length, have the patient sit in the sunshine and press the tongue with the instrument whose description was given earlier, then pierce the skin in the groin.
Then pull it down and cut it with one of the two instruments mentioned for cutting cysts, but only what exceeds its natural state should be removed, because if you remove more than that, it will harm the voice and speech.
Then, after cutting, use what we described for cutting cysts and treat it until it heals. If the patient fears cutting it, you should use cauterization to burn it without fear or hesitation. The burning instrument is a strong medicine, which means placing the patient's head on your stone.
Then press the tongue with the instrument mentioned earlier, then take some of the hot water described in the cauterization chapter and dip an unquenched wool thread into it, making sure it is neither too cold nor too thin. Fill this instrument’s container with it, and here is its illustration:
The end that is placed with the medicine should be narrow like the narrow end of a spoon, and the instrument should be placed with the medicine on the affected area while the patient lies on his side so that the liquid flows from inside the hole to prevent anything from descending into the hole and causing harm.
Then take the medicine in your hand and squeeze it onto the affected area for about half an hour until you see it turn black, indicating that the medicine has taken effect. If desired, you can take a cloth and wrap it around the narrow end of the spoon and dip the cloth in the medicine.
And insert the spoon with the cloth into a tube from above until the cloth adheres to the affected area, repeating this until you achieve the desired tightness of the aneurysm. Then leave it alone, for it will dissolve and fall off after three or four days. If further application of the medicine is required, reapply it.
After tightening, wash around the aneurysm with a cloth soaked in oil to remove any remaining medicine. Then rinse with cold water and treat from the outside with compresses and from the inside with enema until it heals. This type of treatment is safer than cutting and further from danger.
The lice are also treated with what is gentle from the incision and excision, it is treated with smoke in this manner: you take a willow, a mulberry tree, an almond tree, a cherry, an apricot, and quince, and similar types of trees. You collect all of them or some of them in a pot and soak them in vinegar.
It is boiled, and the pot is sealed with clay from a wise man's house, and in the middle of the lid there is a hole on which the hollow instrument is placed in this manner, made from silver or copper.
And the end with the plum goes into the mouth of the patient until the steam reaches the lice through the tube, until the lice are dead; then it is repeated on them several times until they are all killed. Be careful not to perform this treatment at the first appearance of the boil.
For it often increases the boil, and it is only appropriate to do this when the heat of the boil subsides. If you do not have this instrument, take a reed and place at its end a shell from an egg so that the patient's mouth does not burn.
Because the eggshell prevents the heat of the steam from burning the mouth, and this is a good treatment in terms of both effectiveness and safety.
Chapter Eighty-Three
In removing the tooth and whatever grows in the neck besides that.
Often in the neck grows bone, tooth, or some other thing. Therefore, one must remove from it whatever is visible and can be seen after the tongue has been pressed with an instrument at the sun.
So that you may know what is in the neck, and what has not appeared to you and is hidden in the neck, it is necessary for the patient to fast before his food settles in its place. Perhaps the growing thing will come out with coughing, or the patient will swallow a piece of fat or root of lettuce.
Or he may swallow a morsel of dry bread, or take a piece of soft sea sponge, tie it to a thread and then swallow it. Then if it reaches the place of the tooth, pull the thread quickly, doing this several times.
But often the tooth or bone gets stuck in it and comes out. If it does not come out with what we have mentioned, then use an instrument made of lead in this shape:
It should be harder than wax by a little, and in its end there is a clamp that the patient puts into his neck with difficulty while raising his head upwards. He must guard against touching his throat lest it cause pain, and he pushes out the bone or tooth with it, or the physician enters it with his hand.
And the insertion of the probe into it is best due to his knowledge of the place of the displaced thing, and he pushes it down or pulls it up with the instrument until it comes out.
Chapter Nineteen and Thirty.
On the extraction of displaced blood from the vein.
If the vein has been treated with what we mentioned in the section on drug treatment and it does not heal, then look at the patient's veins in sunlight after compressing his tongue with the instrument that I have described to you.
If your sight falls on the vein, draw it with a small hook or with a fine, hard probe. If you are unable to do so, take an open tube and insert it into the patient's vein near the vein, then insert an iron probe covered with fire into the tube.
Do this repeatedly and the patient should abstain from drinking water for the entire day. Then he takes a mouthful of cold water, opens his mouth over it, swishes it around without swallowing any, and moves the water with his hand from time to time.
If you feel the vein drop into place, then it will come out with the water. But if it does not emerge as described, then dry the vein with urine and with hellebore using the instrument that was described in the chapter on cautery. Do this repeatedly until it drops.
And the method for using incense is to take a container with a lid, make a hole in its center, and place the end of the tube in that hole. Then, place the incense, and have the patient put their mouth over the end of the tube, closing their mouth so that the incense does not escape until it reaches the throat.
If the polyp does not fall off, repeat the use of incense several times, and the patient should endure thirst, eating salt and garlic, but not drink water. This way, it will certainly come out. And this is an image of a device used to draw the polyp from the throat if it falls into view.
They resemble leeches, as you see, except that they have this proboscis that enters the throat, and its tip resembles a bird's beak, in which there is a cold cauterization tool if it latches onto something, it will not let go.
Another device is used to press the tongue, which is a wide iron ring that fits in the mouth over the tongue and stands upright on its side, keeping the mouth open against the patient's will and preventing them from removing it until it is pulled out.
The instrument that opens the mouth to this measure by itself.
Chapter Forty.
On the suturing of wounds and tearing them open.
Wounds are of many kinds, each with its own specifications for suturing and tearing them open, as will be mentioned in this book, one by one. They differ in their suturing and tearing according to two types: one type is similar to the wound itself, including what it contains of moisture.
The second type is based on the bodily location where the wound occurs, because a wound occurring in the head is not like a wound occurring in the abdomen, and a wound occurring in a fleshy area is not like a wound occurring in a joint; each of these has its own rules for treatment.
Among the wounds are those that should not be sutured until the pus in them has matured and is complete, and there are those that should be sutured while they are still fresh and not yet fully healed, such as wounds near joints.
Because if a wound occurs near a joint and its matter matures, the surrounding area may decay, affecting the ligaments or nerves of that joint, which can cause paralysis of that limb. The wound could also be near a principal organ.
If you delay suturing until it coagulates, you will harm the main member or it will be close to the anus and you will suture it tightly with a needle, and you should only suture the worm with a needle if it is partially coagulated near the anus so that the wound does not become gangrenous and penetrates into the anus and becomes narcotic.
And it should be sutured when it is completely coagulated, which occurs with the subsidence of wound pain and the disappearance of swelling and reddening and throbbing, and the drying of the head of the wound and other signs.
And it is desirable that the suture be placed below the wound if possible, so that it is easier for the pus to flow downward or in a higher part of the wound and more resistant, and let the suture pass through the length of the body if the wounds are near the hands and feet.
And in the places of muscles, tendons, nerves, and vessels, in short, in all flat places that have no swelling; as for those that swell, let the suture go according to that place. But if the wound is in fleshy places, it is better to leave its suture.
Until he is ready to be cooked as we mentioned, for if you cook it before that, the sperm will come out of it and it will have much pus and corruption, and perhaps its cheek and throat will become stiff, and some of the wounds may stick on the surface of the body according to necessity or according to what the member needs.
It is necessary to use a single dressing for small wounds and a large dressing or many cuts according to the size of the wound, and there are some wounds that require the skin to be cut if it has become like a scar.
It has become like what is seen in many scars and wounds, and among them are those that cut with three corners, and among them are those from which a piece is cut like the shape of the leaf of a fig tree.
Among them are those in which the circular cut and the crescent-shaped cuts, and similar cuts, are used. And if it does not have a head like flat, soft wounds, then a simple dressing should be applied to it. If the wound is large and has collected a lot of pus and has been cooked, do not rush so that all the pus comes out at that time.
You extract some of it, then tighten the bandage until another day, then you extract some more pus as well; repeat this gradually until all of it is extracted.
Especially if the patient is weak, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an old man with senility; for the vital force often disappears with the outflow of pus in one go, and sometimes the patient may die while you feel nothing. Beware of this matter greatly.
After dressing these wounds, it is appropriate to wash the wound and examine it. If the wound of the bandage is small or if there is only one simple opening, use cotton or linen wool. But if the pus is abundant and the openings of the wound are many,
Then it is necessary to insert a woolen thread into each opening until they meet, and if the pus has separated part of the skin or destroyed it, it should be stuffed with dry cotton wool or linen cloth, and tightened until the third day.
Then remove it and treat it with the appropriate remedies until it heals. But if bleeding occurs during treatment, use cold water and vinegar after dipping a cloth in them, and place it on the bleeding site repeatedly.
If the ulcer persists, it is necessary to use poultices and treatments and the urgencies that we have described in many places in this book, and from the division, if you are in winter and the place of the wound is full of nerves, it is necessary to warm the edges with hot drink and oil.
And place it on the spot, and if you are in summer and the places are fleshy, it is necessary to carry the edges soaked in water or oil, or with drink and oil, all of that cold, until on the third day, as we have said, it is necessary for the wound to open and clean it.
And use what is appropriate for its treatment until it heals. This is all that is needed in the knowledge of treating wounds in general. As for the method of detailing, each wound has been mentioned briefly and summarily in the order of its treatment.
The First Forty Chapter
On the Cuts of Wounds Exposed in the Skin of the Head.
There are small wounds exposed in the skin of the head, which are of the type called sebaceous cysts, similar to a chicken's egg, and they have many types: some are oily, while others contain moisture resembling pus.
And among them is what contains moisture resembling alum and the like, and some of it is hardened and solid, and all of it has no danger in its breaking or extraction unless you are prevented from breaking it by a vein.
And the work in breaking it is to wait for it first with the tool whose form will be shown after this, which is called the probe, so that you know what it contains. If it contains moisture, break it by making a long, straight incision on this image:
Begin the incision from line ~B~ to line ~J~. If the moisture is released, remove all of the sac that contained it and cut off all of it without leaving any of its residue, for if left, it often returns.
Then wash a piece of cotton in vinegar, if available, or in salt water, and fill the wound with it. Leave it until the next day, for it will eat away any remaining sac. After that, apply another and third piece of cotton soaked in vinegar, if necessary.
Until you are sure that nothing remains of the sac, then treat the wound with vinegar until it heals. And if the inflammation contains an oily substance, break it like this:
Cut the bone and use the dental forceps in the wound, then scrape it from all sides, and put your effort into removing the splinter that contains it. If a vein obstructs you, do what I described to you before, and likewise do in the worm if it is exposed from the cut.
The treatment is the same as mentioned, and cutting over an exposed worm is easier because there is less blood and moisture. Some of these wounds in the head may have no pus with them. For example, I cut over a worm in
I cut into the head of an old woman and found the worm to be hard like a solid stone, rough and white. It could not be broken even if someone threw it. And this was different from other wounds in the head except for those similar to the wounds that occur in children's heads.
When cutting the roots of the teeth, make all cuts simple and open their base from below to facilitate the flow of pus downward; then treat it with a suitable treatment.
Chapter Two Hundred and Four.
In the case of cutting into the boils that occur in the neck, which often appear in this part of the body, as well as under the armpits and in the groin area, they can also appear in other parts of the body. The one that appears in the neck is usually a single boil, but it can be many and some develop from others.
Each of these polyps is within a special pouch, just as it is with the tonsils and sinuses that we have described. The types of these polyps are many; some are warty, others contain moisture, and still others are malignant and do not respond to treatment.
What I saw of them in a healthy state was pleasant to touch, and their appearance was close to the color of the skin, moving in all directions, not adhering to any nerve or vein or artery, nor was it ulcerated. It is necessary to cut it with a simple incision from top to bottom of the body in this shape, like line ~j~ to line ~b~.
Wash it from all sides and pull the edges of the skin together with needles or two needles or many stitches if needed, as we have said in the sinuses. Extract it little by little and let it be on a necklace so that no vessel or nerve is cut and the suture should not be very tight.
So that your hand does not increase the cutting or frighten the patient and cut what you do not need to cut, if you have cut a vessel or artery and it prevents work, then put powdered alum or some of the herbs that stop bleeding in the wound.
And the wound healed and was left until the inflammation subsided, and the wound began to heal and dry up, for the blood was cut off at that time, so return to your work until you are free, then examine with your small finger if there is still some small warts, then cut them out and clean them.
If there is a large vein at the root of the wart, it is necessary not to cut that wart from its root, but rather to tie it with strong double thread and leave it until it falls off by itself without harm, then fill the wound with cotton wool soaked in Egyptian myrrh, then treat it.
And if the entire wart is cut off, it is necessary to close the lips of the wound and sew it from its edge after knowing that there is no remaining fragment, but if you see that a piece of the wart's bone has remained.
It is necessary to aim with the cut towards its root and base, and use suturing as mentioned. As for what is left of the warts, cover them with a simple dressing where it shows signs of healing, and place the dressing lower as we said.
Then use the Egyptian myrobalan and similar for a while, until you see that the wound has cleansed itself. Treat it with fresh meat broths until it heals.
Chapter Thirty-Four.
In the case of a hernia due to worms within the testicle.
As mentioned earlier, this type of hernia in the scrotum is not seen among our people, and this is what they say. However, butchers should avoid having a hernia in the scrotum because it will not benefit them.
Because all the organs and the brain will be sick, and as for those with hot worms in the mouth or the testicles or both, if there is no problem in the spine, it is necessary to use scrotal hernia to escape from the infection that results from strangulation.
If we wish to do that, it is necessary to make the scrotal hernia under three or four vertebrae, making small incisions in width between two vertebrae so that the incision is in the loins and not in the intestines, and this place is suitable for the incision.
The surgeon should extend the skin of the finger with a scalpel, then cut the skin until he reaches the bone next to the blood vessel if he sees anything from it.
Then he should cut the tendon that we described, and discern the cutting of the bone from the marrow that comes out with it, along with the loss of voice and sound. The wound is left open for some time. When the time of fearing adhesion has passed, the edges of the wound are gathered together from the skin.
And he is treated alone, without the use of tourniquets, and medicines that promote healing are used until he recovers. The author of this book explains that the statement we mentioned means: if they see the patient has closed his finger with one of these scars.
And the patient approaches death, and his soul intends to separate (from his body), they go to cutting the throat so that the patient can breathe over the wound for a little while and be saved from death. They were commanded to leave the wound open until the course of the disease is completed, and its course is three days or thereabouts.
They were ordered to stitch the wound and treat it until it heals. What I saw myself was that a servant took a knife and sent it to her neck, which cut part of the windpipe, so she was called for treatment, and it was found swelling like a slaughtered animal, so the wound was uncovered.
They found that the blood coming from the wound was flowing, so they knew she had not cut a nerve or vein, and there was air escaping from the wound. So they hurried to mark the wound and treat it until she recovered, and nothing happened to the servant except a slight hoarseness in his voice, no more than that.
After a few days, she returned to her better condition, so from here we say that cutting the throat has no danger in it.
Chapter Forty-Four.
In the case of cutting the worm that appears outside in the throat and is called the fillet of the throat.
This worm, which is called the fillet of the throat, can be a large worm, resembling the color of the body. It is common in women and has two types.
It may be natural or acquired. The natural one is harmless, while the acquired type can have two forms: one resembles fatty tumors, and the other resembles the worm that results from blocked bile ducts; cutting it is dangerous. Do not expose it with the smooth iron unless it was small, if you preserved it and tested it with the probe, then sew it like a fatty tumor and it was not attached to any of the vessels, cut it as you would on a fatty tumor. And extract it with what contains it in the sack, if it is in a sack; otherwise, remove all of them and then treat the place as needed.
The Fifty-Fifth Section
On cutting into types of tumors.
Tumors are of many types and all their types have been mentioned in the division. It is necessary to mention here the difference between a tumor and an abscess, as it is problematic. I say that with an abscess there is heat, inflammation, and severe pain until the fever subsides. And the fungus completes it, at which point the heat and pain subside. A tumor does not have any heat, inflammation, or pain, and it is enclosed in a sack with a specific opening that is the same color as the body. Its beginning is like a pimple and then becomes like a wart, larger or smaller.
It is of two types: either fatty or containing moisture, and the colors of moisture are numerous as mentioned in the classification. Therefore, if it reaches the stage of treating the wound, it should be left to dry out and then examined with an instrument called a probe, as shown in the following chapter.
Measure the bone's ulcer, then insert the probe and observe what comes out in its wake. If moist matter of any color emerges, split it with a simple incision as described for other ulcers. If no moisture appears in the probe's trail, know that it is fatty.
Make an incision on it with a curved incision as shown to you, and attach it with sutures. Peel the skin from all sides with forceps, and keep it in a bag if you can remove it correctly along with the wound.
If the bag tears during the procedure and you cannot remove it intact, often this occurs. So remove it piece by piece until nothing remains of it. For if any part of it remains, small or large, the wound will likely recur.
If the wound is severe and only a small part of it remains, treat the wound with harsh caustic substances when you are free from other necessities. Close the wound and apply something hot that attracts worms, and treat it with the rest of the remedies until it heals. If the wound is large, cut its lips and treat it with what can be used as an adhesive.
If you encounter a pulsating or non-pulsating artery, and there is oozing of blood, hasten to treat the area with powdered lime. Leave it tightly packed for two or three days until the wound heals and the bleeding stops. Then return to cutting what remains of the vessel.
Chapter Sixty-four.
In the figures of the instruments.
The instruments used in trephining and probing, of which are the figures of trepans, which are three types: large, medium, and small.
Image of a large trepan:
Image of a medium trepan:
Image of a small trepan:
The boring instrument is made of iron, square and hard to quickly enter the bones, and these are the figures of the drills, which are also called borers; they are three types: large, medium, and small. Image of a large borer:
A clear picture in the middle.
A small clear picture.
It is suitable for examining ulcers, wounds, sinuses, and cavities regarding what they contain of bones and other things. It should be made round, polished, smooth like mirrors from tin or lead, or from copper, iron, or silver, and the best is made from lead.
It can also be made from black lead, and it is suitable for examining sinuses which have twists in their depths so that the light will reflect off those twists along with that reflection, and there are three types of them because some are long, others are medium, and others are short.
A picture of a large lead mirror, according to the size and narrowness required by each sinus, making its thickness according to the capacity and narrowness of the sinus.
A medium-sized lead mirror picture.
A small lead mirror picture.
Pictures of forceps, which are many types, for there are simple ones, meaning those with one clamp, and they are three types: large, medium, and small. And there are blind forceps, which are three types, and there are forceps with multiple clamps, which are three types, and there are serrated forceps with multiple clamps. And there are three types, one of which is the three-edged needle with three types, and all these types require a large, simple shape: A medium simple form: A small simple form:
Blind large needle form: A medium blind needle form:
A small blind needle form
Large needle with points Medium needle with points Small needle with points
Large three-edged needle
Medium three-edged needle Small three-edged needle
And these are the forms of needles that pierce and tear the flesh and wounds, and they are three types, some large, some medium, and some small. Large needle form:
Medium needle form:
Small needle form
Its edges that pierce are limited, and the other ends are unlimited, and this is done so that it can be used to tear the flesh when there is a fear of cutting off a nerve or tendon, and the patient will endure with it some relief from the burning sensation he finds when tearing the worm.
Here are the images of the treacherous, which are three types: large, medium, and small. Image of a large treachery:
It is made of copper that looks like lead, and on one end it resembles a broad spoon with two layers, at the tip of which is a hidden blade shaped like a bird's tongue that extends inward and outward as you wish to see.
Images of the tricksters that hide between the fingers when bandaging the wounds, which the patient does not feel, and they are three types: large, medium, and small. Image of a large trickster:
Images of the lancets used to cut blood vessels, which are three types: large, medium, and small. Image of a large lancet:
They are made of copper or turned Chinese [steel] slightly long as you see, and they should be sharp. It is necessary for these types of lancets to be with you, large and small, to cut blood quickly in case of need and when there is no medicine.
Do not use in cutting blood vessels in any part of the body, but only in fleshy parts such as the calf muscles, thighs, arm muscles, shoulder, abdomen, and similar fleshy parts.
And from it are made smaller instruments, resembling the husk of walnuts in this image:.
It cuts blood if it leaks from a ruptured vein, or when cutting a nerve or artery, and similar instruments can be made as shown in this image:
Chapter Seventy-Four.
In the treatment of male breast conditions.
If a man's breast swells up at the time of puberty and resembles a woman’s breast, it will remain warm and ugly. Therefore, if one dislikes this, it is necessary to make an incision on the breast with a lunar-shaped incision as shown in this image.
From line A to line B: Then scrape off all the fat, then fill the wound with a medicated ointment. Next, suture the edges of the wound with stitches and treat it until it heals. If the breast is sagging and the bone is exposed as in women's breasts,
It is necessary that it be cut along its upper sides with two cuts resembling the shape of a crescent, each connected to the other at their ends so that the larger line surrounds the smaller one, as shown in this image: From line ~B~ to line ~G~, then clean the skin between the cuts and remove the fat. Use what we have mentioned of sutures and bandages, and whatever other treatment is needed until it heals.
If the cut is not absorbed as it should be due to the patient's anxiety or excessive bleeding, it is necessary to stuff the wound with cotton soaked in vinegar and leave it until what remains of the fat is eaten away, then treat it until it heals.
Chapter Eighty-Four.
In treating ulcers that are exposed under the skin.
These ulcers that are exposed under the skin are of the hard, pigmented type contained in a sac; some contain fluids. If it contains fluid, it should be cut with a crescent-shaped incision like this.
From line ~B~ to line ~G~, so if all the pus in the ulcer has drained out, stuff it with cotton wool and leave it until the next day, then remove the cotton.
And treat it with the corresponding cautery until it is healed, for if the ulcer is of the type of hog boil, incise it as we mentioned in the incision on pigs, whether the wound has reached the bone or not. If the wound reaches the bone, use the trephine as we mentioned previously.
Chapter Forty-Nine.
In the incision of the ulcer that appears before the shins or wrists, which is called aneurysm.
If the shin is injured and the skin above it is lacerated, often an ulcer appears from this, and likewise, a swelling or ulcer can also appear in the wrist.
And the signs by which it is recognized whether the ulcer and swelling are from the shin or wrist: if the ulcer is from the shin, it will be rectangular and deep in the flesh, and if you press on the ulcer with your finger, you will feel as if it has a pulse.
And that which is from the wrist will be circular on the surface of the flesh. The incision into these ulcers is dangerous, especially in the foot, ankle, neck, and many other parts of the body. It was very common, so it is necessary to avoid treating them with iron.
And what was also in the extremities or in the head should be avoided, for whatever swelling of the veins occurred, it was necessary to incise on it in the skin a longitudinal incision, then open the incision with scissors, and clean the vein and free it from the thrombus.
Then it should be probed until it is opened, and a needle should be inserted under it and passed to the other side, and the vein should be tied with a double thread in two places as I have shown you for tying the veins in the fingers, then press on the place between the two ligatures so that all the blood comes out.
And the worm will dissolve, and the treatment that produces pus should be used until the ligatures fall off, then it should be treated with appropriate compresses until it heals.
And if the worm is before the incision of the vein, it is necessary to grasp with your hand as much of the worm with the skin as possible, then insert a needle below the place you have grasped and pass it through, and in it a double thread until it comes out on the other side. Then tie the worm well with a knot from both sides at the ends of the thread, as I have told you for tying the grape stalk from both sides at the ends of the thread. And if you fear that the threads may slip, insert another needle with another thread under all the worm where the first needle passes.
Your sutures have been placed in four locations; then the worm has been pierced through its center until what is within it comes out, after which the surplus skin is cut off and what remains of it is left attached. Then a pad that has been soaked in vinegar and oil is placed upon it. Then the treatment with pine nuts and pomegranates is used until he recovers.
Chapter Fifty.
On the worm that appears from the spinal cord.
Just as the worm appears in the veins and arteries, it also appears in the nerve if a blow occurs to it or due to excessive fatigue or similar causes. It is more common in the locations of the fingers and toes.
In every location where the joints move, there is a worm that resembles the color of the rest of the body and does not usually cause pain. However, if it is pressed firmly, the patient will feel a sensation similar to ants crawling on them, and the worm will not be deeply embedded within the body.
Rather, it will be under the skin and will move in all directions except forward or backward. Thus, what is found in the joints should not be removed with iron because it may cause paralysis. What is found in the head or forehead...
Peel the skin with tweezers, if the worm is small, grasp it with forceps and cut it from its root; if it is large, lash it with a ligature and then extract it, then gather the wound with sutures and treat it until it heals.
Chapter Fifty-One
On Cutting the Intestines That Are Exposed in the Abdomen
Many people have intestines exposed in their abdomens and other parts of their bodies, known as adhesions because they resemble the navel. Their origin is thin, while their tip is thick. Sometimes its two lips are reversed, and it can be small or very large.
I once saw a man who had two intestines in his abdomen, resembling the navel without any difference. They were white and thin at their origin, sometimes reversed and fissured, with moisture constantly oozing from them. I cut them out; one weighed about eighteen ounces, the other about six ounces.
The procedure for cutting them is to observe: if the patient is wet and the color of the intestine is white, moist, and thin at its origin, cut it with a wide pair of tweezers, and have a sponge ready in the fire, because often when they are cut, much blood flows.
If the bleeding overwhelms you, tie it off. And if you see the patient is pale and frightened from being cut with iron, take a thread of firm lead and tighten the hemorrhage that has this description, and leave it for two days, then increase the tightening of the lead. Do not stop tightening the lead.
Whenever you feel a hemorrhage, keep cutting until it separates and falls on its own without any bleeding. If the hemorrhage is fleshy, there will be some fear and concern in cutting it, especially if it's in the abdomen, but it might still be possible to cut half of it or part of it.
Then tie it off to prevent its return, then treat it until the wound heals. Be careful not to cut a hemorrhage that is like a slight pain, dark in appearance, for it is a malignant wound, and we will mention cancer later on.
Chapter Two Hundred Fifty-Five
In the Treatment of Cysts of the Uterus.
Cysts of the uterus may have many causes, either from the tearing of the ligament on the abdomen, causing pus or water to escape into the rest of the womb; or from blood that flows from a vein or vessel that has been cut beforehand; or from wind trapped beneath it.
If it is before the break of the membrane and the exit of the placenta, then the worm will be similar in color to the body, soft without pain, and in different positions. And if it is before the excretion of urine, its position will be more different from what we have described. If you press it with your fingers, it disappears then returns, and sometimes there is a crackling sound. It becomes very large when entering a warm bath and during severe exhaustion. If it is before moisture, it will be soft.
It does not disappear when pressed with your hand, nor does it increase or decrease. If it is before the blood, then along with these signs, the worm appears black. If it is before well-cooked meat, the worm will be hard and stiff, and it will remain in one place.
If it is from before the wind, its touch will be soft. The treatment for this is to observe that if the worm appears before the blood of the veins or the artery or the wind, then one should refrain from treating it, for there is danger and uncertainty in that, as I have informed you in the chapter where I mentioned the worms that occur before the veins and the artery.
If the swelling is due to a tumor or an abscess, it is necessary for the patient to hold his breath and stand straight. Then he should be taught how to press around the entire swelling with even pressure. Then command him to lie on his back between your hands, then wrap a broad bandage around the swelling in the place you pressed, then extend the center of the worm upwards with a large bandage, then secure the wrapping place with a strong thread or silk suture, bound and reliable.
And the knot of the bandage should be loops, then open the center of the pressurized worm above the bandage and insert your little finger into it and seek the tumor, if you find it taken by the bandage, tighten the loops and push the tumor into the abdomen, and if it is an abscess, extend it with a bandage.
And cut off its tip, and if you find a vessel or vein in it, tie it with strong thread and return to your work. Then take two needles, insert two strong threads into them, then insert the two needles into the wrapping you made around the worm, two firm stitches that have been pulled through. Then press the worm in four places on the needles.
If you wish, remove the thread and leave the place until the compressed flesh decays and falls off by itself, or cut it if it becomes soft and decayed. Then treat it with what is necessary from medicaments until he recovers, for the wound has become deep in the flesh.
Or if there is moisture, the worm should be cauterized as we said and the blood or moisture found in it should be removed. Then treat it with what helps to heal the place.
Chapter Thirty-Five
Treatment of Cancer
We have mentioned in the division the types of cancer and how to treat it with medicines, and we have warned against treating it with iron lest it ulcerate. We have also mentioned cancer that occurs in the womb and warned against treating it.
And the predecessors mentioned that when cancer is in a place where it can be completely removed, such as cancer that occurs in the breast or thigh and similar limbs that allow its removal intact, especially if it is small at the beginning. However, if it has advanced and become large, it should not be approached.
For I have not been able to cure anyone of it, nor have I seen anyone before me reach a cure, and the treatment for it, if it is possible as we said, is to cauterize it in advance so that the patient can be spared from the black days, then it will putrefy if it is in the veins clearly.
Then, place the patient in a position that allows for the operation, then insert the hooked probes into the cancerous area that is suitable for it, then cut it from all sides with the skin until its roots are completely removed, and leave the blood to flow without cutting it quickly.
Then, apply pressure to the area and clot all the thick blood with your hand or any available tools. If bleeding interferes with the work due to cutting a large vessel or vein, open the artery until the bleeding stops, then treat it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
Chapter Forty-Five.
On the Treatment of Cataracts.
We have been informed in the division of the types of thirst, how water collects, and the signs of each type and its treatment with medicines; that which is treated with iron is only the thick type alone, and one should not approach the thin or the soft fleshy type with iron.
For that is a fight; if you have treated this thick type of cataract with medicines and your treatment has not been effective, then look (to see) if the patient has severe weakness or another disease besides the cataract such as having it.
Treatment for hemorrhoids or similar conditions, do not treat with iron, as it causes harm. If you see the patient is strong and only suffers from piles, and he is neither a child nor an elderly man, then the treatment for him is to have the patient stand between your hands. And a servant behind him squeezing his abdomen with his hands, pushing the water downwards towards the anus. Then, take seven figs in this manner.
Long, with two ends, and defined at the tip like a fig, except that it has a little fat on it, so that when you work it into the anus it does not hurt. Then look to see if the piles are produced from the direction of the anus.
It is necessary to insert the finger from behind, three fingers' width below the navel, above the anus. If the piles are produced by a liver disorder, then your finger should be easy and smooth for three fingers' width from the navel. If they are produced by a spleen disorder, then the finger should be on the right side, three fingers' width.
It is also not advisable for the finger to be on the side where the patient wants to lie down, lest the feces flow to that weak spot. Then, pierce the entire skin with the instrument, then insert the instrument into that opening and lift your hand.
In the nail bed between the skin and the nail, as if you are scraping it, and the amount you scrape will be the size of a fingernail or similar. Then you drill into the nail until the scar reaches an empty space, which is the place of water, then you bring it out and insert the instrument whose image is this.
It is a semi-cylindrical tube made of thin copper or polished soft brass, with a small hole at its bottom and three holes on its sides: two from one side and one from the opposite side, as you see.
The end of it may be fitted with a blunt point, resembling the tip of a pen, as shown in this image.
At its upper end is a ring, for if the instrument reaches the water, it will descend on its own from the tube onto the instrument, emptying itself of water in moderate amounts over time. If it empties more than necessary at once, the patient may die due to the loss of vital spirits.
Or it may expose him to a condition close to death, but empty it according to his strength and what his condition indicates about the strength of his pulse and the good color [of his skin]. Then remove the instrument and retain the water, for it retains from the tube.
Because of the skin that adheres to the hole in the nose which I informed you to close with this method, then you return to apply the instrument again on another day if you see the patient capable of it.
And a small amount of water will also come out, do this for several days while you are lying down and be careful not to make mistakes until only a little water remains, for if you fear for the patient and leave too much water, bury him in hot sand.
And excessive sweating in the bath and the sun, and letting him endure thirst, and treating him with desiccant drugs until he is cured, and he should be cautious with food, drink and cold after the water comes out as I described earlier.
The Fifty-Fifth Chapter.
In the treatment of newborns whose urethral openings are not perforated or are too narrow, or in an incorrect position.
Some children may come out of their mother's womb and foreskin not perforated, it is necessary to hasten to perforate it from the first hour after birth.
With a very thin knife on this image:
Then place a thin lead wire in the hole and tie it, and hold it for three or four days. Whenever he wants to urinate, divert him from it and make him wait, then return him to it. And if you do not put the lead, it may be that the urine passing over the place does not leave it open.
The one whose fistula is narrow should be treated with lead as we have said for many days until it expands, and those of them whose fistula is in a place other than its proper location, and that is because some are born and the fistula is at the end of the intestine, so he cannot urinate forward.
...until he raises the flaccid member with his hand to above, and nothing comes out of it before the semen can reach the womb on its own, which is a very ugly cause, and the way to deal with this is that the patient should ejaculate onto his back.
Then stretch his intestine with your left hand strongly, and expose the head of the penis with a knife or a sharp iron needle as thick as a pen, as if you are carving something, so that there is a hole in the middle like an intestine, and let the fistula fall into the center where it should be.
And be careful during your work to prevent blood spillage, for it is often a problem that requires treatment with something that stops bleeding and heals the wound until it recovers.
Chapter Sixty-Five
On the fistula that appears in the bladder, intestine, ulcer, rotting, and adhesion of the bladder to the intestine.
This wound often appears in the analysis, and it is a severe inflammation of the flesh. Some of it is bad, and some of it is not. The non-bad part should be treated with a delicate needle.
It should be cut until it is completely cleaned, then apply a cotton swab soaked in honey to it. After that, treat it with date syrup until it heals. However, if the wound is severely inflamed and dark in color, an iron should be used after cutting and cleaning it.
If the wound is in a fold and has not been cauterized, and part of the wound is inside the fold while another part is outside, it is necessary to remove the inner part of the wound first, so that when it heals, then treat the outer part.
Because if you treat both parts together, the fold may be pierced. It also appears in women and in folds as blackness and putrefaction. All that has turned black or will turn black should be cut out.
Then apply honey on it afterward, along with finely ground and sieved pomegranate peels and myrtle. After that, treat it with the rest of the medications until it heals. If blood oozes out, use a crescent-shaped cauterizer like this:.
And indeed, the stone is beneficial for both conditions, meaning bleeding and wound infection if they become corrupted. So if the bladder was consumed and it went with its contents at an inappropriate time, then a lead tube should be inserted into the course of the penis to let the patient urinate through it. As for the adhesion of the peritoneum to the bladder...
And this adhesion only occurs in one whose peritoneum is healthy and not required to be removed. It may also result from a wound or a bullet. It is necessary to clean it with a sponge until the attachment dissolves, allowing the bladder to separate completely.
If it is difficult to distinguish between the two during surgery, some of both the bladder and the peritoneum should be cleaned. The peritoneum is thin and may tear easily due to its delicacy. Then separate the peritoneum from the bladder with a thin, cold-water-soaked cotton swab so that it does not adhere again.
Then it should be treated with astringent drink until it heals.
Chapter Seventy-Five.
On the purification of children and the treatment of their ailments.
The incision is not anything but a separation of connection like all other surgeries, except that when it is done by our intent and used on children in particular, we must describe the best action.
And the easiest way to safety is as follows: I say that the ancients did not mention incision in any of their writings because it was not used in their practices, but rather it is something we have acquired.
Through experience, I found that most surgeons and barbers use purification with a knife and scissors, and they use the lancet and ligature with thread and nail cutting. I have tried all these methods.
I did not find anything better than purification with scissors and ligature with thread, because purification with a knife often damages the skin, as the skin of the cap is in two layers. Sometimes it cuts the outer layer and leaves the inner layer.
Therefore, one is forced to make another cut and the pain persists. Purification with a lancet does not ensure cutting the tip of the foreskin because it sometimes enters its opening. As for purification with the nail, the skin may be torn and your work spoiled, or the child's skin might naturally be short...
It is often born that way, so there is no need for correction. I have seen this, and as for the correction with scissors and suturing with thread, experience has shown me its superiority because the scissors are appropriate for cutting since the blade above is like the blade below.
When you align the two blades and cut in one motion, at one time, the suture knot will be almost flush with the skin of the circumcision from all sides, avoiding any mistake in the foreskin, and the first step is to make an incision.
Especially since it is someone who does not understand much that you only tie the thread in his foreskin and leave it until another day, then release and remove it in every way possible from him, and what he can accept with his mind, then stop him between your hands with an erection.
He should not be sitting and the scissors should not be in your pocket or under your foot, so that the child's foreskin does not fall on them or on any of the instruments. Then, insert your hand into his foreskin and blow air into the skin, raising it until the tip of the foreskin comes out.
Then clean what collects in it from the decay, then tie the marked place with a double thread, then tie a little below it a second tie, then grasp with your fingers and the clamp the place of the lower tie firmly, and cut between the two ties. Then lift the skin quickly to above and extract the tip of the lancet, then allow the blood to flow a little, which is better and lessens the injury from the lancet, then wipe it with a wet cloth, then sprinkle on it some dry burnt pumice powder, which is the best I have tried, or also some flour.
Then lift the skin quickly to above and extract the tip of the lancet, then allow the blood to flow a little, which is better and lessens the injury from the lancet, then wipe it with a wet cloth, then sprinkle on it some dry burnt pumice powder, which is the best I have tried, or also some flour. Then place on the ulcers from above with a piece of cooked white cloth soaked in rose water mixed with good quality rose oil, and leave it on until the next day, then treat it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
And this is an image of the scissors suitable for cauterization.
It should be a cutting forceps without any spring, and the length of the two blades should be equal to the length of the handles. As for the mistakes that occur in cauterization, sometimes the entire inner skin or part of it may be turned over during the cut. Therefore, you must straighten it with your fingers before the place becomes numb.
Do not cut it on a swelling, for if you cannot hold it with your fingernails, draw it out with pincers and cut it off. If three days have passed and the area under the swollen head remains swollen and warm, leave it until the hot worm settles and pull it out with tweezers.
Cut it according to what is suitable for you, and preserve the head of the swelling. If something is cut from the head of the swelling, it does not harm, so treat it with whatever heals the wound from the medications that we have described in the chapter on medications.
Even if the skin is cut more than necessary and it heals over, this also does not cause much harm. So treat it with what we have mentioned until it heals.
Chapter Eighty-Five.
On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retained urine in the bladder occurs due to obstruction by a stone, blood clot, tumor, or similar things. Therefore, if this is treated with what we have mentioned according to the method of treatment described in the division.
If the urine does not pass and you see that it is retained due to a stone that has caused damage in the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary for the patient to lie on his back and someone should step on his abdomen with their foot, stretching it towards his back. The patient should hold himself as much as he can.
In that case, the bladder neck must be pushed back to release the stone, which will cause urination. If it does not come out as mentioned and the condition worsens for the patient, it is necessary to use an instrument called "catheter," as shown in this image:
It is made of lead and should be thin, soft, and hollow like the pipe of a bird's beak in the length of about two fingers. At its end, it has a subtle bend. To draw urine with it, take a double thread and tie a wool or cotton swab tightly to its end.
The thread's end is inserted into the lower part of the catheter and tied with a knot, leaving a bit of the swab outside so it can enter the pipe and block it like a cork. Then, the catheter is greased with oil, fat, or egg white, and the patient sits on a chair.
The patient moistens his penis and scrotum with wet cloths or oil and water, then the catheter is inserted into the scrotum until it reaches the base of the scrotum. Then, the scrotum is pulled upwards towards the navel, and the catheter is pushed inside.
Until the rectum is emptied, then the probe is pushed inside until it reaches near the anus, and the penis leans downward with the probe inside it. Then it is pushed further until it reaches the bladder, and the patient feels that it has reached something empty.
This is done at this level because the urethra through which urine passes has a bend, so a thread with wool is inserted tightly, then the urine follows the thread and it is removed, allowing urination, and the probe is reinserted.
Do not stop doing this until the bladder is emptied and the patient finds relief.
Chapter Ninety-Five.
How to Catheterize the Bladder
The instruments that are suitable for this purpose are made of silver or hollow glass tubes, with a long tube on the end of a goose quill, designed to contain water and drugs. This is done using an instrument called the syringe, which looks like this:
It is made of silver or hollow glass, with a long tube on the end of a goose quill, which is completely hollow except for one end, where there are three holes: two from one side and one from the other side, as you see.
The place of the deep holes in which are the catapults, it should be sealed without addition until when a thing is drawn with it from the moisture, it is drawn, and if it is thrown with it, it is thrown to a distance like the splash that is thrown at sea in naval battles.
If you want to throw moisture into the siege tower, insert one end of the chain into the moisture and draw it up with the catapult. The moisture will be drawn up into the hole of the chain. Then insert its other end into the container as described for the sling, and then throw the moisture with the catapult.
For that moisture reaches the siege tower in its entirety until it is felt by the afflicted, and this is also a design for a fine sprayer with which to spray the siege tower.
It is made of copper or lead, its upper end resembling a small funnel, and beneath it is a groove into which the rope fits. Then take the siege tower of a camel and place in it the moisture you want to spray on the siege tower. Then tie them tightly between the two rings with a double cord.
Warm that moisture a little over the fire, then insert one end of the sprayer into the container. Then press your hand firmly against the siege tower with the moisture until the afflicted person feels that the moisture has reached the siege tower.
If you do not have a patch, take a piece of cloth and make a circle from it. Pierce holes all around its circumference, then insert a thread through those holes as if sewing. Gather the circle like a bag after placing in it whatever liquids or ointments you desire.
Then attach it to the device and use it as you would with a patch, squeezing it with your hand until the liquid reaches the patch.
Chapter Sixty.
For removing kidney stones.
In the division, we mentioned the types of stones and their treatment with medicines, and noted the difference between stones formed in the kidneys and those formed in the bladder, along with all their signs. We also discussed the stones that are treated by hand and incision.
And these are the stones formed specifically in the bladder, which travel into the urethra, and I will explain this clearly and briefly.
I say that the stones formed in the bladder are more common among children, and one of their signs is that urine exits the bladder resembling water in its fluidity.
فيه يظهر الرمل، ويحك الذكر، ويعبث به، وكثيرا ما يتدلى ثم ينتشر، وتبرز معها المقعدة في كثير منهم، ويسهل بروء الصبيان منها حتى يبلغوا أربعة عشر سنة، ويعسر في الشيوخ، وأما الشبان فمتوسط بين ذلك.
The patient whose stones are larger will have an easier treatment, while the smaller ones are more difficult to treat. If we proceed with the treatment, it is necessary first to inject the patient with a syringe that expels all the bile in his body, as this may prevent the presence of stones upon examination.
Then the patient is taken by his legs and shaken downwards so that the stone descends to the neck of the bladder, or he is raised from a high place several times. Then he is seated in front of you with his hands under his thighs so that the bladder becomes completely tilted downwards. After that, examine him.
And you palpate him from the outside, and if you feel a stone in the bladder, be quick to crush it with your finger. If it does not drop, you must press on the bladder with the middle finger of your left hand if the patient is an adult or the little finger.
If he is a virgin, enter her in your seat and search for the stone until when it falls under your finger, move it little by little towards the neck of the uterus, then press on it with your finger and push it out towards the place you want to open.
And order a servant to squeeze the uterus with his hand, and order another servant to raise the woman's right thigh upwards with his right hand, and with his left hand, raise the skin under the woman's right thigh away from the place where the incision will be made, then take the needle with the thread like this image.
And make the incision between the seat and the thigh, not in the middle but towards the left side of the thigh, and the incision should be on the same level as the stone, with your finger in the seat and you pressing it out gently, so that the incision is wide from the outside and narrow from the inside, just enough for the stone to pass through.
Do not make the incision too large, for perhaps the finger in the seat will push the stone out easily during the incision, and know that the stone may have angles and letters, which makes its exit difficult.
And from it are soft tissues resembling the bladder, and they are herniated so their exit is easy. So what has exits and letters from it increases a little in the gap. If it does not come out like this, then it should be reduced on it, either by gripping it with a firm tight grip, its end being like a lance.
To stabilize the bladder, so it does not fall out from under it or to insert a delicate tool with a fixed end underneath it. If you cannot do that on it, widen the gap slightly. If something overpowers you with blood, cut it with scissors.
If there is more than one, then push the largest first into the neck of the bladder, then cut it open. Then push the smaller one after that, and do the same if there are more than two. If it is very large, then it is not known to cut a large opening in it because it exposes the patient to one of two things.
Either it may kill him or cause constant incontinence, because the place does not heal quickly. But try to push them until they come out, or reduce them with clamps until they come out completely.
If you finish the work on the shameful wound with alkanet, and patience, and syrup, and compress it, and place above it a bandage soaked in oil or rose oil and cold water to cool the burning heat, then let the patient lie on his back, and do not unravel the bandage until the third day.
If it becomes swollen, treat the place with plenty of water and oil, then heal it with almond oil and castor oil until it is healed. If the wound shows excessive burning pain or the like, such as if blood clots in the bladder and urination is difficult, this will be known from the presence of blood in the urine.
Then insert your finger into the wound and remove that blood, for if it remains, it will call to the corruption of the bladder and its putrefaction. Then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt, and every type is acceptable as treatment until it heals.
It is necessary during all times of treatment to bind the thighs together and join them to stabilize the medicines placed on the site. If the stone is small and lodged in the urethra, blocking urine from exiting, treat it as I have described before it becomes critical.
This is often used instead of the cautery, for I have tried this, and it takes the form of a hook made of steel.
A sharp, pointed triangle pierced in a tube; then take a thread and tie it to the rod under the stone so that it does not return to the uterus; then insert the iron hook into the hole until the hook reaches the same stone.
And you rotate the hook in your hand a little at a time, piercing the stone until it exits from the other side, then urine flows from its place; then grasp what remains of the stone from outside the rod, as it crumbles and comes out with the urine, and the patient is cured.
If this treatment is not prepared for you due to an obstacle that prevents you from doing so, then tie a thread under the stone and another thread above the stone, then press on the stone in the same rod between the two ties, then remove it.
Then the tie is released and the hardened blood that was in the wound is cleaned, and it is necessary to tie the thread under the stone so that it does not return to the uterus, and the other tie from above, so that if the thread releases after the stone exits, the skin returns to its place and covers the wound. ‌
It is necessary for you, if you tied the upper thread, to raise the skin above so that it returns when you release and covers the wound as we said.
Chapter One: Sixty.
On removing kidney stones in women.
Rarely do women give birth to kidney stones, and if any of them have a stone, it is difficult to treat because of many reasons. One is that the woman might be a virgin, and the second is that you cannot find a woman who can expose herself to a doctor.
If she is chaste or has relatives, and the third reason is that you cannot find a woman skilled in this craft, especially working with her hand, and the fourth reason is that the location of the incision for removing stones from women is far from the stone's location, so it requires another incision.
And in that there is danger, so if necessity forces it, then a skilled woman physician should be taken, and rarely is she found. If she is not available, request a chaste doctor, or a capable and skillful woman for women's matters, or a woman who gives some indication of this craft.
Bring her and command her to perform all that you order her to do in examining the stone first, which is to insert her finger into the vagina and examine for the stone. If she finds it and presses it under her finger.
She commands her to cut it off, and if she is not a virgin but has menstruated, she orders the midwife to insert her finger into the woman's vagina and examine for the stone after placing her left hand on the womb and squeezing it well.
If she finds it, it is necessary to push it down from the mouth of the womb to below as much as her strength allows until she reaches the root of the thigh; then cut off that part of her near the middle of the vagina at the root of the thigh on whichever side it comes and she feels the stone in that direction.
Her finger should not be released from pressing on the stone, and let the cut be small at first; then insert the probe into that small cut. If she feels the stone, increase the cut according to how much she knows the stone will come out of it. Know that there are many types of stones.
Among them are small and large, soft and hard, elongated, round, and branched ones. Know their types so you can understand what you need to do. If the bleeding is too much, put powdered alum in that place and hold it for an hour until the bleeding stops, then return to your work.
Until the stone exits, and work so that you can use the tools mentioned in removing stones from men to assist you in your task. If you are overcome by bleeding and learn from the pulsation of blood that it is from a ruptured vessel, then restrain the urgency at the site.
And bind it tightly with bandages and leave it, do not revisit it, and leave the stone, do not remove it, for fear that the patient may die. Then treat the wound; if the bleeding subsides after a few days and the area heals, return to your task until you extract the stone.
Chapter Two: Sixty-three.
On the application of water to a hernia.
A hydrocele is merely an accumulation of moisture in the tunica albuginea, which lies beneath the skin surrounding the testicle and is called the vaginal tunic; nature forms a special covering for it at one side of the testicle.
Until he thinks it is another testicle, and it is between the skin of the scrotum and the tunica albuginea that we mentioned, and this only happens rarely. This type of hydrocele occurs due to a weakness in the spermatic vessels, so this substance settles there, and it can occur from a blow to the testicle.
This humidity can be of many colors, either yellowish or reddish and bloody, or blackish and purulent, or watery and white, which is the most common, and these are the signs by which it is recognized.
In the case of water collecting in the white membrane that we mentioned, the worm becomes cylindrical and elongated, resembling an egg, and no characteristics appear because the humidity surrounds it from all sides.
If the humidity is in a cyst, then the worm will be cylindrical from one end like an egg.
Because of this, a person may think it is another egg. If the humidity is between the skin and the white membrane, it falls under the sense of touch. However, if you want to know the color of the humidity, let the worm be in contact with the square sponge that was shown earlier, and what comes out behind the sponge will tell you its contents.
When treating with iron, it is necessary for the patient to empty himself if he can and you see his body filled. Then he should lie on his back on a slightly elevated surface, placing many splints underneath him. You will sit on his left side.
And he orders the assistant to sit on his right side, extending his member towards one side of the scrotum and towards the lower part of the abdomen; then he takes a broad needle and pierces the scrotum from the middle lengthwise close to the anus.
And the incision must be vertical, parallel to the line that divides the scrotum into two halves, until it reaches the white fatty layer, which should not be pierced. The incision should be more extensive from the side attached to the testis. Stretch the incision as much as possible.
Then, you press the fatty layer with a wide and flat instrument to expel all the water. Then, separate the lips of the incision with retractors and elevate the fatty layer upwards without touching the surrounding scrotal skin. Cut the fatty layer as much as possible either in one piece or in several pieces.
Especially the thin side, for if you do not cut enough of it, the water will return. If the testis comes out of its skin during the operation, once you have finished cutting the fatty layer, push it back in and then join the lips of the scrotal skin with sutures.
Then treat it with the treatment of other wounds until it heals; if the membrane is affected, it may have deteriorated from another disease, so it is necessary to tie off the vessels in the hanging part out of fear of suppuration, then cut off the tip of the hanging part and remove the membrane, and treat it with what we mentioned.
If the water collected in both parts is completely, know that they are connected. Then open the other part as you did with the first one, whether or not you find it to be the same work; then wipe off the blood.
And put into the openings cotton that has been soaked in oil or rose oil, and make it come out from the other side with another piece of cotton that has been soaked in wine and vinegar; then apply it to both tips and cover the abdomen, and place on top a bandage folded over itself.  This is called 'rafa'id'. And bind them from above with a six-sided bandage, like this image:
Then take two bandages and sew them together, stuffing them with loose cotton like this example; then make the ends that are to be held in place from cotton or wet wool, and tie them tightly with a belt around the trousers, and one of the ends is taken over the seat to the back.
The second [method] is to take it towards the anus and the two ends on the thighs from below, and the remaining two ends on the buttocks, and gather all the tension in the belt of the trousers, and this bandage can also be made with linen instead of iron.
Take a fine, thin scalpel and incise the skin of the penis, which is protective of what we have described until the white, water-bearing tunica albuginea is exposed; then take another scalpel like this one.
It resembles the Greek eye, then it is used to puncture that tunica albuginea which is protective until all the moisture comes out; then the tunica is extended with needles and the covering layer is scraped off with a scalpel, and it is cut according to what you can do until all of it is removed, and it is protected from the testicles, do not let them touch the fire.
Know that this procedure is safer and more distant from blood loss, and better than working with a scalpel, for if you encounter difficulty during cutting or while sewing, there may be a hot worm or bleeding or something else; it is necessary to treat each of these as appropriate for the treatment mentioned earlier.
If the patient is stupid and cannot tolerate this procedure, use the duck as I described it to you, if it proves effective based on what we have presented as evidence.
The watery bladder should have the patient sitting on a high chair, then place the worm below him with a wide band and put the duck on the body lengthwise so that the opening is wide enough to allow all the water to drain out. Then place cotton on the spot and tie it.
Let the rest of the water drain and then heal it until the wound heals. If the water does not come out while you are putting the duck on him, it is only because the white layer prevents the exit of the water from the mouth of the wound.
At that time, it is necessary to insert a goose feather or the instrument with which the water of the Hippocratic cups (previously mentioned) is drawn out, or slightly enlarge the opening of the wound.
Know that the water may return and collect again after about six months, so if it collects, apply the duck in the same manner, and the patient will resist for a few days.
Chapter Thirty-Six
In the Treatment of Anal Fistula and its Cure
Know that the fistula in this anal region is usually fatal, so we see it abandoned and safety from it, while I remember its operation and types of worms.
I say that many worms occur in the bodies of which anethin is composed, and this is from many causes, either from a slight fever that affects the anethin, or from a blow, and the color of the worm will be like the color of the body and it has no water.
The worm may be dry and sometimes the worm is like cooked meat, having no feeling, and it can come from the blocking of the veins and their swelling as previously mentioned, or from the swelling of the testicles. If it comes from the blocking of the veins, it is known as the pain of the worm.
If you press it with your fingers and it does not swell, then it is not from the blocking of the veins. As for what comes from the swelling of the testicles, nothing hurts when pressed with the fingers. This type can lead to a fistula in it and in all the other flesh.
And it is to incise the skin of the pox, then to extend the blister above, and bring it out from the white membrane, and free the hanging part from the veins, and tie the veins, and cut the hanging part after freeing it from all sides of the blister, for if the blister has adhered to those raw meats.
It is necessary to bring out the blister and cut it, and if there is adhesion between some membranes or between the veins, it is necessary to free all that adhesion and cut it in a circular section.
And if the flesh that adheres is in the place of adhesion, which is from behind, it is necessary to cut all of it and bring out the blister as we said, then when you have completed your work, close the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine, then treat it with the rest of the treatment until he recovers.
Chapter Forty-Seven.
In the treatment of abscess with ulceration.
The ulcer is a tumor that grows with some hardness, similar to chains, accompanied by difficulty in the movement and exercise of the patient, and in its treatment there is a resemblance to what has been previously mentioned.
The patient should sit on a raised chair, then the penis's foreskin is pulled down and the scrotum skin is held with your fingers along with the sheath near the penis.
Then an assistant holds it and stretches it strongly, then a sharp wide-bladed knife is used to make a deep cut, with the edge rounded by the sheath, until the sheath is revealed. Then it is scraped from both sides as I mentioned in cutting the sinews that are in the legs, then a needle with a double thread is sewn in it.
And it is tied at the first places that were revealed by the sheath, and also tied at its end. Then a vertical cut is made in the middle, based on the length of the body, and what accumulates in it from the foul humors is expelled.
Then treat the wound with the usual treatment for wounds that you want to heal, so that one of the testicles falls off along with its sheath. There is no harm in this, as if all the sheaths are revealed, then one of the testicles should come out with the sheath, otherwise the sperm will be wasted. From before the removal of the testicles, he experiences weakness and does not benefit from it.
Chapter Fifty-Six
In the Treatment of Gonorrhea
This gonorrhea occurs from a crack that appears in the foreskin, extending over the abdomen to about four fingers' breadth below the navel; then the discharge flows from this opening into one of the testicles.
And this crack can be either in the foreskin or its extension, and both types occur due to many causes, such as a blow, a fall, a scream, lifting a heavy object, and the like. Its symptom, if it is in the extension of the foreskin, is that it occurs little by little over a long period of time.
And it does not occur suddenly, and the pain is continuous to a depth before the foreskin squeezes out the discharge. Its symptom, if it is from a crack in the foreskin, is that intense pain occurs from its beginning with a rush, and the pain appears different, prominent under the skin nearby. ︎
And that is by the exit of the discharge and its flow outside the foreskin. It may also come out with a thread, in which case this gonorrhea is called venereal and thread-like. It may be accompanied by an odor, and pus may run in the discharge, causing death to the patient.
It causes severe pain and cramps, especially if it bleeds. The treatment of this disease with iron is dangerous, so one should be cautious about it falling in. The method is to order the patient to return the water with their hand into their mouth if it returns.
Then he lies on his heels between your hands and raises his leg, then you stretch the skin above the ankle upwards and cut off all the skin of the leg lengthwise, then sew with needles in the cuts as much as needed to open the cut with them.
The cut will be the size that allows an egg to exit from it, then you scrape the fascia below the skin of the leg until the white, hard fascia is revealed from every side. At this point, insert your little finger into where the egg was.
Between the white fascia under the skin of the egg and the second fascia, you pull out the adhesion that is behind the egg. Then, with your right hand, push into the skin of the leg, while with this, stretch the white fascia upwards with your left hand and raise the egg along with the fascia towards the edge of the cut.
Do not command the servant to stretch the egg upwards, but release it from behind with a full release, and examine it with your finger to ensure that there is no residue of pus in the hard white membrane. If you have removed something from it, push it down into the abdomen.
Then take a needle with thick thread, split into ten threads, and insert it at the end of the membrane under the skin that is below the incision. Then cut the ends of the thread until there are four threads remaining. Then arrange some of them on top of each other in a solid manner and use them to tie the membrane that is under the skin with strong knots from both sides. Also, fold the ends of the threads and tie them with strong knots so that nothing can reach the vessels that nourish it. To prevent a hot worm from emerging, also make another knot outside the first one, less than two handspans away from it. After these two knots, leave an amount of membrane under the skin equivalent to the length of a finger.
To prevent a hot worm from emerging, also make another knot outside the first one, less than two handspans away from it. After these two knots, leave an amount of membrane under the skin equivalent to the length of a finger. Then cut the rest in a circular manner and remove it with the egg. Then make an incision below the skin to let out blood and pus as we described earlier. Then use wool soaked in oil and place it in the wound, and use the bandage as we described.
The white vein that we mentioned after cutting it must be cautious not to bleed, as this is often the case. Leave the ligature until it falls off by itself. If its falling off is delayed, then dip it in hot water and place on it something that will cause it to dissolve until it falls off.
Then treat the wound with the rest of the wound treatments until it heals.
Chapter Sixty-Seven.
In this windpipe, I have not seen anyone dare to treat it with iron, and the ancients mentioned that it should be made as we described in the case of a tracheotomy, namely by tying the ends after the incision with a cord below.
Then make an incision in the middle and treat the ulcer with what will open it until the ends fall off, and treat the wound as we have mentioned until it heals.
Chapter Seventy-Seven
In the fissure that occurs in the lip.
As we mentioned, the fissure in the lip may occur. The place swells and nothing of the saliva descends to the lower teeth; if it does descend, it is mild and returns at all times.
And if the time spent with it lengthens, the constriction in the intestines increases until the water and excrement leak into the abdomen, which is shown by the distension of the abdomen, as we have said. And this is because the intestine extends, then constricts and sticks to the place and adheres, and its treatment is with cautery as I have described.
It may also be treated with iron by having the patient lie on his back between your hands, then make a warm, broad incision of three fingers' width over the rupture site, and then suture the intestines beneath the skin.
So if the white intestine is exposed, take a piece of wool and place it on the naked part of the intestine, press it into the depths of the abdomen, then suture both naked parts on either side of the intestine with thread, and tie one to the other.
Then cover the end of the wool and do not cut the intestine or touch the yolk, as I have taught you in treating the excremental hernia, then treat it as a wound.
So if the sutures break, clean them and compress the wound until it heals, because the intestine will then contract and there will be no further distension of the rupture.
And al-Kai is the best in this matter because it is closest to safety.
The Eighth and Sixty-Seventh Chapter.
On the Treatment of Skin Diseases.
Many people treat skin diseases without treating the flesh underneath, which makes it look worse. Therefore, anyone wishing to cure it should make the patient lie on his back.
And he should cut all the skin that has been treated, leaving only thick skin. Then gather the two edges together; and if you wish to suture first, suture the edge of the treated skin with three or four stitches and draw tight on the stitching, then cut between the stitches.
Then treat it with the treatment for other wounds until he recovers and the stitches fall out.
The Ninth and Sixty-First Chapter.
On Cautery.
It is forbidden in our law to practice cautery.
And because of this, it was fitting for me not to mention it in this book of mine, but I mentioned it for two reasons: one, so that the physician may know how to treat someone who has been cauterized if asked about it; and the second reason is that we often need to cauterize certain animals for our benefit.
As for pregnant women, cows, goats, cats, and such animals, I say that the cutting should be done by either pressure or cauterization. The one done by pressure is performed by sitting the animal in hot water until its womb contracts, relaxes, and softens.
Then press it with your hand until it softens and no longer feels hard when touched. As for cutting by cauterization, it is necessary to hold the animal firmly and squeeze its skin with the left hand, then tie the ligatures and cauterize each ovary with a single iron.
until the eggs protrude, cut them after cauterizing them, and leave nothing on them but the thin ligament that is on the fallopian tubes. This type of cutting is better than the one done by pressure.
because pressure might leave something in the females that causes them to desire mating again, then treat the wound until it heals.
Chapter Seventy.
On Treating Hermaphrodites.
The hermaphrodite in men occurs in two types: one where the genitals appear as a vulva with hair, located between the thighs, and it may excrete urine from that which is on the skin of the scrotum.
And in women, there is one type that occurs above the vulva like the scrotum of a man with small testicles reaching to the outside, resembling the penis of a man, and the two are like the ovaries, and the treatment for the three types.
The two types in men and the single type in women should have the excess flesh cut away until it is healed, then treat it with the usual treatment for wounds until it is cured. As for the second type in men, which excretes urine that is on the skin of the penis, there is nothing to do or remove from it.
Chapter Seventy-One
On cutting the clitoris and the protruding flesh from women's genitals.
The clitoris sometimes increases beyond its natural size until it becomes flaccid and ugly in appearance. In some women, it can grow as large as a man's penis and be used for intercourse.
It is necessary to hold the base of the clitoris with your hand or with a forceps and cut it, taking care not to cut too deep, especially at its root, lest blood flow occur.
Then treat it with the usual treatment for wounds until it heals. As for the protruding flesh, it is flesh that grows in the vaginal opening until it fills it.
and perhaps it protruded to the outside like the example of a nose. and for this reason some of the ancients called it "nasal disease," so it should be cut like a polyp, and treated until healed.
The Second Section and Seventh.
In the treatment of fractures.
A rupture occurs when the woman's vulva is not perforated, or if it is perforated, the opening is small. It may be either natural, in which case she is born with it, or acquired. The acquired kind comes from an underlying cause that preceded it and may be due to excessively large and protuberant flesh.
Or a thin or thick fissure, which may be in the depth of the uterus, or its sides, or its top or bottom, preventing intercourse, pregnancy, childbirth, and sometimes menstruation. Recognizing this is by visual examination.
If the obstruction is visible and close, if it is not visible, she should feel for it with her fingers or a probe. If the obstruction is due to a thin fissure and is near the lips, hasten to cut it by making semicircular incisions at the edges of the lips and then place your two hands together.
The woman's thigh is laid open on her back, then the forceps are inserted with strength until they pierce the thin wall and open the vein; then she takes wool and soaks it in oil and places it on the spot, and the woman gathers herself every day, lest the place bleed again.
If the vein is thick and dense, it should be split with a wide blade resembling a sieve; if the membrane is fleshy, it should be ligated with silk threads and cut off. And let there be with you medicines that calm inflammation without pain, such as gum acacia, syrup of violets, and whey mixed with egg whites.
Then use a wide lead tube to prevent the wound from bleeding quickly; hold it in place for several days and use a bandage of dry cotton cloth, then treat with the usual treatments for ulcers until cured. It may also show a growth of flesh in the womb, which should be cut off in this manner.
If the tumor is not cancerous, for the cancerous tumor in the womb does not respond to cauterization with hot iron.
Chapter Thirty-Seven.
In the treatment of fistulas, ulcers, and red wounds that occur in women's genitals.
As for fistulas, it is the swelling of the mouths of the vessels until blood flows from them constantly. If a fistula is presented, it becomes an ulcer, and in the division, its types and signs were mentioned, and we will mention them here.
What is acceptable for treatment and what is not? I say, if the fistulas and ulcers are deep within the womb and have not reached the point of sensation, there is no treatment with iron. If it is at the mouth of the womb and can be felt, then it is the one that can be treated.
It is necessary for the woman to enter a cold room, then apply the ulcer with a lancet or a coarse cloth and cut it from its roots, then leave it when the blood flows from one of the vessels that stop the bleeding without cauterization.
Such as alkali, tannin, milk, and the like, then raise her feet to the wall for an hour, then wash it in cold water. If the bleeding persists, let her sit in a decoction of sumac, pomegranate peels, and vinegar, then take barley flour, cook it with honey and vinegar.
He stitched it on its back and if the bleeding stopped, otherwise he bound the chest and the two breasts without condition, then he took cotton and soaked it in the juice of thyme or the juice of hawthorn branches with vinegar drink, and pressed it to the place.
If the ulcer heals, treat the place with rose oil until it is cured. As for the red tumor, it resembles coarse turnips in appearance. It is necessary to cut off whatever appears from it according to what was mentioned in the chapter on warts, and treat it until it is cured.
The Forty-Seventh Chapter.
On the hernia that protrudes in the uterus.
There are many types of hernias that can appear in the uterus, such as cancer, ulcers, wounds, fistulas, gangrene, abscesses, fissures, warts, hot tumors; all these diseases and their types and symptoms have been mentioned in the chapter.
In this chapter, it is necessary to mention the hot tumor that appears in the uterus, for if it is one of those tumors that form a knot, how should it be incised with iron? It is necessary to examine whether the pain of the tumor at its onset is severe with throbbing and inflammation and heat.
I saw it red if the injury fell upon it, do not hurry to treat it and heal it with what helps in cooling until when these symptoms subside, then at that time it is appropriate for the woman to sit on a chair with two seats and lean on her back.
And she should bring her feet to the lower part of her belly, and let her thighs be open, and her arms under her knees, and tie them together with a suitable bandage.
Therefore, then the woman who will deliver sits on the right side of her. Use the instrument that opens the uterus which follows in its shape later. And it is necessary that if you want to use this instrument, you should estimate the depth of the woman's womb, so that what enters from the instrument does not exceed the depth of the womb.
The patient is in pain if the instrument is deeper than the depth, then it should be placed on the neck of the uterus to prevent the entire instrument from entering the womb, and the loop that runs in the instrument should be on top.
And you hold the instrument, and the servant turns the loop until it opens the neck of the uterus. If the exit appears and is felt by hand as thin and delicate, then it should be cut off at its head with a wide scissors. When all the period is emptied out.
In the wound, a soft linen thread soaked in rose oil or green oil with some vinegar is placed, and the thread comes out of the tear in the uterus, and from outside on the uterus and the anus, clean wool soaked in boiled flour water.
Then, after two days, treat with the mugwort that is suitable for this until it heals.
And the uterus and the wound can be washed by injecting water with honey, then boiled licorice or long zarwand, and then return to the mugwort, for if the discharge is constantly inside the uterus.
It is advisable to avoid treating it with iron, but rather treat it with what we mentioned in the division.
Chapter Fifty-Seven.
On teaching students how to treat living ulcers if they appear in an abnormal shape.
The student should first know the natural shape of birth, and among its signs is if you see the woman bend downwards and gasp for breath and feel tired from what she is carrying.
And the exit of the fetus is quick, so know that this birth will be in its natural shape, and it will come out on its head with the placenta or hanging from his navel. So if you see these signs, it is advisable to press her abdomen so that the fetus may quickly come out.
And if it descends upon his head, the mucus also descends with it, and cleanses from that excess with a good cleaning. But if this birth is not completed, then it is an unnatural, imperfect birth, for the fetus may emerge from its feet, hands before the head and feet.
And if one hand or one foot emerges, or the head and hand emerge together, or if it emerges breech, it may turn on its belly, and there are other similar imperfect forms. Therefore, the midwife must be very careful about all these things and avoid mistakes and errors.
And I will explain each form of it and how to deal with it, so that you can rely on this and stand firm in it. If the fetus emerges headfirst, that is a natural birth. But if this becomes difficult for the woman and she has trouble pushing, and you see her strength weakening, then sit her on a chair and order the women to support her.
And she should massage her womb with cooked onion and wet cloths, then the midwife should insert a small cotton pad between her fingers, which she will use to break the mucus or break it with her nails until all the moisture is released and her womb is pressed until the fetus descends.
If it has not descended, it is necessary to inject the woman with the juice of the pomegranate mixed with shirje oil, then command her after the injection to cough and blow into a reed, holding her mouth and nose, for the fetus will come out from its hour. If the hands of the fetus come out first, it is necessary to return them gently, little by little.
If she does not push to enter, make the woman sit on a stool and lift her legs up. Then shake the stool on the ground while the woman holds onto a hook so that she does not fall during the shaking. If the hands do not enter and the fetus dies, cut them off and pull out the rest of the fetus.
Or tie his hands with a cord and pull them gently, for he will come out. If the fetus comes out by its feet, it is necessary to push them up, then turn the fetus little by little until it is straightened, then take one of its legs and stretch it gently little by little.
If they come out to the thighs, order her to cough and blow into a reed; for he will come out. If he does not come out as we have described, return the fetus little by little until you make it natural again, then it will come out easily. If he resists as we have described all of it.
A mixture of the game of the knucklebones, the game of the almonds, ointment of shirj, and dissolved sumac; beat all in a mortar well, then anoint with it the woman's vulva and below her belly, then seat her in warm water until it reaches the navel.
If you see that she has miscarried, make for her a diaper from wool and place it on her. If the diaper holds for an hour, seat her on a chair, then cause her to sneeze and plug her mouth and nose, and press lightly below her belly; for the fetus will come out within its hour, exiting by its feet and hands.
If it exits in this manner, insert your little finger into its mouth slightly and then let the woman squat on her heels, turning her feet downwards while she lies on a bed, embracing her legs; press lightly above her belly. Then remove what is under her feet of the bandages until she is squatting down low; if the fetus does not exit, take both of her legs together and shake them vigorously, then press lightly above the navel slightly until the fetus ascends upwards; then insert a midwife's hand and adjust the fetus slightly.
The woman was instructed to wait until the fetus exits, the exit of the fetus being facilitated by holding it with one hand, controlling its head as it comes out. If she cannot control it, then position the woman and make her walk; if she cannot walk, let her lie down.
Place her on a bed and shake her thighs vigorously, then use the instrument that has been described for this purpose. If she feels labor pains, seat her on a chair. Then, arrange the position of her hand and straighten the fetus to its natural shape. Give the woman something to drink and instruct her to wait until it exits.
When the fetus comes out on its feet, holding it with his hands and its face towards his mother's back, it is necessary that the midwife hold the baby's hand, then turn him a little at a time and straighten him gently until he becomes upright, then place him against her chest as we have described with the oil and the instruments.
Then, instruct her to move a little at a time, and if she does so, seat her on the chair and tell her to lean to the right side, then order her to wait and give her something sweet to drink. When it exits, it will come out on its side.
If the embryo descends to the womb in this manner with the placenta, break the placenta with your fingernails until it is free from moisture. If it sticks to the face or neck of the fetus, cut it off from its root so that it does not choke and die. Then push the fetus back inside until it reaches the proper position.
And order the woman to urinate repeatedly, for it will come out easily, whether twins or many fetuses. Know that twins are often born and sometimes three or four can live, although this is rare. As for five, it is unnatural and they do not survive.
And even if they are many, a single placenta surrounds them, and they separate by a septum attached to the root of each one of them. Sometimes they come out as a single fetus comes out naturally easily, and sometimes they come out together as we have described.
If one of them is difficult to deliver and takes on one of the unnatural shapes that we have mentioned, then treat it as we have described. And be ready for subtlety and do what you can with care and skill, adapting to all shapes with the necessary devices leading to safety.
What is seen in the womb from polyps, they fall out; it may be one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, more than ten. I have confirmed that a woman has fallen seven and another fifteen, all of which are seen like this.
In the estimation of the noble and learned man, all this should be within the knowledge of the woman who may face something like that one day and deal with it as necessary.
Chapter Sixty-Seven
On the extraction of a dead fetus
If the treatment of the dead fetus as mentioned in the division of treatments does not lead to its expulsion and you are forced to use your hand, it is necessary that the woman should lie on her back on a bed if she is strong and has no condition that may cause harm from this position.
Her head should be tilted downwards, and her legs raised, with a servant holding them on both sides or tied to the bed, so that her body does not stretch when the fetus is pulled out.
Then, wet her vagina with these wet medicines along with aloes, honey, and flaxseed. Then the woman's hand should be anointed with these medicines and ointments, then inserted into the womb gently. Then she should search for a place where the sinews of the fetus are located, and suitable places for that. ر
Look, if the fetus is facing downwards and descends onto its head, then the sutures of the scalp may be in the eyes, nostrils, mouth, neck, under the chin, on the lips, or in places near the ears.
If the descent is onto its feet, it is in the groin and the middle of the thighs. It should be held with the right hand, and the suture should be turned between the fingers of the left hand, and the hand should enter by the armpit and cut the suture in some of those places that we mentioned.
Until it reaches a place that is empty, then cut another or third suture towards it if the suction needs to be balanced and not leaning in one direction. Then stretch straight without the cut being vertical only; rather, move it in all directions.
In order to facilitate its exit, as is done with a tooth when it is extracted, it should be stretched. If something catches on it, the area around it should be oiled with some fingers and inserted to guide what caught, until the fetus partially exits; then move the sutures to other places.
It is better to raise [the child] a little and do this until the fetus comes out entirely. If a hand comes out before the others and it cannot be pushed back due to its pressure, it is necessary to cut a slit in it, then pull it until all of it comes out and is cut off.
Or if it is in the palm or in the wrist, you should do the same with the other hand and the feet. If the fetus's head is large and there is pressure on it during birth, or if there is water accumulated on its head, then it is necessary to insert a blunt hook between the fingers.
And you pierce the head with it, and the water comes out or you can crush it with the instrument called the crusher, whose picture is shown with the pictures of the other instruments in the chapter that follows this one.
Do the same if the fetus has a large head by nature; it is necessary to pierce the fontanel or crush it with the crusher as we have said, then extract the bones with forceps. If the head comes out and is compressed at the nape, pierce until the moisture in the chest is released.
Because then the chest adheres. If the chest does not adhere and does not come out, cut as much as you can. If it is below the abdomen or has a lump, it is necessary to compress until the moisture drains from it.
If the fetus is on its feet, then drawing it out is easy and straightening it towards the uterine mouth is gentle. But if it is compressed at the abdomen or chest, you should draw it out with a hook that you have wrapped around your hand, and cut open the abdomen or chest until what is inside comes out.
If all the other parts have been removed and the head has returned, let the left hand enter. If the mouth of the uterus is open, then let the hand enter into the neck of the uterus and with it seek the head, and draw it towards the mouth of the uterus with the fingers; then insert a hook or two hooks and draw it with them.
If the mouth of the uterus has narrowed with hot and hard tissue, it is not appropriate to forcefully act upon it. Instead, in that case, one should use the injection of wet and thin substances, employing the suppositories and sit in water that is heated and moistened.
And if the fetus is on its side, it can be straightened using what we mentioned for the live fetus. If that is not possible, then cut it into pieces and remove them, and nothing of the placenta should be left inside. Then, when you have finished treating it, use what was mentioned for treating hot wounds that appear in the abdomen.
"If a wound bleeds, let it bleed into the water and use the rest of the treatment. I have seen a woman who miscarried in her womb, then she became pregnant again.
"Then the other fetus died, and after a long time she had an ulcer which swelled until it burst and began to discharge pus. So they called for her treatment. She was treated for a long time, but the wound did not close. Therefore, some of the strong attracting substances were placed on it.
"Then a bone came out of the place, and after some days another bone came out. I was amazed by this, as there are no bones in the womb. I concluded that these were bones from the dead fetus. So I probed the wound and removed many bones from the head of the fetus.
"I continued to follow this until I removed many bones from her, and the woman was in good condition. She lived this way for a long time, with pus continuing to flow from the place. And it is because of this that I have come here to report this case.
"Because in it there is knowledge and assistance for what the practicing physician attempts to treat.
Chapter Seventy-Seven
In it are the tools needed for extracting a fetus.
An illustration of an instrument used to open the mouth of the uterus.
This instrument, which is described in the books as having two rods with handles on both ends, should be more delicate than the usual instrument. It should either be made of ebony or boxwood, and each rod should be one finger's width wide.
And the ends of the rods should be approximately one finger's width, and their length three-quarters of a finger. Between the two rods, there are supports made from the same type of wood as the rods, which are fastened in place. Their length should be half a finger or slightly more, and their width about one finger or slightly more. These two supports.
They are the ones that enter into the mouth of the uterus to open it when you manipulate the two handles. Here is another illustration of a more delicate and lighter instrument for this purpose.
It is made of ebony or boxwood in the shape of forceps, except that at its end there are supports as you see. The length of each support is about three fingers and their width is two fingers. If you want to open the uterus with it,
The woman should be seated on a low bed, her legs spread apart between her thighs. Then insert these two retractors into the mouth of the womb, and hold the end of the instrument below between her thighs. Then open your hand with the instrument as you do with the scissors, to whatever extent you wish to open the womb. To construct the suitable as you desire, here is a figure of another uterus similar to the first.
A figure of the membrane which expels the fetus:
Figure of the instrument used to extract the head of the fetus.
It resembles scissors, having teeth at the end as you see, and it can be made rectangular like scissors as seen in this figure; as you see, its teeth are like those of a saw, cutting and scraping.
Figure of another membrane:
A figure of the drill:
This drill should have a little thickness so that it does not break when the fetus is pulled out with it. Figure of a double-pronged drill:
A figure of two broad retractors for cutting the fetus:
These instruments, the more their types increase and are prepared by the manufacturer, the faster and more efficient they will be in use. Therefore, do not neglect any instrument that should be prepared for use when needed.
Chapter Eighty-Seven
On the Extraction of Cataracts.
If the cataract remains after sneezing, it is advisable to instruct the patient to hold their breath and then blow through a reed. Press your hand firmly on their mouth and nose. If it comes out with this method, well and good; otherwise, take a cautery.
And make an aperture in the cover, into which you place the herbs that open the womb, such as fennel, dill, hyssop, marjoram, sage, savory, and caraway seeds. All these drugs or some of them are to be soaked in water and brought near the fire. Then put a silver tube on the aperture of the cup's cover, with the other end in the woman's mouth.
And she holds it until the steam reaches the depth of the womb, then blows as mentioned before. The cataract will come out quickly. If after this treatment the cataract remains and does not come out, instruct the midwife to immerse her left hand in shirej oil or la'ab al-khatmi.
Then she inserts it into the uterus and searches for the cataract with it. If she finds it, she grasps it and pulls it out little by little until it comes out. If it is attached to the depth of the uterus, she enters her hand as we have described until when she finds the cataract, she draws it out little by little towards the vulva.
To prevent the uterus from falling due to excessive traction, it is necessary to pull it gently towards the sides, right and left, then increase the amount of traction, for at that time it will adhere and be free from adhesions. If the mouth of the uterus is adherent, we have described the treatment with cupping and treating the womb and ligaments.
But if it does not come out with all that we have described, then beware of being harsh with it in trying to pull it out again. Rather, what has come out of it should be tied to the mouth of the uterus to the woman's thigh, then inject her with the fourth part of a grain of marjoram, for it will cause it to putrefy after a few days.
And it will dissolve and come out, except that if it putrefies, a foul odor will rise from it to the stomach and head, and this will cause pain to the patient. Therefore, an appropriate ointment should be used.
For this reason, some of the ancients have tried ointment made from wolfberry and dried figs, similar to the device that makes a woman sweat when she retains menses and similar conditions.
It is made from lead that resembles a scab or it is made from copper; the thin end is placed in the vagina, and the wide end over the fire and incense prepared on coal, holding it until that incense disappears and then replacing it with another.
Chapter Ninety-Seven.
In the treatment of ulcers other than perforated ones.
Many children are born with ulcers that are not perforated and closed by a thin membrane; it is necessary for the nurse to puncture that membrane with her finger, or if she cannot, let her touch it with a sharp instrument and be careful not to touch the tendon.
Then she places on it a woolen cloth soaked in water and oil, then she treats it with medicated dressings until it heals. If there is a fear that it may close again, place for many days in the opening a lead tube, and remove it when the child wants to walk.
And the closure of the ulcer may also occur from a tumor or worm; it is necessary to burn that tumor, then treat it with the treatment and dressings we mentioned.
Chapter Eighty.
In the treatment of piles that occur in the lower part.
Piles that occur in the lower part are a swelling and hardening that occurs near the anus, either externally or internally on one of the sides, and the pile may be one or more.
If that swelling is severe and opens, a watery white or thin yellowish discharge flows from it; some of these piles may extend to the penis and scrotum and some may not be extended. The extended ones can be recognized by what exits from them during walking and the odor when the patient moves around.
And perhaps the worms will come out of it, and if it is in the pelvic region, it may be perforated to the bladder or to the urethra, and it may also perforate to the joint of the thigh and to the anus, and what is known as the perineal fistula, which is not a perforation.
Your little finger should enter the anus, and insert a fine copper or iron wire into the fistula if there is no discharge in it. But if there is discharge, then put in it a thin lead wire or a horsehair.
Until you feel the wire or hair in your finger, and if the ulcer does not exude any pus, nothing protrudes from the opening, nor is there any bad smell or worms as we mentioned, then know that it is not a perforation, so proceed with the treatment.
If the fistula is perforated into the bladder or the urethra, the sign of this is the excretion of urine from it and its refusal to heal with medicines. However, if it is perforated into the joint of the thigh or the anus, the indication of this is the arrival of the wire there.
In it, there is no swelling towards the bone, and pain in the direction of the side, and pus constantly coming out from it, and it does not respond to treatment, nor does it adhere to medication; these are all released exudates.
Its treatment is a futile effort for the ignorant physicians, but as for those that are not released and not discharging, I hope for their cure with iron as I have described and tested it. It involves placing the patient between your hands on his back.
And his leg is elevated above, and his thigh inclined towards his abdomen. Then, the copper or lead probe is inserted into the swelling until you know where the probe ends. If the patient feels it towards the anus, then your probing finger should enter the anus.
Then, if you feel with your probing finger that it has passed on its own, exposed without sensing anything between your finger and it except for skin or flesh, then know with certainty that it is released. Do not treat it, as there is no cure for it, as we have said.
And it has been said that in some people, it heals spontaneously rarely. As for the treatment that is hoped to be beneficial, a thin bladder should be warmed according to the size of the swelling, as previously described, and inserted into the swelling with its neck until it reaches near the anus, then remove and reinsert it twice or thrice.
Until you learn that all the excess fat resembling a bird's feather has burned, then treat it with clarified oil in fat until that fat is removed which was burnt; then treat it with salted bandages. If it heals, it is cured.
Otherwise, he will never be cured by any other treatment; and if the iron entered, it did not reach your finger in the seat, and there was a thick layer of flesh or membrane between it and the iron. You saw the iron head on the surface of the skin, so you should split the skin from its beginning. And you continue to split with the iron while it is in the wound until you reach with the splitting where the end of the iron ends, and the iron is removed and falls out. Then clean that excess fat which resembles a bird's feather, and nothing of it should remain.
Then treat it with salted bandages until it heals. If the blood overpowers you and prevents you from cutting that fat, the best thing to do is to cauterize it quickly with fire or a sharp instrument, for cauterizing with fire achieves two beneficial outcomes: it burns that excess fat.
To cut the blood and remove moisture, then treat it with fat that has been melted in oil or powdered sulfur mixed with oil until the area swells and those burnt meats come out in the swelling; then treat the wound at that time with softened wool soaked in salt.
These are the drugs that bring closure and healing, for if they are pressed out, he is cured and there is no fear of recurrence; if the tumor has reached the bottom of the ulcer and is away from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the ulcer and explore with it.
If you feel the tumor between your finger and it, and there is a membrane of scar or flesh between them, and it is close to rupture, then there is nothing to do but wait with hope, which means that you should use one of three methods in it: either cauterize it as we have said.
Or to incise it until you reach its depth, so that you can insert fat and treat it from within, and do not be excessive in incising lest you cut the surrounding muscle of the ulcer and cause an unwanted fistula; then treat him with what we mentioned, and perhaps he will recover as we said.
And as for piercing that membrane and drilling it after you have made a hole near the seat as we mentioned, either with a needle or another sharp instrument, then clean all the softened flesh in the hole as far as you can measure.
Then fill the whole wound with the hole and the upper lip until it is closed, leaving the nostril open inside the seat, which will be less painful for the patient, and the nostril may be split in this way.
If you insert the needle into the nostril and it is in one of the sides of the seat towards the surface of the body with the skin and the edge of the seat, take at that time a needle like the point of a scissors as shown in this figure:.
Insert into it a loose thread, five or so threads, then insert the needle with the thread into the nostril until it reaches its depth. If it is penetrating from the edge of the seat inside near it.
Then remove the thread from that hole by inserting your finger into the seat and bring out the end of the thread, gather both ends together and tighten them, leaving it for a day or two. Each time the thread cuts into the flesh, tighten it well until the flesh between the threads tears off and falls out. Then treat the wound until it heals and clears up.
In the case where the Nasoor's mouth is not accessible, make it so as much as possible, even if it goes deep. You cannot do this to avoid cutting the tendon, then proceed with it as we mentioned until he recovers.
The image of the hook-shaped probe used to extract the Nasoor is as follows: the tip should be very sharp, while the other end should not be sharp so that it does not cut anything unnecessarily, as you can see:
Chapter One and Eighty.
On the incision of blood vessels from which blood flows, and their cutting and treatment for slits.
The blood vessels are of two types: either they are inside the flesh resembling the veins of a grape, or as if they are clusters of grapes, and there will be small ones and large ones, and blood flows from them constantly.
And there will be one or many, and they will be outside the flesh and in its surroundings. However, these vessels that are outside the flesh are usually less moist. Water or a little blood flows from them constantly, and they will be the color of the body.
And the treatment of what is inside the chair is that you order the patient to protrude and expose himself until the chair comes out and shows you the hemorrhoids, so hurry and grasp them with forceps or hold them with your fingers, then cut them at their roots; if the forceps do not hold due to moisture and softness.
And if they are rough or a piece of hard bread, or draw them with your fingers, then cut them, and after cutting, sprinkle some strong vinegar on them so that they stand firm like a lump of dough, or bake it as you see fit in the oven door.
Then treat it with the rest of the treatment until he is cured. If the chair does not come out, inject the patient in that area a little to irritate and clean what is inside the chair, causing it to come out quickly when the patient protrudes. The external hemorrhoids are easy to deal with.
And it is that you take them with your fingers or grasp them with forceps and cut them, then treat them as mentioned until they are cured. If one dislikes cutting with iron, it is better to use a thread on this method; take a loose thread and insert it into the core.
Then pull the cord upwards and pierce it with the needle from the other side at its root, and let the ends of the thread hang below the needle, which is tied tightly. Hold the cord firmly and securely, then knot the thread and remove the needle; do this with all the cords except one that you do not cut off.
Remove the surplus blood, then place a soaked bandage in rose oil or oil of Cyprus on the chair and put it on the patient's seat, ordering him to remain still. Leave it until the cords fall off; if they do, treat them with plasters and the rest of the treatment until he is cured.
As for the treatment of scars, it often presents with dryness and adhesion of the tissue. If they are severe and do not respond to medication, it is necessary to scrape them with a sharp blade or your fingernail until they become moist and the outer layer that prevents healing is removed.
Then treat it until it heals as needed. If it does not heal, scrape it again more vigorously than the first time until it bleeds, then treat it; for it will heal.
Chapter Eighty-Two
In the treatment of hernias, whether they are protruding or not protruding, and hydroceles.
The hernia is nothing but a circular lump on the skin, resembling the head of a nail, which can be found in all parts of the body, especially at the bottom of the feet and toes, and it causes pain when walking.
It is necessary to cut around the hernia and hold it with a hook or tweezers, then pull it from its root. After that, treat it as you wish. If you want to suture it on what has been mentioned in its chapter, regarding dry hydrocele, one of them is a small, rough, round lump above the skin surface.
Often, it appears on the hands of children, and its treatment is to apply a poultice and cut or burn it with a silk thread or hair until it falls off. If you wish, suture it as mentioned before with fire or strong medicine.
The protruding and non-protruding hydroceles can also be removed using the device I mentioned in the treatment of hydrocele. As for the hydrocele, it is also a small, rough, thick lump on the skin surface, deeply sunken, and if cold affects it, you will feel something like the bite of an ant.
It will be in the whole body, and most of it will be in the hands, and its treatment is to take a tube from the hair of an ostrich or a strong eagle feather, and this tube is placed on the boil until the circle of the tube surrounds it from all sides, then you turn your hand with the tube until it bursts what is around the boil.
And it is placed in the depth of the flesh, and the boil is removed from its root. If you wish, you can do this with a copper or iron tube as shown in this figure:
The top of the tube is closed and threaded to facilitate handling and turning by the fingers, and if you wish, you can cover the boil with what has been mentioned in the treatment of furuncles.
Chapter Thirty-Eight.
In the figures of the instruments used for injecting in diseases of the rectum, hemorrhoids, and piles.
The syringe can be made of silver, tin, or copper, either cast or forged. From this instrument, small and large ones are made according to the users' needs. Therefore, the syringes used for treating small children will be small, and those whose rectums are narrow or tight should have their syringes very slender. A figure of a large syringe:
The upper part where the leather strap is attached should be wide in this manner, having a barrier at the point where the strap is tied as you see, and the lower end that enters into the chair should be very smooth to the touch, with two holes on one side and one hole on the other side.
The hole should be as wide as the size of a small pearl or slightly smaller, and the container for holding the medicines should be made from the intestine of an animal or from fine leather in the shape of a small box with a diameter of a finger.
And many holes should be made as it turns, and the distance between each hole should be the width of a finger. Then a thread and a thin rope made from spun cotton, twisted into ten strands or so, should be inserted into those holes, binding the leather like a box. Then, if the medicine is placed in it, squeeze its end between the two stones tightly and securely, then inject with it. And this is the shape of the leather container and holes.
The method of injecting it is to fill the leather or intestine with the medicine and place it in hot water for as long as possible, being careful that it does not become too hot or too cold. Then the patient lies on their back, and the end of the tube is raised above them.
It is placed under it a cloth or blanket, then the end of the syringe is anointed with ointment, or egg white, or almond oil, or something similar to it, then it is inserted into the seat tightly, and the assistant takes the handle with both hands and squeezes it strongly until everything in the syringe is emptied into the basin.
Then the syringe is removed, and the patient is made to urinate against the wall. If the medicine prompts him to evacuate, let him hold on as much as he can, even if it keeps him up all night, for that is better than injecting into the bladder. If injected into the bladder and it hastens its exit, let the injection be delayed until he recovers.
If there are pipes or painful ulcers in the seat, let the syringe be very fine and softer than those used for children's injections. And this is an image of a fine syringe with its skin sealed on it:
Chapter Forty-Eight
In the Treatment of Wounds
I have mentioned in the classification how to treat ulcers, and I remind here of their treatment with the hand and with medications in detail. I say that wounds differ according to what causes the wound and where it is located on the body.
The things that have many injuries include: a spear, stone, or sword cut, knife cut, arrow wound, and similar numerous things.
As for the injuries according to their locations on the body, such as the injury that falls upon the head, neck, chest, abdomen, liver, and similar organs.
Now I will describe the treatment of some injuries to serve as a measure and standard for other injuries, and I will begin with the simple head injuries, particularly because the compound ones will be mentioned in the third chapter of this book.
I say that when a simple head injury occurs without bone fracture, if it is from a stone or similar and only the skin is bruised, and the wound is large and there is fear of fever developing in the patient, then he should hurry to cauterize it immediately. And do not delay this, and let him bleed as much as his strength allows if there is no obstacle to cauterization, especially if the blood coming from the wound is flowing; the cauterization should be done opposite the direction of the wound.
Warn the patient against overindulgence, drinking alcohol, and eating fatty foods, for preventing constipation is preventive. Let him reduce his food intake, avoid meats and broths, and apply a warm compress of cotton soaked in rose oil alone or with a drink that has ginger.
If the hot compress is readily available, apply it to the wound if it is moist with blood and has not changed due to the air. I will describe this type of air to you shortly. However, if the air has caused a change in the wound, then use some marjoram on it.
Let the bandage extend, then treat it until he is cured. If the wound is large and is from a sword cut or similar, and its edges have not met with the sutures, then join it by stitching as I described in the chapter on abdominal wounds.
If the skin is exposed bone and hanging, and its retention is only in a loose piece, then cut it off. Treat the wound with medicines that make the flesh hard like bone instead of skin. Instruct the patient to eat foods containing fat, such as heads and brains, and the like.
If a wound occurs in the skin and does not adhere to the bone, cut off all of the affected area and stitch it up, then treat it. If there is an artery or vein from which blood flows and has not been stopped with medication, search for the artery.
If he was pierced, do not pull it out, but bind it with the sheath and tie it. But if necessity requires it, then if what we mentioned does not work, cut it until the blood stops. For these wounds are small and simple, their treatment is easy: leave them with this dressing while they bleed.
Before the air changes it, and the recipe for the dressing is to take a part of milk, two parts of oil, and three parts of hot or unheated lime, grind all together, sift, and wrap the wound with it, binding it tightly until a good scab forms.
It is then bound with a cloth, and covered from above with bandages, leaving it unwashed as long as it does not adhere. For the medicine will not leave him until he recovers, and lime alone can do this if milk and oil are not available.
This action can also be done with a sponge in many of the major surgeries, if he is skilled in placing it and compressing it. The surgeries are bloody with their blood, as long as the air has not changed them, and if the air has changed some of them, especially in summer.
There is no benefit in placing this sponge, so treat it with what we mentioned by placing some cooked grains or a poultice made of wheat flour mixed with water and honey until it softens, then treat it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
If the wound is associated with a fracture in the bone and it is mobile, then it should be pulled together with the jawbone. The treatment of skull fractures has been mentioned when necessary during neck surgery. If the wound occurs in the neck, there is no difference in treatment between it and a head wound if it is simple.
However, if a nerve in the neck or jugular vein is cut, there is no treatment for it except to avoid treating it with anything that constricts strongly, such as chains and hooks, because they irritate the nerve and cause it to fester.
And do not place anything cold on the wound, because the nerve is cold and its connection to the brain, which is the noblest of organs, will be injured. What you treat it with are soft drugs like aloe washed several times with sweet water mixed with oil or rose water and tincture of roses.
If you also wash with sweet water and the other minerals on this type, as well as wet compresses, then if the wound is large, use stitching or close it with threads, then treat it until it heals.
If the wound has a cavity and there is a hidden abscess in its lower part where the pus has gathered, then it should be opened in the lowest place in it. If blood vessels have been cut in the wound and you notice blood oozing out of it, then cauterize it or tie it off or sew it shut if necessity requires that.
If the wound has cut some of the tendons or all of them and the nerves have been exposed, then bring the skin edges together with stitches on top of the tendon, and do not touch the tendon itself but rather place it in its natural position, then tie it firmly with a tight knot and leave it for several days.
Then treat it with medicated dressings that contain astringents and drying agents until it heals. If the wound has affected the bone, examine it. If there are splinters of bone in it, remove all of them or as many as you can, and leave what you cannot remove until the wound heals and clears up, which will facilitate their removal.
If the wound is open, leave the pus we described on it; if bone ulcerates in the wound and becomes overhanging, treat it as mentioned for sternal wounds and intercostal spaces.
If the wound is from a spear or sword and you see it has an opening, observe if air comes out of it when the patient breathes; then know that it is a puncture wound. If it does not have an opening and is open with blood, do not put any dressing on it at first nor bandage it so that the blood does not collect in its opening.
Then draw it towards the heart and the patient will die. But put two astringent medicated dressings on it and bandage it during the day twice. If you do not have any medicated dressing, then put a woolen cloth in the mouth of the wound to absorb moisture from it, and let the patient sleep on the wound.
Treat what is collected in it, even if three or more days have passed since the injury and no swelling, fever, discoloration, or shortness of breath has occurred, and you see that his other conditions are good. Then know that the wound is healed, so treat it with honey and the rest of the treatment until it heals completely.
If his pulse is difficult to feel and the fever persists, know that it has become dangerous. Treat it by opening the wound, drain what accumulates in it. Even if several days have passed since the injury to the chest or back, treat it with stitching as mentioned before.
If it is large or urgent, even if it is small, then if it affects the bone and some of its fragments are present, examine the wound and quickly remove those fragments. If they are loose, remove them; if not, leave them until they come out by themselves.
The wound becomes rotten, which facilitates their removal. As for other injuries that occur in the limbs, their treatment is according to what we have mentioned.
Chapter Fifty-Eight
On Abdominal Wounds and the Protrusion of Intestines, and Their Stitching.
The hernia that appears on the abdomen can be large or small or medium-sized. The large one may protrude a bladder or several bladders, making their insertion and suturing very difficult.
And the small hernia may also be difficult from another aspect, requiring that its return be difficult. If the bladder does not quickly enter its place after an hour, it will swell and thicken, making its insertion difficult. Therefore, the best of hernias is the medium-sized hernia because with it there is no difficulty in returning the bladder as there is with these two types.
Know that the suturing of the abdomen is done in four ways, two of which are universal and suitable for suturing the abdomen and for other bodily incisions, while the other two are specific to other incisions except that they are particularly suitable for suturing the abdomen.
I will describe them to you one by one with explanation, so I say that if the wound is small and something from the bladder has come out of it and its return is difficult, this is due to two reasons: either because the hernia is small as we have said, or because the bladder has been exposed to cold air.
If it is so, it should be heated by placing a wet sponge or cloth in hot water alone, or in which chickpeas, lentils, and sesame seeds have been cooked. Then wring it with the hand until the swelling subsides.
This drink, which contains alum, is better than water alone for dissolving the swelling. If you see that the swelling has subsided, pour cold water in which chickpeas or lentils have been boiled over it, as this will more easily enter its opening.
If, after this treatment, it is difficult to return, make a small cut in the cloth with the instrument used for cutting needles. The first treatment is preferable if possible; one resorts to cutting only out of necessity and when all means have failed. Here is an image of the instrument:
It should have one beveled end and the other not beveled. The thin end should not be sharp but slightly blunt. This instrument resembles a small awl, as you can see. If the wound widens and water enters it, its return should be in its natural shape.
"As for its specific place, if you can reach it, it is better; but if the tear is wide and in the lower abdomen, the patient should lie on his back with his legs higher than his head, and if it is in the upper abdomen, he should raise his head and chest above the rest of his body.
"And so if the tear is in either side of the abdomen, always make sure that the side with the wound is higher than the other side, and thus it should be used for major wounds and medium-sized wounds.
"As for small wounds, place the patient as you see fit, then prepare a competent assistant who holds the entire wound with his hands and gathers its edges together, then peels it back slightly to facilitate the suturing.
"This is the basic method of suturing: take one needle or several needles according to the size of the wound, then leave a length from the edge of the wound equal to the thickness of the skin. Thread one needle without inserting thread into the edges of the skin. "Then, with the edges of the fascia underneath the skin, pass it through from that side until you bring them together. When the skin and fascia edges are brought together, they become four layers. Then sew around the needle twice in both directions using double thread until the wound edges are firmly closed.
Then leave some of the thickness of the finger also and pierce another needle, then tie it with the thread as you did with the first needle, so continue to do this with what you need of needles until you have filled all the wound with needles, and let the needles be moderate between thick and thin.
Because the very thin needles cut the flesh quickly, and the thick ones are also difficult to enter the skin, therefore it is necessary that they be moderate in thinness and thickness, and it is not appropriate to pierce the needle near the edge of the skin.
So that the flesh does not break quickly and the wound does not open before it heals, and also do not make the stitches too tight so that the wound does not resist healing. Then cut the ends of the needles so that they do not hurt the patient when sleeping, and make for him a bandage from cloth on both sides to hold the ends of the needles.
And leave them until you know that the wound has healed, and this type of stitching with needles in this manner is suitable for small wounds because it may suffice to suture them with one needle or two or thereabouts.
The characteristic of the second-year stitch is that it gathers with one needle in a single pass four layers: two skin layers and two muscle layers, using a thread of moderate thickness and softness. If this needle penetrates these four layers, the same needle is returned from the side it began.
Let the thread fall in a knot from above the wound, so that the stitch is like the purse-stitch that sews together the seam and makes between each stitch and the next the thickness of the little finger, and this stitch is known to everyone.
And with this stitch, a wound that appeared on a man's abdomen, which he was cut by a sword and the wound opened more than a finger's width, and there emerged from his intestines about two fingers of the middle intestine, and the opening was in the middle of the abdomen.
After removing his intestines from the wound for twenty-four hours, the wound healed in about fifteen days, and I treated him until he recovered and lived many years thereafter, engaging in all his activities, and the physicians judged that it would not be possible to recover without this procedure.
And it is remarkable that I did not treat it with myrrh, because I was in a place where there were no medicines. So I used to put cotton on the wound twice a day and I committed to washing it with honey water until he recovered.
As for one of the types of special sutures, I mention it according to Galen's statement: begin the suture from the skin and let the thread enter from outside to inside; then if the thread passes through the skin and through the tendon extending lengthwise along the entire abdomen.
I left the edge of the flap from the sack in the side into which I inserted the thread, and passed the thread through the other edge from inside to outside; then, if it passed through [the other side], I passed it a second time in this same edge of the sac from outside to inside.
Leave the edge of the flap that is in this side, and pass the thread through the other edge from inside to outside; then, when passing it [through] with it into the sac, also pass it into the edge of the second sac on its opposite side until it passes through all of it.
Then start also from this side with its eye and line along the edge that is on the other side, and remove the needle from the flap that is near it, then return it in that flap and draw the line of the edge of the flap that is on the other side along with this edge from the forehead.
And remove it from the flap that is on its side, and do this again and repeat it after each one until you have sutured all the wound in this manner. The nature of this suture is to resemble the stitching of the eyelids for the eye.
That the flap is sutured once from one side with the edge of the skin and left free on the other side until it releases, and as for the second type of special suture that Galen also mentioned, here is his statement:
And that is to suture it in the manner that some of the practitioners do, by bringing each part to its opposite with the difficulties inherent in it. They will bring the edge of the flap to its other edge and the edge of the forehead to its other edge, as I have described for you.
The needle should be sewn into the edge of the forehead near you from outside and then pushed inside it alone, leaving the two edges of the flap. Then return the needle and push it from outside to inside in both edges of the flap, both together, and return it again.
And it is pierced from the inside out into the other margin of the opposite side, and this suturing is better than common easy suturing which was mentioned before; this is the word of Galen, verified. Some have said that abdominal suturing can be done with two needles. This is because you insert a single thread in them, starting by entering the needle from your side and passing it to the opposite side; then you enter the other needle from the opposite side and pass it from your side according to the suturing of the lips equally.
Know that if the rupture is in the middle of the abdomen, its suturing is more difficult than in other parts of the abdomen. As for the treatment of the wound, its ruling is like the ruling of other wounds, because if you reach the wound while it is still fresh with blood before the air changes it and the pus returns, and you mark it and rule it, then place on it the plaster that seals.
If the wound has already been changed by the air, then place on it some of the poultices that you have prepared until it suppurates and the threads fall out, and the skin and the margin adhere, then treat it as you treat other wounds until it heals.
If you do not have medicines, then apply cotton wool soaked in fresh water twice a day as I have instructed you until it heals, for in most cases, if the wounds are simple, you will not need any other treatment. However, if you fear that the wound may affect the major organs with pain.
It is necessary to soak a soft wool cloth in warm oil or rose oil and place it around the areas between the hips and the buttocks. If he feels pain or swelling in his thighs, this often occurs, so rinse it with black fermented grape juice.
Especially if the swelling has reached the thigh and become an open wound, know that what was thick of the thighs is easier to heal, while what was thin of them is more difficult to heal.
As for the thigh known as the inner thigh, it does not accept healing from a wound located in it due to its abundance of veins and bones, the softness of its flesh, and its proximity to the nature of nerves. However, if what emerged from the wound is pus and you have drained it thoroughly, return it to its place as you would with any other thigh.
And it passed for him a period, and he turned green or black. It is necessary to suture it with thread above the place from which it turned black, lest there be an outpouring of blood, for in the wound are vessels and nerves. Then cut what is below that ligature.
And you make the ends of the thread hanging from below the wound, outside it, so that it is easy for you to pull and remove when the wound falls and the scarring occurs. The wound that appears on the abdomen, if a tear appeared in the abdomen and it was small.
And it may rupture in some people, for I have seen a man who tore his abdomen with an arrow wound to the right of the stomach. The wound healed and became strong, from which the intestines and feces exit. So I treated him while not hoping for his recovery. So I continued to care for him until he recovered, and the place healed. When I saw the place had healed, I feared for the patient that something bad would happen in his abdomen, but no such bad event occurred, and he remained in good health. Indeed, he eats and drinks, has sexual intercourse, enters the bathhouse, and serves in his role. Some experienced individuals have mentioned that when a small wound appears on the abdomen, it should be treated in this manner.
And it is that the large ants are taken, and their heads cut off; then the wound is brought together, and one of them, which has its mouth open, is placed on the two sides of the wound. If she grips it and closes her mouth, she cuts off her head, for it sticks and does not dissolve. Then another ant is placed near the first one.
And continue to do this with several ants, according to the size of the wound; then sew it up and suture the wound, for these heads will remain sticking in the ulcer until the ulcer becomes healthy and heals, without the drawback of maggot infection. It is also possible to suture the ulcer with thin thread.
Which is used from the silk of the silkworm after it has entered into a needle, and this is that its end is taken from the silk and drawn out in a thread; then at its end a thin, soft linen thread is tied, and then that thread is inserted into the needle. And the silkworm thread is used to suture the ulcer, and then it is brought back into the bowel. This method of suturing with ants and silkworms is only wishful thinking and hope.
But if the tear is large and extensive, especially if it is in one of the thin membranes, there is no remedy for it, nor a cure from infection.
The Sixty-Eighth Chapter
On the treatment of cough and pleurisy
Know that any wound or ulcer, if it worsens and advances and becomes a tumor and does not heal, and constantly emits pus, is called in general "pleurisy" in any member where it occurs, and we call it "cough," and pleurisy.
It is in reality a hardened, whitish substance without pain, having a cavity like the cavity of a bird's bone.
Therefore, some have called it "bone," and in certain times, it can be wet, constantly emitting pus; sometimes the moisture ceases, and this moisture can be abundant or scarce, thick or thin.
It was mentioned in the classification when describing wounds that any ulcer that does not heal and in which flesh does not grow is due to one of nine causes: either because of the lack of blood in the body, or its impurity, or because there is hardened flesh inside it and on its margins, preventing the growth of good flesh. Or because it is very foul and putrid, or because the ulcer itself is festering and the material emitted by it is of poor quality, or because the treatment was not appropriate for its cure, or because a corruption occurred in the region from the type of plague, or because it is specific to that region. بعض المرضى يزورون مع الحدث إلى المقتل، فإذا كان الحدث فى جملة الأردن أو أصبع أو الجنب أو طرف الساق أو الركبة فهو يزور إلى مقتل الأردن أو الأصبع أو الجنب أو الساق.
Or because it is very foul and putrid, or because the ulcer itself is festering and the material emitted by it is of poor quality, or because the treatment was not appropriate for its cure, or because a corruption occurred in the region from the type of plague, or because it is specific to that region. بعض المرضى يزورون مع الحدث إلى المقتل، فإذا كان الحدث فى جملة الأردن أو أصبع أو الجنب أو طرف الساق أو الركبة فهو يزور إلى مقتل الأردن أو الأصبع أو الجنب أو الساق. In the city of Syracuse, where it is difficult to heal diseases and slow to cure wounds by nature, whether due to a single bone or multiple bones, all these causes, their signs, and treatments with medicines have been explained in the section on division.
It is necessary for me to inform you about the treatment of fistulas and sinuses that occur by the way of the hand. Know that fistulas can occur in all parts of the body, some of which end at large vessels and nerves or at nerves.
Or to the groin, or to the abdomen, or to the thigh, or to one of the ribs, or to one of the joints of the back, or to one of the complex joints like the hand and foot; some extend near a major limb and so on.
Therefore, of these fistulas that have this nature, they are among the difficult diseases to cure, which do not accept treatment and occupying oneself with them is troublesome and ignorant. If it is one of the fistulas that has not reached these places, then there is hope and aspiration for its treatment.
I intended to reach knowledge of that, so take a wire from copper or iron; if the nasal bone is passing over the upright then examine it with it. If there is expansion in the nasal bone, then examine it with a wire from thin lead because lead softens its body.
It softens upon entry and tends towards expansion, so if the nasal bone has many openings, you cannot determine them with a wire. Therefore, drain one of its holes. The moisture that drains out will flow towards the other openings and come out.
From it, then continue the examination on any side that is possible for you to know if there is a bone or nerve, or if the nasal cavity is distant or close, or if the nasal bone has many openings and all of this with the full extent of your ability to inquire from the patient about the presence of pain when you touch the area.
And such are the signs and causes that lead to inflammation, so if you have examined all of this accurately, then proceed with treatment confidently, which is to observe whether it is present.
The wound is clearly visible nearby or in a distant healthy place, far from a joint, nerve, blood vessel, or any of the places I mentioned to you. So cut the wound according to what was described before, and remove its rotten flesh, corrupted meat, and excess meat.
And if there is flesh or gristle growing in his mouth and similar things, treat him until he recovers. If the wound is deep and stable, it should be cut deeply as much as possible, then cleaned of all its rotten meat.
Then use the burnt talc in strong medicines and apply it to the depth of the wound that you reach with iron. Do this repeatedly until that strong medicine consumes all the corruption remaining in the depth of the wound.
Then force him to eat the vegetables that make the flesh grow correctly until he recovers. If he does not recover from this, treat him as described before. If the cause of the wound is a bone and you have confirmed this, then examine it and cut it according to what I told you, unless something prevents you.
Whether it be a tendon, nerve, or main limb as we said, if the bone is exposed and contains some corruption or blackness, scrape it until its corruption disappears. Then treat it with what promotes healing until he recovers. If he does not recover and the pain persists as before.
Inform you that you have not reached all the extraction of decay, so uncover everything above it and wash its roots thoroughly with great effort, then force it. If it is clean, otherwise inform you that this decay is far from decay, so uncover everything above it.
Wash its roots and clean it thoroughly with great effort. If the decayed bone was a small bone, you could pull it out with tweezers suitable for this task.
If there are many bones, extract all of them and do not leave anything from them, exerting your effort. If something stands in the way, such as ligaments, which cannot be cut without risk, then cut those ligaments and the flesh if present, and free the bones.
If you are unable to remove the bones from the wound during your time, place a poultice on the wound and leave it for several days until the flesh and ligaments around those bones putrefy. Protect the wound so that the split you made during your work does not close.
Rather, if you fear that, place a cloth soaked in powdered sulfur with oil or a cloth soaked in Egyptian bitumen or any green bitumen on it. For when those ligaments putrefy and the bones separate, it becomes easy to extract and pull them out.
If the bone is large, like the shinbone or thighbone and its vicinity, and only its head has rotted, then scrape it with a vigorous scraping until that blackness and rot disappear. Then force the wound to heal. But if the rotten part is a large section and the rot has reached the bone marrow, it must be cut open.
Cut it all off until the rot ends, then treat it to heal. I tell you about a certain man whose shinbone was exposed so that you may take an example and be guided in your treatment. This man was elderly.
About thirty years ago, he felt pain in his shin due to an internal movement causing the substance to reach the shin and form a large abscess with no external cause. Time passed with the mistakes of doctors until the abscess burst open.
Much pus and bad treatment continued until the shinbone became exposed, with many openings all emitting foul odors and bodily fluids. A group of doctors treated him for about two years, but none were skilled in the craft of surgery.
I intended to perform the operation, but as soon as I made the incision, a great amount of pus poured out from those orifices, and the man had become emaciated, his skin yellowed. So, I inserted a probe into one of those orifices, which reached the bone, then I explored all the orifices.
I found that some of them extended towards each other from all directions of the leg, so I hurried and incised one of those orifices until part of the bone was exposed. I found it decayed, blackened, rotten, perforated until the hole reached the marrow, which gushed out when uncovered.
I removed the decayed bone, and I believe that there was no other decay in the bone except what I cut out and gushed out, and indeed I had reached it. Then I treated the wound with medicated dressings for a long time, but it did not heal. So I returned and uncovered the bone again above the first exposure.
I found the decay connected to the bone, so I also gushed out what appeared to me from that decay. Then I dressed it with medicated bandages, but it did not heal or close. So I uncovered him again and continued cutting the bone piece by piece and dressing his wound, but it still did not heal until I cut almost all of the bone.
The extraction was performed with a spoon, then treated with medication, and it healed quickly, and the patient recovered. This repetition in his work and its severity were due to the weakness of the patient and the lack of his ability, and my fear for his death because he used to experience excessive bleeding at all times, so he recovered completely.
A piece of flesh grew in place of the bone, his condition improved in his body, and his strength returned, allowing him to move freely without experiencing any harm from walking. If the bone had been fractured in another part of the body, it would have healed.
It should be spread in this way: take a bandage and tie it at the end of the broken bone, then order the one helping to pull it up, and make another bandage from wool thicker than the first bandage.
Then tie it to the flesh under the bone and pull the end so that the flesh moves down, while you expose the flesh from the place where you want to spread it, so that the saw does not harm the flesh. Place a small piece of wood or board firmly under the bone from below.
Because if you do that, the saw will not be prevented from cutting through the diseased bone. The spreading should be slightly above the diseased area so that there is no rottenness in the bone cavity, which would not show on its surface and thus force another spreading.
If the bone is rotten and does not fall off, but some parts are connected to each other, and the rot is in the middle or in one part of it, then remove all the flesh from all sides, place a wooden piece underneath, then cut it from the first side where the rot is.
When you finish cutting from one side, cut from the other side as well, and let the cut be a little away from the rot, as we have said. If the rot is in a joint, cut the rotten joint itself and cut the bone where it connects from the other side.
If the rot is in the connection of two joints, there is no cure except amputation. If the rot is in the elbow or knee, treating it is very difficult, but you should scrape off the rot and amputate it and clean it in whatever way you can.
And whatever method you find suitable when no artery or nerve is obstructed, and know that the saws and shears for cutting these bones are many according to the position of the bones, their attachment, thickness, softness, size, smallness, hardness, and softness. It is therefore necessary to have a tool for each type of work.
Know that the tasks themselves guide you to the type of tool needed for them, especially if you have a long experience and knowledge in these crafts. For the craft is learned by seeing examples of diseases. Therefore, he may need tools that are specific to each disease. I will illustrate for you, at the end of this chapter, a variety of tools.
May it serve as an example to be admired and a standard by which others are judged, if God wills. Picture of a saw.
Image of another saw:
Image of a small saw.
Image of a large saw.
Its tip is in the shape of a round-headed drill and carved like an escarf, suitable for scraping joints if they are deformed or wide and large bones. Picture of another small scraper:
Image of a wide scraper.
Its upper bow and blade are made of iron, and its handle is a firm conical peg from the wood of a boxwood tree. Picture of a scraper with a hole in it.
A plain image of Tiif.
Another plain image of the end.
A small simple image resembling a cylinder.
Another small section image.
Its end moves in many places within the bone, a plain image suitable for what is bored into the bones.
Its end is a sharp-edged triangle made of Indian iron, and similarly all the drills and sections that we have mentioned should be made in this way. A plain image.
Chapter Seventy-Eight.
On Cutting Tips and Boring Bones.
For the tips may decay either from an external cause or from an internal one. If that decay is treated with medical treatment and the treatment does not heal, and you see the decay advancing in the limb so that nothing stops it.
Then it is necessary to cut off that limb to where the decay reaches, in order to save the patient from death or from severe pain which is greater than losing the limb. And a sign of its inclination towards this is if the limb becomes black, as if fire has burnt it.
And if it gangrenes after the blackness, until that gangrene reaches what is below that limb, and he takes it into the whole body, then hasten to cut it off. Similarly, if the cause of the gangrene is due to the bite of some venomous creature, like a sea scorpion or a viper or a tarantula, and the like.
If the gangrene or poisoning is at the tip of a finger, cut off the finger and do not delay the gangrene from spreading to the hand. Similarly, if it affects the hand, cut it off from its root without delaying the gangrene until it spreads to the forearm.
Similarly, if it affects the arm, cut the arm at the shoulder joint itself. However, if the gangrene and its sight spread towards the neck, do not cut off the head because that will cause the patient to die; rather, use other treatments according to one's ability.
Similarly, do this for the leg if the gangrene is in the toe; cut off the toe at one of the joints. And if it affects the shin, cut off the leg at its ankle, for if it spreads to the knee, cut the thigh at the knee joint.
If the gangrene has reached above the knee, there is no cure for it except to leave it and make the patient comfortable until death, and the remedy for cutting off the limb or cauterizing it is to tie a ligature below the place you want to cut, and then tie another ligature above the place.
The servant who holds the lower ligature pulls it down, and another servant pulls the upper ligature upwards, and you peel off all the flesh between the two ligatures with a wide spatula until all the flesh is exposed, then cut or cauterize, and cotton must be placed around from all sides.
In case the saw touches the wrong place, it will cause excessive pain and severe burning to the patient. If bleeding occurs during your work, quickly open the site or apply some hemostatic plants, then return to your treatment until you finish.
Then bandage the injured limb with a suitable ligature and treat it until it heals. I inform you of an example of a man in whose leg this happened, as I described to you, and that is because there appeared on his leg a blackness accompanied by a burn like fire.
The man was the first to experience that corruption in his finger, so he took all of it until the man recovered from himself when he saw the corruption spreading in the limb along with the severity of the pain and burning sensation. So he cut it off at the joint, and he was cured.
After a long time had passed, that corruption appeared in his left hand finger, so he came to me. I cut off the distal phalanx of that finger along with what it was carrying on the hand from the medications after cleaning him. The distal phalanx did not regrow, and the corruption spread into the other finger.
Until the corruption spread to his hand, he asked me to cut off his hand, but I refused and advised him to try to regrow that phalanx. I also feared for him when cutting off his hand, as death could occur because the man's strength was weak. When he lost hope in my advice, he returned to his homeland.
I was informed that he recovered and cut off his hand himself, and he was cured. I have told this story so that it may serve as a guide for those afflicted with this disease and as evidence to act upon.
Chapter Eighty-eight
In the treatment of hernias and how to inject them with medicines.
If a boil occurs in some fleshy parts and the period of the boil is prolonged until it reaches its full term, then either bursts or empties out completely along with all that was inside it, leaving the place empty like a vessel.
And the skin, which is like a parchment, has become thin and is not deeply affected in decay so as to affect bone or nerve or sinew; from here it deserves to be called a hernia and was not called a cicatrix except that its duration became prolonged until decay affects one of these parts.
Then it is called a cicatrix or eschar, and its treatment is to cut off all of that skin as if peeling, especially if it has become thin like parchment and it has been confirmed that it will not adhere to the place due to decay.
Therefore, if it is hoped that the skin will adhere and decay has not reached a significant degree and there is some fleshiness in the skin, then treat it with an injection, which is to look at the hernia; if it is large and the abscess from which the fetid smell emanates is prominent, then inject it with the Egyptian medicine.
This is oil, honey, and vinegar mixed together in a pot and cooked over fire until the medicine boils and reaches the consistency of honey. Then take what you need from it and mix it with water and honey, inject it into the wound, cover his mouth, and leave the medicine in it for two hours.
Then remove it with the juice at dusk, do this every day until the wound is clean and the pus disappears. If this medicine is not available, inject water of ash, which is prepared by taking ashes from apple or pear tree wood and pouring water over them.
Then rinse it and inject with it until you are sure the wound is washed clean. If the patient cannot tolerate Egyptian medicine or ash water, then inject him with a mixture of water and honey containing some powdered vinegar.
Or inject him with a mixture of honey and wine, for honey cleans and washes the wound, while wine closes it, especially if the wine has a strong, dry taste. If you do this repeatedly and are sure that the putrefaction in the wound is gone, then inject what causes flesh to grow.
Like taking from the date kernel, soaking it in rose oil and thick drink or injecting it with some drugs and other kernels that we have proven their properties in the chapter on kernels, for if the hidden mouth is narrow, it will not fit the injection tube.
Stretch it slightly with a little iron or place in it a thread soaked in Egyptian kernels or Syrian kernels until it expands, and likewise if the mouth is also wide, gather its lips together with stitching and leave from it as much as can fit the injection tube without excess.
And likewise, if the mouth from which the pus exudes is elevated above the split, then split it in a lower place so that the pus flows downwards, because the pus, when injected into the depth of the hidden mouth, prevents the flesh from growing in it.
And if you cannot split the hidden mouth downwards as desired, then remove the limb and place it in a position where the pus flows out of it easily according to what suits you best, ensuring that nothing from the thick pus accumulates within it.
As for the medicated poultices that are placed on the external hidden mouth and how to place them on it, it is done by taking one of the moistened kernels suitable for what you want and applying it onto a piece of cotton cloth, and let the cloth be as large as to cover the entire hidden mouth. Then use the scissors to make an opening wider than the mouth of the abscess a little, then apply soft bandages on another layer according to the size of the opening and place it in a spaced manner away from the mouth of the abscess so that the pus can easily exit from it, and do not remove the large bandage until later.
Several days, and as for the one on the mouth of the abscess, it is the one that you remove at any time to allow what has accumulated in it from pus to exit, so that you can know what drains from it: whether it is abundant or scanty, thick or thin.
And with this, also examine the location of the abscess itself: whether its owner feels pain in it or not; and whether there is worm in it or not. If your treatment continues thus and you see that the matter which exits is smooth over the mouth of the abscess.
Know that the abscess has healed or is close to healing. At this time, open it again on the next day or the third day. When you have opened the wound, replace the bandage with another and renew the dressing. If pus continues to come out of the abscess after a long period, do not despair of its union. ‌
He delays because there are some people whose flesh grows slowly in their wound, and others quickly; so if it comes out after many days not inflamed, know that the bandage was not tightly wrapped, for the tightness of the bandage delays it.
He prolonged his treatment, so he increased in drying the medicines, and let them be medications that are wet in their nature and dry in their power, like a date stone, if it is increased with more saffron, and one of those treated with it should take the date stone.
And he dresses with rose oil and sprinkles on it the old wine, temperate in its nature, then kneads him with it and uses it. He can do this action if the date stone is not available; if you cook the honey until it becomes thick and use it, or take from murr, sabur, and kandar, grind all of them together, place it on the honey while it is on the fire. Then he pours it on a linen cloth and ties it over the bandage, or it can be poured with the honey that has been cooked until it thickens, let acacia thorns be placed on it, put the linen cloth on top, and tie it.
And it may be used in such cases the long zarwand, the root of the almond tree, the fine flour of corn, and the narcissus bulbs, which are either used alone or as a mixture to grind and sift and leave on the honey that was described and used. So if the matter of the box persists and does not heal with this treatment, know that there is corruption in it.
And if it occurs in the bones or any other hard tendons or ligaments, then treat it with the Nasoor treatment as mentioned before.
Chapter Ninety-Eight
On the treatment of ulcers and suppurating nails, the removal of supernumerary fingers, and the cleavage of fused fingers.
The ulcer is a thick growth of flesh that appears under the nail of the thumb or big toe, and it may also occur in other fingers. If its condition persists and treatment is neglected, it will become hot and painful.
Or it may become corrupt and spread until it eats away at the root of the nail, and it may even completely corrupt it. Sometimes the corruption reaches the bone, giving off a foul odor, making the tip of the finger swollen, and turning its color black. If you treat it with what we have mentioned in the section and it does not heal from your treatment.
It is necessary to cut all the nails that grow from the finger with iron, then heal the wound after that, for cauterization in this case is very beneficial. And if the bone is intact and the fingernail is also intact.
And the angle of the nail had penetrated into the flesh and caused it to retract and shrink. Therefore, a thin blade should be placed under the angle of the nail that causes the flesh to retract, raised above it, and then the flesh should be cut with scissors.
And on what remains of the flesh, place burnt medicine to make it disappear entirely. Then treat it with marrow until it heals. But if there is decay affecting the bone, it is necessary to cut that bone and remove it, for it will not heal as long as it contains a rotten core.
If you see decay and rotting spreading in the finger, cut it at one of its joints as previously mentioned, then treat it until it heals. If the nail is struck or crushed and experiences severe pain, it is necessary to remove the afflicted portion first.
Then cut the nail with a sharp, slanted cut from top to bottom, being careful not to reach the flesh beneath the nail, for doing so will cause severe pain in the afflicted area and may lead to excess flesh growth in that spot. Afterward, treat the area with a substance that soothes pain.
The extra finger that is born in some people's hands may sometimes be entirely fleshy, and sometimes it has bones, and sometimes it has nails. The growth of some of them occurs at the base of the fingers connected to certain fingers.
Or its growth may be in some of the finger joints, and those that grow in the finger joints do not move, but those that grow near the base of the finger may move; as for what is fleshy from it, it is easy to cut, and this is because you can cut it at its base with a wide scissors.
As for those whose growth is at the base of the joint, their treatment is difficult because they cannot be cut off; but as for those that grow on the finger near one of the joints, it is necessary to first cut its flesh in a circular manner up to the bone, then saw the bone with one of those suitable saws.
Then treat it until it heals. As for the adhesion that sometimes appears between some fingers, this often occurs and is something a person is born with; it can also occur due to the fusion of a wound or burn from fire, and so on. It is necessary to cut this adhesion.
Until the fingers return to their natural state, then place between them a piece of wool or gauze soaked in rose oil, so that it does not heal quickly and separate them, or make a thin lead sheet between them until the place is healed as needed.
And so if the adhesion is over part of the fingers on the palm, cut that adhesion according to what fits and adjusts it to the shape of the limb.
Chapter Ninety-Nine
On Cutting the Toenails.
The toenails are soft, thick membranes with dark pigmentation that can occur in various parts of the body but are most common on the feet, particularly among laborers, porters, and carriers. It is first necessary to use strong emollients several times a day.
Then the owner of the condition should use purgatives. As for treating it with iron, one method is to cut and draw out the black blood, while another is to cauterize the membrane and remove it entirely. If it is cut, the leg should first be soaked in hot water.
Until the thick blood clot dissolves, then bind the patient's leg from above the thigh to below the ankle with a bandage, and make one or two or three wide incisions in the same place.
Then drain the black blood from below the leg to above and from above to below until you see that sufficient or as much as the patient can bear has been drained, then bind it and instruct him to avoid foods that cause the return of the black humour; repeat the evacuation and purging.
When the veins become congested and this harms the patient, but if he is bled, it will be in this manner: Shave the patient's leg if it has a lot of hair, then have him enter the bath and wash his leg with hot water until it becomes red or perform strenuous exercise.
If there is no bath to heat the limb, then make a longitudinal incision in the skin towards the vein, either at its end near the ankle or below it near the heel, then open the skin with scissors and drain the blood from all sides until it appears to the touch.
When it appears, you see it red and swollen. If it exudes from the skin, you also see it like a worm. Then it enters under the skin until it raises and comes out of the skin; then he ties it with a soft black thread, and makes another incision near that incision about three fingers long.
Then scrape the skin off the vein until it appears, then lift it with the probe as before and tie it with another thread as done previously, then make another incision or many incisions if necessary.
Then extract it and cut it off at the end of the incision near the ankle, then draw it out and scrape it until it comes out of the second incision; then draw it to the upper incision and do that until you draw it out from the third and highest incision, so when all of it has come out, cut it off.
If drawing and scraping is difficult, insert a double strong thread with a needle and tie it; then draw it out and insert the probe under it and move your hand in all directions until it comes out, being careful not to break, for if it breaks, it will be very hard to scrape.
If the patient is afflicted with a wound, then apply to the place of the incision wool soaked in drink and rose oil or olive oil, and treat him until he is cured. If the wound has edges, direct them towards the sides.
If it is not stable as we have said, then make incisions at each edge and the places of their turnings, and hang them with needles until they unite with each other. Be careful when making these incisions that you do not cut the vessel or wound it, for if you do so, it will be difficult for you to join it, and you will waste your effort.
Image of the incision that the wound makes:
Image of the dark needle:
It should not have a barb like other needles, nor should its tip be sharp, so as not to wound the vessel. Rather, it should be thick and smooth. If it is thin, it will cut the vessel due to its sharpness. Instead, it should have a thick head as we mentioned.
The First Part in Nineteen Sections.
For suturing the vein.
This vein occurs in the legs in hot countries such as al-Hijaz and the Arab lands, and in sparsely forested hot countries. Sometimes it may appear in other parts of the body besides the legs, originating from a fissure beneath the skin.
The appearance of scabies in living bodies and lice, the emergence of the itch mite, which is born between the skin and flesh, and the sign of the beginning of this itch is that there is a severe itching in the leg, then the place swells, and then the itch begins to come out from that swollen place.
It is as if it were the root of a plant or an animal, so if its tip emerges, it should be wrapped in a small piece of lead weighing from one to two dirhams, then bandaged and left hanging from the leg.
Whenever anything comes out of it, wrap it in the lead and bandage it. If it becomes very long, cut off part of it and wrap the rest, but do not cut it from its root before it all comes out. Because if you cut it, it will become shorter, enter the flesh, cause infection, and a bad ulcer will form in that place.
Therefore, it is necessary to move and turn it a little at a time until it comes out completely from the end, so that nothing remains in the body. It may come out of this itch in some people with a length of five or ten fingers.
And it was reported to me that he went out for a man of twenty shabras, so if you cut off his treatment in your time, insert a probe into the hole and push it with a long stick along with the body until everything within it is emptied, and try to heal the place with medicines every day.
Then treat him with the treatment of wounds, and this pus can have many veins, especially if it appears in the joint of the foot or in the foot itself, causing many mouths for it, and from each mouth a vein comes out. So treat him as we mentioned in the division and what preceded.
Chapter Two Hundred Ninety-Nine.
On the swelling on the newborn calf under the neck, which is called "bovine disease".
This disease is called in some of our countries "bovine disease" because it often afflicts cattle, and it is a small single swelling that develops between the skin and the flesh, spreading throughout the entire body, both upward and downward.
It is noticeable to the touch as it moves from limb to limb until it bursts wherever it has burst through the skin, and it exits and forms a blister of some mixtures, similar to what afflicts frogs, snakes, and the scorpion's sting in the abdomen.
If its injury reaches the body and rises to the head, reaching the eye, it may open in it and come out, causing the eye to lose its function. This happens frequently. Therefore, if you wish to treat it and remove it, it must be done at the onset of its appearance and feeling.
It is necessary to bind what is above and below it with a strong bandage, then cut it open and remove it. If it sinks into the flesh and you cannot find it, burn it in place with fire until it is destroyed. This is the greatest cause of damage to the eye, as we have said.
If you see it has reached the head near the eye, bind tightly beneath it on the forehead and then cut it open and remove it. It is advisable for the patient to purify his body with mild drugs that are easy to mix, avoiding foods that produce putrefaction.
Chapter Three and Ninety.
On the incision for the disease known as "nāfir.
This disease, which is called "nāfir" in our country, is a pain that appears in some limbs and then moves from one limb to another. I have seen it as I described it for you.
A sick woman was brought to me in one of the villages, and I uncovered her arm and inserted a tube into the vein of her arm. After an hour, I saw that tube moving with the blood like a fly climbing up to its nest as quickly as mercury.
If moved from place to place, the pain leaves that spot and settles in the chest. Then, after an hour, it spreads throughout the body until it reaches the other arm. Afterwards, she told me that her entire body was turning as I witnessed.
I was amazed at the speed with which the condition moved from limb to limb, and I had never seen this disease with such characteristics before except that I saw a group who found the pain moving from limb to limb, but I did not see it as I saw in this woman.
I could only attribute this to the fact that the woman was from the countryside, her body stiff and veins exposed. Thus, the moving wind became perceptible and should not appear in this manner among city dwellers with soft bodies and hidden veins.
If you wish to treat it and its owner feels pain, then if the swelling appears clearly as we mentioned, tighten above and below it with a ring and cut until that trapped wind is released and the place heals.
If you do not see it with your eyes, then treat it with body poultices and things that expel winds and disperse them, such as the plant of mint and the plant of sage, and similar medicines.
Chapter Forty-Nine.
On Removing Arrows.
Arrows vary according to their types and the parts of the body where they are lodged. As for their variations in type, there are large ones and small ones, some with hollow glass heads and others with solid glass heads, and some with three prongs and others with four prongs.
And some have tongues, while others have barbs. As for their variations according to the parts of the body where they are lodged, they fall into two categories: either the parts are hollow like the brain, heart, liver, bladder, kidneys, intestines, and the like; or they are solid like the bones, muscles, tendons, nerves, and joints. Therefore, when an arrow penetrates one of these hollow parts and the signs of death that I will describe to you later appear, it is better not to remove the arrow from it, for in most cases, death will follow its owner. And when you do not see these foul signs and the arrow is not lodged in the hollow of the limb, remove it and treat the wound. As for the signs of the brain, if the arrow strikes it and pierces the bone and wounds the membrane that covers the brain, severe headache and dizziness will ensue.
And when you do not see these foul signs and the arrow is not lodged in the hollow of the limb, remove it and treat the wound. As for the signs of the brain, if the arrow strikes it and pierces the bone and wounds the membrane that covers the brain, severe headache and dizziness will ensue. And redness in the eyes, and redness of the tongue, and delirium, and confusion of the mind, and vomiting once, and sometimes blood comes out from the nostrils or the ears, and sometimes speech is lost and the voice disappears, and a white liquid like egg whites exudes from the wound, resembling meat juice.
So if these signs appear to you, then abstain from treating the patient and removing the arrow if it has not yet been removed, but as for the signs of the arrow, if it strikes the heart and is close to the left nipple and feels as if it has struck a solid object rather than an empty one.
Sometimes the arrow has a movement similar to that of the pulse, and dark blood flows from the wound, followed by coldness in the extremities, cold sweat, and unconsciousness. Know then that death is imminent. And if the sign of the arrow is that it wounds the liver, then there will be flow of foamy blood from the wound.
The neck veins are dilated, the patient's color changes, and he breathes deeply and seeks cold air. If the arrow has penetrated the lung, it will be close to the ribs, and breathing will be very difficult with severe pain.
The patient vomits, and all the limbs shake. If the arrow has struck the liver, this is followed by severe pain, and blood that resembles liver in its redness exudes from the wound. If the arrow has struck the intestines, sometimes something undigested comes out of the wound.
The patient's condition is obvious. If the arrow has struck the stomach, there will be swelling and something from the intestines or food or urine will come out of the wound. There is no hope for his treatment or removal of the arrow. If the arrow has struck the bladder, urine will come out.
If something protrudes from it to the outside and the pain increases on the patient, know that he is dying. As for other parts such as the face, eye, ear, shoulder, arm, upper back, loins, thigh, leg, and similar body parts, the situation is more straightforward.
When an arrow does not encounter a vein or nerve and is not poisoned, I inform you of some observations I have made regarding these arrows, to aid in your treatment. This is because an arrow fell into a man's eye socket at the root of his nose.
I removed it from him from the other side, under the fat of the ear, and he recovered without any harm to his eye. And I extracted another arrow for a Jew who had fallen into the fat of his eye beneath the lower cheekbone, and the arrow had turned; I only grasped its small end that was lodged in the wood.
The arrow was large, of the type used by mounted archers, with a square-sectioned soft iron head that had no barbs. So the Jew recovered and nothing bad happened to his eye. And I extracted another arrow from the cheek of a Nestorian, which was an Arabic arrow.
This is the one that has barbs, so I fractured it between the ribs and it had penetrated his cheek. I treated it gently until I extracted it, and the Nestorian survived and recovered. And I removed another arrow for a man who had fallen into his abdomen; we thought he would die from it.
"After thirty days or thereabouts, with no change in his condition, the wound broke open around the arrow, it softened, and I extracted it; he recovered without further mishap. I saw a man whose arrow had penetrated his back, and the wound closed on him.
"After seven years, the arrow came out at the root of his thigh. I saw a woman whose arrow had penetrated her abdomen; the wound closed and the arrow remained without any change in her condition, nor did she find it hindering any of her natural functions.
"I also saw another man whose arrow had penetrated his face; the wound closed and he felt little pain. Many such cases occurred, and I extracted an arrow from a soldier who had it lodged in the middle of his nose, slightly deviating to the right side.
"The entire arrow was missing, so I was called to treat him three days after the arrow had fallen out. I found the wound of the arrow extremely narrow; when I probed it with a thin needle, I did not feel anything, and he felt numbness and pain under his right ear due to the wound.
"I feared that the arrow might be from the poisoned side, so I cauterized the spot with a cautery having a pulling force, and I thought it would cause the spot to become inflamed and show signs of the arrow's presence. But when I did so, nothing happened in the spot, indicating that the arrow had reached its target.
"So I cauterized the wound with a cautery for many days, but nothing happened. Then I filled the wound with caustic medicine for many days. The patient became very ill and could not be cured until one day he felt the arrow in his nose and told me about it. So I put caustic medicine on the wound for many days.
"Until it opened and drained, and I felt the thin tip of the arrow that adhered to the bone. Then I increased the use of that caustic medicine to open the wound further until the tip of the arrow became clearly visible to us. It remained with me for some time, about four months.
"Then, when the wound widened and I was able to insert forceps into it, I pulled and moved them, but they did not respond to being extracted. So I continued to probe and manipulate it with various instruments until one day I grasped it firmly with forceps as shown at the end of the chapter.
The physicians used to say that the orbital sinus of the nose cannot be forced. I forced it and healed the wound, and the patient was completely cured without any pain from that. And I inform you about a way to remove some arrows so that this may serve as a measure and evidence for what I have not mentioned.
Because the parts of this craft and its details cannot be understood by description or encompassed in a book, only the skilled artisan measures little by much and what is at hand by what is lacking, and he innovates a new work and a new tool according to strange needs.
If I depart from this craft, I say that arrows only exit the limbs in which they are embedded in two ways: either by being drawn out from the place they entered or from the opposite direction, exiting from where they entered.
Or, if the arrow is prominent in a fleshy place, it should be pulled out. If it does not come out when it first enters, you must leave it for days until the flesh around it rots, making it easier to pull out and remove. The same applies if it lodges in bone.
Do not remove it for exit, so leave it also for days and return it with traction and movement every day because it will come out. If it does not come out after days, then it is necessary to bore around the arrow in the same bone from all sides with a fine drill until you widen for the arrow, then draw it out and remove it.
If the arrow is in the bone of the head and has entered one of the cavities of the brain, and some of the symptoms that I mentioned to you have appeared from the patient, then refrain from drawing out the arrow and leave it until he recovers after several days.
Then proceed to draw out the arrow and remove it, for if it is deeply embedded and cannot be drawn out, use drills around the arrow as I described to you, then treat the place until it heals. But if the arrow has turned in the body, And he lost consciousness, so examine him with the stethoscope. If you feel it, attract it with some of the tools suitable for attracting it. But if you cannot do so because of the narrowness of the wound and the distance of the arrow in the abdomen, and there is no bone or nerve or blood vessel.
Then split open the wound until it is widened and you are able to grasp the arrow until you can pull it out. If there are ears clinging to it, clear the flesh attached to them from every side with all the means you can and take possession of them. But if you cannot clear the flesh in the breaking of the ears, then cut them off until you are freed of them.
And if you try to extract the arrow from any place, use the pincers on your hand in all directions until you release it, and be very gentle so that the arrow does not break, making it difficult for you to pull it out and remove it later, if you cannot do so at this time.
Then leave it for a few days until the flesh around it decays, then try again, for at that time it will be easier. But if bleeding prevents you, use what we mentioned in the treatment chapter, and be careful not to cut a vein or nerve or artery, and use ingenuity.
By all means, you can remove the arrow and that should be done with gentleness, care, and steadiness as I have described to you. It is advisable when removing the arrow that you position the patient in the same manner he was in when the arrow struck, so that it will be more effective.
If you cannot do that, then use whatever form is possible for you. As for the arrow coming out of the other side, either it may protrude something to the outside or you may feel the tip of the arrow beneath the skin close to the surface and see its shadow.
Cut over it, and let the cut be just enough for the clamps to enter. Then pull it out, as this will facilitate its exit. But if it is lodged in a bone, twist your hand until the arrow turns within the bone and widens itself, then pull it out.
Otherwise, leave it for however many days it takes to come out on its own, because if the arrow has a fletching, you can push it with that. But if the fletching is missing and you wish to use the pushing method, then insert the hollow instrument so that its cavity enters into the tip of the arrow, and then push it out with it.
If the arrow is barbed, push it with an instrument that enters that cavity; for the arrow will then come out easily. If the arrow is poisoned, it is necessary to cut off the flesh in which all the poison has settled, if you can do so, and then treat it with what is suitable for this purpose.
If the arrow is in the chest, abdomen, bladder, or side, and it can be reached with a probe, cut around it, taking care not to cut a nerve or blood vessel, and remove it.
Then, if the wound needs suturing, suture it, and treat it until it heals. Image of the caltrops that catch arrows:
They are like the talons of a bird, made so that if they catch an arrow or any object, they do not let go of it. They can be made in various sizes, large and small, according to the size and smallness of the arrow, and the width and narrowness of the wound.
Image of the barbed lance:
Image of the poisoned lance:
This is the poisoned tip, like marrow, to facilitate its entry into the barbed arrow and push it out.
"The Fifty-Ninth Chapter.
"On the Cauterization of Vessels.
"There are thirty vessels in the body that have become accustomed to being cauterized, of which there are sixteen in the head: two pulsating vessels behind the well-known jugular veins called the sensitive vessels; two vessels in the prominent carotids; and two vessels in the sockets of the eyes known as the sight vessels.
"And the erect vessel in the middle of the forehead, and the vessel at the tip of the nose; the two jugulars in the neck; the two vessels on the upper lip; and the two vessels on the lower lip, which are known as the jaw; and the two vessels beneath the tongue.
"As for the vessels that are cauterized in the arm and hand, they are five vessels: one is called the carotid artery from the temporal region, which the common people call the head vessel; another is called the ulnar nerve, which is the middle vessel composed of a branch of the radial nerve and a branch of the carotid artery, and it is commonly known as the body vessel.
"The radial nerve, which is placed in the inner region of the arm, is also called the biceps; it is commonly known as the abdominal vessel and the tendon of the arm. The ulnar nerve, which adheres to the ulna, appears clearly above the elbow, and the little finger.
The vein that is between the calf and the shin has two branches, and in the thigh there are three veins: one that is below the pelvis on the external side, and the second is the saphenous, and its location is near the knee on the internal side, and the third is the vein of the woman and its location is near the ankle on the external side.
In the other thigh, there are also three veins similar to them. As for the two veins behind the ears, it is beneficial to tie them off for persistent headaches, migraines, and mild head wounds. The method of tying them off is as I have explained.
It is done by shaving the patient's head and tying their hair at the place of the two veins with a rough thread, tightly. Then the patient is choked with a cloth until the two veins appear and their location behind the ears in the low places of the head. Feel them with your finger, and wherever you feel the pulsation under your finger, that is where you tie them off.
Then take a sharp knife, known as a razor, and insert it under the vein into the skin until the blade reaches the bone. Then raise the vein along with the skin upwards and cut the vein with the skin in a single smooth cut. The length of the cut should be about two fingerbreadths.
"And as for the method, draw off from the blood the required amount, then bind it with bandages and leave it until it heals. It was mentioned at the beginning of this book how to cut and prepare them. As for the two veins in the cheeks, their benefit is that they are beneficial for the prolonged facial paralysis, the severe headache, and the persistent cataract.
"As for how to ligate them, as I have described to you, the patient should tie a turban around his neck until the veins become visible and their pulse is palpable under your finger. At that moment, learn with the tweezers, then raise the skin from above the vein to its proximal part with your index finger.
"The anesthetist inserts the needle from below and raises the vein above, punctures it as done with the other two veins, and draws the required amount of blood. Then, release the patient's tourniquet and place your finger on the vein for an hour.
"Then place a cotton and bandage on it, and bind it tightly from above. Leave it until it heals. It was mentioned earlier in the book how to tie and cut them. As for ligating the forehead vein, its benefit is after ligating the jugular veins for prolonged facial diseases such as tumors, ulcers, and severe redness.
How to strangle the patient with a scarf until the vein appears, then take the instrument called the lance and this is its image:
Place the natural sponge at the end of the lance on the same vein and strike from above with a mallet or something similar, allowing the blood to flow to the desired amount. Then loosen the scarf around the patient's neck and tighten it until he is healed.
The incision may be wide, but it should not have sharp edges like other incisions; rather, it should be slightly blunt and made without deviation because the bone is nearby, which could cause a thin blade to break in it.
As for the veins in the corners of the eyes, their benefit is for diseases of the eye such as trachoma, redness, and pterygium, and facial diseases. As for how to cut them, it is by strangling the patient with a scarf, then cutting them while you are standing over his head. Let the incision be slightly deviated to the length, with a small, slightly blunt blade.
Since the place has no fat, if the blade is thin, it may break; then send the desired amount of blood and place cotton on them and tighten them for one night, then loosen them. As for cutting the nasal vein, it is beneficial for acute headaches.
The severe earache, and among the diseases of the face is the red swelling that appears in the nose, especially if it is chronic, and how to prevent it from causing the patient to strain their neck: then hold the nose with your left hand and take a thin, long probe.
You drill it in the middle of the nostril itself, between the septum and the nasal wall, because mucus does not appear there, but blood will come out from its veins. Your hand should lightly grasp the probe so that only a little blood comes out, then you bind it at night, for it will quickly heal.
As for the tonsils, it is beneficial to remove them due to difficulty in breathing and causing coughs and skin diseases such as black scabies, boils, and poor wounds. How to prevent the patient from straining: tie a bandage under both of them on his neck while standing over the patient's head.
The patient sits on a chair, then you remove the mucus completely and broadly, lightly, then you squeeze out an appropriate amount of blood or as needed, then do the same with the other nostril, then untie the bandage.
Do not compress the two veins too much, so that the patient does not suffocate, and leave it until the next day, for the wound will heal. As for the jugular veins, it is beneficial to tie them after tying the carotid artery because it helps with ulcers in the mouth, decay of the gums, minor wounds, and fissures of the lips, as well as minor wounds.
If it is in the nose or around it, make the patient sit before you and tie his neck with a bandage, then turn his lips and look at the two veins which you see one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left side, and cut them off by their blackness.
Also, around them are thin black veins; cut both of them with a fine cut, for if you find it difficult and do not know which (vein) it is, then approach the larger and more apparent one, and do likewise with the veins in the lower lip.
As for the veins under the tongue, it is beneficial to tie them after tying the carotid artery for the ulcers that are in the throat due to leprosy and mouth diseases. The method of tying them is for the patient to sit between your hands facing the sun, then raise his tongue and look under the tongue; on one side there will be a vein and on the other side another vein, and their color is black.
And corrupt them and preserve [them], do not be deceived in cutting them, for beneath them are veins. Perhaps blood will flow from those veins, and as for the three veins that are corrupted in the artery, they are the ones that are usually corrupted in people, and their corruption occurs in two ways.
Either threaded with a wide needle, or sewn with a thin stitching needle, and this is the suture [and here is its image]. Image of the wide needle:
It should be wide, as you see, to be suitable for opening the prominent and apparent thick arteries that contain thick blood like pus. And this is the image of the thin needle:
And this needle is narrower and finer, suitable for corrupting the thin veins that contain light yellowish blood. And this is the image of the suture needle:
This suture is suitable for stitching and can be made in various widths and finenesses according to the size and narrowness of the veins, and it may also indicate other things and is known among craftsmen.
As for the basilic vein, which is one of these three veins, its corruption is beneficial because it draws blood from the diseases that are under the elbow and the neck above the heart and the abdomen. And it is fitting for the corrupter when corrupting it to be careful and be on guard, for beneath it there are arteries. If he makes a mistake and increases the thread of the needle, he will cut that artery.
In the case of a hematoma, it is preferable for its closure not to be by suturing with threads but rather by approximation using adhesive, for if the pus does not appear clearly then it should be avoided and one should resort to another or ask for some of its companions.
Or seal its place with the arm ligature, for it is clear and approximate it with adhesive as mentioned earlier. If you wish to seal it by itself, it is necessary before closing the arm to feel the place until you know the location of the pulse, then learn over it with a pad.
Then tie the arm and approximate the artery with a twisted ligature using adhesive as mentioned before, taking care that the ligature does not fall on the path of the vessels. When you see, after tying the ligature, swelling in the place where you placed the pad, know that this is the swelling of the vessel, so avoid it.
If you see blood at the seal as thin and red like the urine of a small boy, know that it is from the vessel. In this case, hasten to put your finger on it for a long time, then remove your finger. If the bleeding stops, close the arm.
Leave it, and warn the patient not to neglect it, and let him lie on his back, and do not move him for any reason until he is cured. But if the blood does not stop and overpowers you, and you have no remedy at hand, then cut open the vein, for its ends will heal, and the bleeding will stop.
Or take the peel of a pomegranate, crush it and take one half, compressing it firmly on the wound with bandages and tourniquets for another day. If the bleeding stops, otherwise treat him as previously mentioned, placing constrictive tourniquets on the ulcer to stop the blood flow; its cutting is not difficult in most cases.
Because of the smallness of the wound and the ability to tie a bandage on the arm, inform him. As for the bitter juice, it is beneficial to draw blood from the top of the head and the bottom of the body because it is composed of a branch of vitriol and a branch of copper as we have said.
And it is necessary for the person who performs the bloodletting that he be on his back when bleeding him, because under it there is a nerve; if he increases in the squeezing of the vein and strikes this nerve, it will produce an ulcer which is difficult to heal, and perhaps he will not heal at all. This nerve often becomes apparent to touch.
It is hidden in some people and it is thin, not clearly visible. So you should make your incision deep with the knife and avoid the nerve with effort, because if the vein is between two nerves, cut the vein lengthwise. But if the vein is pulsating, then it is beneficial to cut it because it attracts blood from the head.
And it is beneficial for diseases of the eyes, and in this vein especially, if you wish to cut it; cut it with a curved olive oil needle or a wide rosemary needle, because all the veins are calm under it since there are no arteries or nerves beneath it.
However, you should avoid the head of the muscle with the needle when cutting, and seek the soft spot. And it is not harmful if it does not hit with the first strike, as it can be repeated until cut, except that in some people, it may sting if not cut with the first strike.
But that sting does not harm it at all. As for the method of cutting, its side effects, and what should be done to repair it, the first thing is to know that the cut can be used only to maintain health.
In treating diseases and preserving health, if one experiences indigestion in any of the three veins—the spleen, liver, or pancreas—in early spring when there are signs of weakness, it is advisable to perform venesection.
The venesection should be performed on Sunday or Tuesday, three hours after midday. As for the venesection used in treating diseases, there is no specific time; it should be done whenever the need arises, whether day or night.
And in every hour and at any time, it is not recommended to perform venesection on children until they reach fourteen years of age, nor on the elderly who have passed sixty years of age. If someone insists on having a venesection for any reason, it should be done.
It is necessary to purge the intestine before venesection with a mild enema if there is a lot of hardened feces, so that it does not attract toxins to the veins during venesection, which can harm the vital organs. One should not perform venesection on those who are emaciated, diabetic, or obese until these conditions have passed.
He should also beware of farting after eating, excessive copulation, fatigue, exercise, staying up at night, fasting, and any other exhaustive bodily or mental task. Then examine the mixture before that if the blood is thick.
He should eat and drink, and if possible take medicines, then he should enter the bath or perform some physical activity so that his blood circulates and makes him pass wind in the morning, as we said. It is important for him to rest his chest from all bad mental stresses that day.
From mental stresses such as worries, anger, and fear, and from all bodily stresses like excessive fatigue and copulation, and similar things; and he should prepare his place with things that people have the habit of using for fragrances, winds, and perfumes, each according to their ability.
Then the person who is about to pass wind should sit on a higher seat than where the person being treated sits. He should extend his arm and the other person should feel it with their hand two or three times, then tighten the band with a rope and loosen it two or three times, ensuring the tension is moderate.
The swelling is considered unbalanced either by excessive tightness, which prevents the flow of blood, or if it is too loose, it also prevents the flow of blood. Then, after the tightening, it is necessary for the intended person to rub his hands together with both.
Until the veins swell and become visible to touch, then the person who is bleeding should be wiped with a little old oil, especially; then he should place his left index finger on that same vein under the place where he wants to bleed, slightly so that the vein does not throb, avoiding the strike. Because some veins, when bleeding, throb like a snake and others are full of air, so when the cutter is placed on them they sink under the cutter and deceive the person bleeding and the cutter does not open the vein, and if it opens it only opens narrowly.
Therefore, it is necessary for the person bleeding to be patient and cautious in all these matters; then he should lower the cutter. If the vein opens from that pass, well and good, otherwise he should try again a little below that place or above it with the wheel if the place does not swell.
If the patient is frightened or anxious, leave him alone for a day or two and do not tighten the bandage, as it may draw the worm closer to the heat, and he should not enter the bath. Then, if desired, repeat the purging. If the wound is small and the blood flow is light.
And if you fear that the desired amount of blood will not come out, prepare another wound in the same hole, making it straight and increasing the opening slightly, and do this quickly before the place becomes anxious, as in many people the place may become anxious with a small opening.
If you see that it has become anxious, do not apply any ointment to it, as this will not help. Place on it some resin from the olive oil, for it facilitates the flow of blood and is better in this situation than the oil itself and other unguents.
Use resin from the olive oil in all your venesections for the veins when the blood flow becomes difficult, and this can be achieved by using laxatives such as aloe and senna. If any of these are placed on the site, the blood will become thin and dissolve if it is thick.
When there is a wound in the abdomen and a large ulcer forms, it often happens, especially to those who have not had a previous rupture or if the incision was small. One should hasten to place a sponge soaked in warm water and salt on the ulcer and press it for an hour until it softens.
It is necessary to do this after the blood has come out completely from the same wound or another, for if something black or green remains in the place after a few days, it does no harm. If you wish, you can apply to it some patience and soft dressings.
Or something from the juice of fennel and its like, for often an ulcer appears and swells at the time of a rupture. If you find it softening under your hand, it is a bad ulcer, so be careful not to put on it anything we have mentioned.
For it may sometimes bleed with thin blood, but if you staunch it by pressing and the place is clotted, then treat it with the rest of the treatments until it heals. It is necessary for each person to lose as much blood according to their strength and what appears to be the predominant color of the blood.
If the blood is dark, let it flow until it turns red; likewise, if you see that it is thick, send it out until it becomes thin; likewise, if it is coagulated, continue until its clotting disappears. It is advisable for those who are strongly filled with blood and need to release it in one dose.
That the incision be wide and the opening large, but for those who are weak, it is the opposite of this, and it should be released in intervals with a small hole. The best tool for cutting flesh is that it be a sharp, smooth knife without notches.
This incision is safe from infection and nerve damage, and it is the best method for making an incision that is wide and long. For those who are accustomed to becoming faint during incisions, it is advisable to feed them something made of soaked bread in water mixed with vinegar or syrup before the incision.
If the person is anemic and has lost blood three or four times, and if his temperament is cold, let him eat before the incision a piece of bread soaked in mead or honey wine mixed with mint, or in fragrant good drink.
The excerpt reads: "If bleeding occurs after incision due to the loss of much blood, it is necessary to drink meat water and thin aromatic drinks. Use tincture with gall nut and moisten his chest with it, and use all that we mentioned in the division in the chapter on bleeding.
The excerpt reads: "That which is from emptying, and as for one who wishes to alleviate his arm and stop the bleeding a second time, it is necessary for one whose incision has much discharge and weak strength that the blood be drained little by little according to ability over consecutive days.
The excerpt reads: "As for one who wishes to alleviate his arm and stop the bleeding a second time, and his body is strong, let him do that seven or nine hours after his first incision. And as for one who wishes to draw blood from his body towards the opposite side, it is necessary that he be alleviated on the second or third day.
The excerpt reads: "As for one whose blood is abundant in his body and has become heated and caused inflammation, it is necessary that the blood be drained from him in a single act, and a large amount be drained. The incision should be widened until the bleeding becomes evident after all the conditions of incision are fulfilled. And put your hand on his pulse at the time of bloodletting, so that death does not occur in place of healing. This is often seen if the bleeder is ignorant and negligence occurs, and it should not be done if you wish to heal the arm and release the blood secondly.
The vein's orifice has closed and the blood flows out slowly; then you must cut it with force or remove it with strength, for that is very bad. Rather, either leave it until it bleeds a second time, or remove the clot of blood from the vein's orifice with a lancet.
Or place on it something of the salt that has dissolved in water, or place on it something of the aromatic vinegar or mustard and cut it with a gentle incision until the blood comes out; if the vein was torn, leave it.
And do not touch it until the inflammation subsides; if necessity requires a second bleeding, then either bleed over that spot or bleed from the other arm or vein.
As for bleeding the arm vein, it is bled instead with alkali and balsam if they are not available or hidden because it is composed of them. The method of bleeding it is that the patient puts his hand in hot water until the skin reddens and the vein appears clearly; then it is tied with a slight to moderate pressure bandage over it.
Then the bleeding will become corrupted due to slight distortion, neither long nor wide, and let the opening be broad. Your tamponade for it should be a little above the wrist joint, and if the blood is slow to come out, then prepare the hand in a bowl of hot water and let the blood flow into the water.
Until you have had enough, if it is in the summer days you may not need to put your hand back into hot water, as what makes the blood flow more in hot water in winter. This corruption of the bleeding is considered less than all other types of bleeding. Because there is no pulsating blood vessel or nerve beneath it, and as for the beneficial corruption of bleeding from the right hand, it cures liver ailments. Its method of bleeding is to compress the vein of the hand with a ligature or your finger after inserting it into hot water until the bleeding swells.
Because there is no pulsating blood vessel or nerve beneath it, and as for the beneficial corruption of bleeding from the right hand, it cures liver ailments. Its method of bleeding is to compress the vein of the hand with a ligature or your finger after inserting it into hot water until the bleeding swells. And it is very clear to the touch, then you bleed it with slight distortion, and even if it becomes completely swollen, that will not harm it at all. Take care not to numb your hand with cold, because beneath it are the nerves of the fingers, and the place is lean in flesh. Then put the hand back into hot water.
And leave it to let the blood flow in it, for if you do not dip it in hot water, the blood will congeal in the tip of the vessel and prevent flowing; so when you have extracted enough blood, place on the vessel oil and salt, lest it coagulate quickly.
And thus it is fitting to do so with every narrow vessel, and as for the vein of the left hand, it is beneficial for cases of epilepsy, and you should do the same in bleeding it as you did in the second case. As for bleeding from the saphenous vein, its benefit is for diseases below the navel such as diseases of the womb.
And for retaining urine, kidney diseases, chronic ulcers of the thighs and calves and similar diseases, and how to bleed it is that he puts his leg into hot water and carries on it the cupping glass until the vessels dilate, then binds above the ankle with a tourniquet and places the vessel at the ankle towards the outer side.
And there are many veins in the face of the leg, so bleed from the largest or near the ankle where they converge, for it is better and safer; for if you bleed from the face of the leg, preserve the nerves below it on the face of the leg.
You should make your incision for it by twisting as if you want to draw a thread, and the wound will be smooth. If the blood flow is difficult to stop, he should dip his foot in hot water and leave the blood flowing until it stops, because the inciser may err with the incision on the first attempt.
He should cut with the incision slightly above, for if the place is sound, there will be no fear of a spasm if it is preserved from the nerve as we said. And you do likewise with the femoral artery in the other leg. As for the woman's artery, its place is as we mentioned at the ankle on the outer side.
The benefit of cutting it for the pain of gout, if that is from hot blood, and its method of cutting is that the patient should enter the bathroom and hurry and stretch his leg from the ankle to above the heel by four finger widths with a thin, long bandage, for it does not appear except in this way.
So if it appears, cut it in any case, either by twisting (which is better) or by piercing it with a needle or making an incision. If its place is sound, and this is very hidden in most people, if you cannot find it.
And the numbness did not appear for the sense of touch, so some of its branches were amputated, which are those that appear on the back of the foot near the ankle and heel, and they were preserved from the nerves, and sent as much blood as desired.
Then the swelling subsided, and cotton was placed on the site of the amputation and the area was bound; it healed quickly.
The Sixty-Ninth Chapter.
On Cupping and How to Use It.
The cups may be made of horn, wood, copper or glass; cupping can be either with a scarification and bloodletting or without scarification.
This type of cupping, without scarification, can be done in two ways.
And the cups of the armpits, which are both sides of the neck together; and the cup of the chin, which is below the lower jaw from the mouth; and the cups of the shoulders; and the cups of the scrotum on the base of the penis; and the cups of the elbows, which are in the middle of the arms; and the cups of the calves.
The bleeding (cupping) only draws blood from the thin, inflamed veins in the flesh, and for this reason it should not cause a fall in strength or loss of consciousness. It is not appropriate to use cupping with fire or without fire in any disease caused by fullness until the whole body is emptied.
So, if the need for cupping arises from a disease or habitually, we should use it at any time in the beginning of the month, middle, and end.
And this is because some people, if their blood increases to the point where it needs to be removed by cupping, will find heaviness and headache in their head. Among them are those who find fullness and redness in their face, head, and neck. Some find twitching in their face, cheek, and darkness and dimness in their eyes. And among them are those who feel the site of their vein.
And among them are those whose laughter increases, and those who taste blood in their mouth and find that their gums bleed and the blood flows, and those whose sleep increases. Some see blood and redness and murder and wounds and whatever resembles that in their sleep. So whenever we see any of this,
And specifically, if it is in the middle third of the month, we ordered at that time to bleed after two or three hours from noon, and as for the benefit of bleeding from the temple, it helps with heaviness in the head and water that collects in the eyes.
But it is necessary for that to be after evacuating the body's contents, and this bleeding may be a substitute for cupping the nape of the neck. And one should be cautious not to use it if they are cold or have diarrhea, as it will greatly harm them.
Therefore, it is not advisable for the elderly and those with cold diseases of the head to use it, as well as those who are addicted to it, as forgetfulness will befall them.
Therefore, it is necessary for the bloodletter to be instructed to lower his hand with the cup a little downward out of fear of causing forgetfulness. And as for bleeding from the back of the head, it is a substitute for cupping the nape and cupping the occiput.
Therefore, it is beneficial for asthma, tightness of breath, spasm of the respiratory apparatus, coughing, and chest congestion. And it is necessary to raise the cup of bleeding from the back of the head a little, because if it is lowered too much, it will cause weakness in the heart and stomach.
Regarding the bleeding of the jugular veins, it is beneficial for the headaches that occur suddenly and for migraines, earaches, toothaches at their roots, which is a substitute for purging the phlegm, and it is recommended to order the bleeder not to insert his hand deep with the lancet lest he cut an artery and cause bleeding.
As for bleeding under the tongue, it is beneficial for ulcers in the mouth and for diseases affecting the gums and similar conditions, serving as a substitute for purging the bile present in the cheeks. As for bleeding from the shoulders, it is effective against headaches resulting from fullness and heat.
As for bleeding from the inner veins of the thighs, it is beneficial for what is beneficial for purging the three humors: phlegm, bile, and black bile, because it draws blood from all those thin vessels in the flesh, and these thin vessels draw blood from other thicker vessels until the drawing reaches the three coarser vessels.
The bleeder should be instructed not to press with the lancet, because the area is dense with flesh and beneath it are nerves and arteries. As for a single bleeding point that draws blood from the jugular vein, it is beneficial for hemorrhoids and perineal wounds.
It is necessary to instruct the blood-letters that the lancet be large and made of copper, because the place requires a strong incision, and perhaps a glass lancet might break and it has many conditions. As for the lancets used by the phlebotomists, they are lacking in fullness to some extent.
Because it draws blood from all parts of the body and is beneficial for chronic pains in the kidneys, liver, bladder, and it removes bile and is beneficial for hemorrhoids and fistulas, and it takes the place of the incision of the saphenous and femoral veins, except that it greatly weakens the body and causes dizziness in most people. The lancets for the femoral vein are almost as beneficial as those used by the phlebotomists.
The method of placing the lancets is that the lancet should be placed first while empty, and it should be incised with a moderate incision without prolonging the placement of the lancets, but you should place them quickly and remove them quickly so that the mixtures are accepted at the site evenly. You should continue to do this until you see the site has reddened and opened.
When the redness of the blood appears, then you should incise again vigorously, and then examine the bodies. If a person has soft flesh with loose pores, it is necessary to incise them once, no more, lest the site becomes inflamed.
The bleeder is ordered to widen the opening, deepen it slightly, and adjust the stitching for gentleness and slight movement. If the blood is thick, it is necessary to pierce twice: in the first piercing, let it open a path for the smooth blood and its water, and in the second, ensure the removal of the thick blood.
If the blood is very thick, the piercing is repeated a third time to reach the extreme point. In summary, if we wish to draw out a small amount of blood, one piercing is sufficient. But if we want to extract much blood, we use more piercings, especially if we judge the blood to be thick.
It is necessary to pierce deeply, and the average depth of the piercing should be only that of the skin. What should be used when applying bandages and water, and what the one who is bleeding should avoid: if his skin is thick, hard, rough, and its pores are narrow.
It is necessary to grease the places of the bandages with soft, oily, and dissolved ointments. But if it is in the summertime, then similar to kheir oil or pine nut oil, sweet almond oil, or apricot kernel oil.
And as for if it is in the winter, then like the oil of narcissus or juniper oil or peony oil or hyacinth and the like, if the excellence is thick and cold, let the oil be oil of myrtle or oil of pine or oil of laurel or oil of rosemary and its likes.
If the wound is wide with deep flesh, it is necessary to prevent the oil from reaching them. These should have their wounds washed after cupping with rose water, or cold water, or bear grape juice, or pomegranate juice, or mulberry juice, and similar. As for those whose blood has much moisture...
...their wounds should be washed with vinegar or water of the ashes and sumac, and similar. As for those whose blood is thick, their wounds should be washed with old wine or water of myrtle or boiled rosemary or peony and similar. It is necessary to avoid cupping in the bath and after the bath.
Rather, it is necessary to use [cupping] after leaving the bath for an hour or two, and no one should sleep after cupping. What is necessary is that both the wound and the patient be warmed before and after cupping.
It is necessary to observe first, for if the patient or the wound is infected with a fever and the prevalence of blood heat and inflammation, it is appropriate that he take coolants such as pomegranates, grapes with vinegar, lentils, figs, and similar foods. His diet should include farinaceous foods and the meat of birds such as partridges and turtledoves.
And if his temperament is cold, it is appropriate for him to drink honey wine or myrtle wine, or a sweet syrup from figs. He should consume moderately aged fragrant wine, which is between old and new. He is ordered to eat less food, and his diet should include farinaceous foods, partridges, and quail eggs. It is also appropriate for the drink to be more on the day of bloodletting or purging than food.
And sometimes it may be appropriate for some people to drink a warming drug such as fennel, musk, or silphium before bloodletting or purging, or after it, to strengthen the main organs and enrich the blood. It is not appropriate for those who have been drained of blood.
As for the bloodletting that is without a string, these are the bloodlettings placed on the liver, abdomen, breasts, and on the belly, the womb, and the location of the kidneys, and the place of the spleen, because these organs do not tolerate being tied off. The intention with them is either to draw blood from one part to another.
We place the cupping glass on the breasts in the disease of swelling, or we use it to draw out a cold wind that has settled in the limb, just as we place the cupping glass on the abdomen and the back. For it causes the limb to shiver and warms it, and carries away the pain by analyzing that wind.
It can be placed on the kidneys if they present with a blockage or stone, for its suction power may open the blockage or dislodge the stone from its place. Similarly, it acts when placed on the liver and spleen if there is wind disturbing them within. These cupping glasses can be used empty, filled only with water.
It can be used with fire, or it can be filled with hot water in diseases of the bladder. This is done by filling the cupping glass with only very hot water, or by boiling some herbs in the water first and then using that water to fill the glass.
Then it is placed filled on the area and held in place until removed, and this process is repeated as needed. This is what the cupping glass looks like when used with fire.
Its mouth will be the size of two open fingers as we have shown, and its depth will be half a span. On one side of it, halfway up, there will be a small hole just large enough to insert a copper wire made from thick-coated copper or brass.
استمرارية ساطئة متسوية، مجلوّة لئلا تؤذى العضو عند وضعها عليه ويكون في وسطها فضيب معترض من نحاس أو حديد، حيث توضع الشمعة بالنار، وقد تصنع هذه المحجمة كبيرة أكبر مما وصفنا أو صغيرة على حسب الأمراض.
استخدام المحجمة فإن محاجم الأطفال والنساء غير مثل محاجم الرجال والحمير، وأمّا كيفية وضع هذه المحجمة بالنار على العضو فهو أن تقدّ فتيلة بالنار من قطن محكمة أو شمعة صغيرة من القير، وتضعها على وسط القضيب المصلب الذي في وسط المحجمة.
يجب أن تصعد النار إلى فوق غالبًا أسفل المحجمة لئلا يحترق بدن المريض. ثم يُوضع على العضو، والأصبع على الثقب الذي ذكرناه حتى إذا أمسكنا المحجمة ما زعت الأصبع.
The vapor came out of that hole and the syringe was placed on the mark, then the needle was put on the thread and returned to it if needed. As for the syringe used in water dysentery, there is no metal rod or hole in it.
It is only used by filling it with water and placing it on the limb, and this is its shape:
The larger the syringe to hold more water, the better it is.
Chapter Seventy-Nine
On Ligating Veins
Veins are used in most cases in limbs where syringes cannot be placed, either because they are small like the lip and gum or because the limb is bare of flesh like the finger and nose.
And the way to use it is that you take a vein from water that has been in clean, pure water for a day and a night until it becomes dry and there is nothing left inside it. Then the body is first purged either by purging or cupping, and then the affected limb is washed.
Until it becomes red, then it is placed on the limb; if it is absorbed and falls off, that's good. If possible, press the spot with a syringe, which would be most beneficial. Otherwise, wash the spot with vinegar, then with plenty of water, squeezing it out. If blood continues to flow after the vein has fallen off, that is a sign that the bleeding will stop soon. Then, apply a cold compress.
You place it on top until the bleeding stops. If the blood is abundant, sprinkle a powdered vessel or a sponge, or something similar from the poultices, until the blood stops, or half of the peeled onion can be placed on the spot.
And leave it until the onion sticks to the spot, for then the bleeding will stop. And if there is a need to reapply the bandage, do not use that same bandage again if possible; but if the bandage refuses to stick, then moisten the spot with fresh blood.
Or a thread can be inserted into the spot until it comes out with some blood, then it is placed. If you feel any blood, it will stick to its place; but if you want to remove it, sprinkle on it something of ashes or salt or soot, and it will fall in its place.
Chapter Three.
In Algebra.
This chapter also includes what is necessary for the craft of medicine, which are solving equations and dislocations in bones.
Know, O my sons, that this chapter may be scorned by the ignorant among physicians, the common people, and those who have never looked into the books of the ancients or read a single letter from them.
And for this reason, this art has become non-existent in our land, although I have not found anyone who excels in it. I only benefited from [the art] what I benefited from throughout my readings of the books of the ancients and my persistence in understanding them until I extracted that science from them, then I followed practice and experience throughout my life.
And I have drawn for you in this chapter all that my knowledge encompasses [of the art]. And my experience has passed over it after I brought it near to you and freed it from the obscurity of prolongation, and I summarized it to the utmost brevity and explained it to the utmost clarity, and I have depicted for you in it many depictions of the instruments used in it.
For it is part of the elaboration, as I have done in the previous chapters, and there is no power except with God, the Most High, the Great.
The First Section
Before we begin to describe the bones that are fractured and dislocated one by one, it is necessary to mention at the beginning of this chapter certain sayings and sections. First, you must understand them and stand by their truth, as well as anyone who is eager to learn this noble art besides you.
It is important to hurry initially to the patient with a fracture, dislocation, sprain, or fall. If he is prevented from doing so due to weakness, or if the one affected is a child or an old man who is shivering, or if the time is very hot or extremely cold.
Then he should restrict his diet to cold broad beans, bird meat, and small fish, and avoid drinking, fatty meats, overeating, and any food that fills the veins with blood until the inflammation subsides and there is no fear of matter being sent to the affected area.
At that point, the patient should return to his original diet which he was accustomed to beforehand. If the broken bone is in a splint, it is necessary for the patient to be fed food that nourishes the body well with fatty and substantial foods containing pairs such as lentils, rice, heads (of sheep), and testicles of bulls. And eggs, fatty fish, and thick drinks similar to that, for with this diet the healing of the fracture will be quicker and better. Know that broken bones in strong men and elderly people cannot return to their original condition.
The cavities of their bones and their hardness, and what was from the bones in utmost softness like the bones of small children. But nature grows on the broken bone from all its sides something resembling a scab, dense, it adheres to it and strengthens it until some parts adhere to each other.
And some parts adhere to each other until it reaches the utmost strength and solidity as it was originally, so that nothing prevents him from his actions.
And for this reason, it is necessary to give the patient nourishing food that is thick and dense, as we said. Know that the fracture can vary according to the difference in the limbs, because a fracture of the bone of the leg differs from a fracture of the bone of the head, and a fracture of the bone of the chest differs from a fracture of the bone of the back.
And so it is with the rest of the limbs, each different from one another. We will mention each type of fracture separately in its own chapter, distinct from others. The type of bone fracture can also vary within itself.
Because it can be a simple fracture without displacement, or it can occur along the length of the bone and have splinters that are free and others that are not free. The fracture can also occur with a wound and laceration in the skin, and the fracture can be a comminuted one that moves.
And for each type of splint there is a specific way to set it, as will be mentioned in detail in its place, and what is known as a bone fracture: its swelling, tenderness, and sensitivity to touch when you poke it with your hand.
When there is no obvious swelling, tenderness, or pain upon moving and pressing the bone, and the patient does not feel much pain, there is no fracture; it might be a sprain, a slight fracture, or a migratory contusion. In such cases, it should not be moved with stretching and constant poking.
But rather, use on it the medicines that will be mentioned later in their appropriate places. Then bandage it lightly, and know that if the bone crumbles and breaks into two parts without any splintering, then every part has separated from its place.
Then you must hasten to align and straighten it before it becomes inflamed. If it does become inflamed, leave it for days until the inflammation subsides, then set it in any way you can manage with care and skill.
"Know that the reduction and setting of a bone is easier than if it has splinters, then you will be forced to extend both ends of the fractured limb, whether it is a hand or foot.
"Either by your hand if the limb is small, or by two ropes, or with a rope and your hand. Let the position of the limb be on a level place according to its natural shape until when you extend the broken part of the bone, then at that time return those excesses to their places in every way as much as you can from skill and gentleness.
"And strive that you do not cause the patient pain or discomfort with your action, and exert your effort to unite one of the bones with its partner in the best manner. It is appropriate at that time to touch them and feel them with your hand, for if you see anything contrary, correct it and straighten it according to your ability.
"And beware of excessive extension and strong pulls, as many ignorant people do, and often they cause that to happen, with the bone becoming hot or swollen in the limb, as I have seen many times from their actions.
And then after the setting and mastery and tightening of that limb, rest and tranquility were commanded, and the patient was warned not to move it during his waking or sleeping hours, and upon turning over or stirring, and in all his movements to the fullest extent, and that he should not dare for the position of the limb to be one that is safe with it.
And that is because when he feels pain or discomfort in the position of the limb, he should change it to another position where he does not feel pain and he dares to make his position level and straight.
Lest it happens in the limb a swelling if forced, and as for how to tighten the broken limb, know that the broken limbs differ in their smallness and largeness and their natures, so whatever from them is small like the arm and finger and shin and the like.
Therefore, the bandages for thin limbs such as arms and small limbs should be narrow, while for coarse and thick limbs such as thighs, back, and chest, the bandages should be wide because a wide bandage tightens the large limb and compresses it evenly from all sides without causing any gaps.
Then you begin, after finishing the leveling, to carry the suitable plaster for that. In a soft bandage on the fracture site, then begin wrapping the bandage in the same place as the fracture three or four times, according to what the limb requires. Gently tighten your hand with the bandage, then take it up to the upper part of the fracture site.
Gently tighten less than you would for the fractured site, then slightly pull away from the fracture with the wrap and gradually loosen it a little until you take something appropriate from the correct place. Then take another bandage and also wrap it on the fractured site.
Then wrap it to the lower part of the fracture, and let your action in tightening the bandage and loosening it be as we mentioned in wrapping the first upper bandage. Then place between the layers of soft bandage or cloth something that matches the protrusion of the fracture.
If there is a protrusion, do not put anything in it; then wrap another bandage over it. Then place the firm strips of your handkerchief on these wraps if there is no swelling or heat in the limb.
If there is swelling or hot inflammation, apply what soothes that inflammation and removes the swelling, and leave it for several days. Then tighten a bandage on it at that time, and let the bandages be made from half of the peeled, carved, and prepared cane or made from the wood of the pomegranate tree.
And let each bandage be made from linen or palm leaves, or flax, or cotton and similar materials that are available for this purpose, with the size and shape of each bandage as shown in the following figure.
However, the bandage that is placed directly over the fracture should be slightly thicker and wider than the other bandages. As for the length of the bandage, it should be made according to the size of the fractured limb, whether large or small. Image of the bandage:
Then another bandage is applied over the previous bandages in the same manner as the first, and it is tied from above with strong cords according to what we mentioned about binding, which is that the binding should be tighter on the site of the fracture. And every time you move away from the fracture, the binding becomes looser.
The cords should be of moderate thickness and softness, and they should be made from wet cotton specifically because if the cords are thick like what you see the ignorant do, making their cords from strips of unwoven cotton, that is a great mistake.
The string is too short and the thin threads are also not suitable because you cannot achieve what you want with it, and it should not be less than a finger's width between the clamps.
If the patient feels pain at the edges of the clamps after tightening in the correct places, place soft padding or cotton wool underneath so that nothing hurts him from it. But if the fracture is accompanied by a wound and there is a tear in the skin, we will mention it separately.
Know that not every broken limb should be tightened with clamps from the first day, and this is because if the limb is large, it is not appropriate to place the clamps on it until after five days or seven or more, depending on how secure you are against inflammation.
And these are the plasters that were used by the ancients for fractures, dislocations, and sprains. They are a general, concise plaster that consolidates the fracture and is suitable for most mixtures, especially for children and women, because it is not overpowered by heat or cold.
Here is the English translation of the given Arabic text: "Take some flour dust from where it accumulates on the sieve of the mill during its operation, and knead it without washing it or making it too thin or too thick; then apply it.
A different astringent that forces fractures, extraction and swelling; take from mash, ladanum, oak galls, resin, manna and gum of each ten dirhams, and marjoram and patience root of each five dirhams, and from Armenian or Roman clay twenty dirhams. Everything is ground and mixed with marjoram water or egg white if the patient's constitution is hot; then this astringent is applied, for it has good composition that quickly forces fractured bones to heal and suits most people because of its mildness.
Another astringent beneficial for fractures and swelling; take from manna, mash, and white kermes of each ten dirhams, marjoram and patience root of each five dirhams, oak galls six dirhams, Armenian clay twenty dirhams. Grind everything finely, sift, and knead with water or egg white and apply it.
A preparation for dislocations and protruding bones from their places, and it is suitable for severe pain in them, and for the breaking of bones and fractures; cotton soaked in vinegar and cooked oil is taken and placed on the spot, and this preparation has no power to force.
But it is excellent for relieving severe heat and driving away pain, especially; another preparation that forces the fractured bone, take wild fig leaf and boiled palm leaf, grind them together while wet, another brief preparation used in case of bone fracture.
If you want to eliminate the remaining pain, take equal parts of wild almond, peony, spikenard, and barley flour, grind them together and knead with oil if the limb is not hot; but if it is hot, then knead it with rose water or water and use it.
Another more potent preparation for relief than the first one is used when severe pain occurs after bone fracture, take equal parts of wild almond, peony seed, melon seed, basil, spikenard, wild olive leaves, and peony.
He cauterizes everything and bandages with either cold water, soft water, or ointment, all according to the heat of the limb and the intensity of its burning. As for splints, it is not mentioned in his book that they should be placed on a broken limb when setting it.
Except for the tallow made from wax and oil, which is described as being of medium consistency between thick and thin, Galen believed that on a broken limb when setting it, things containing hollows should be placed along with something hot such as mustard, vinegar, milk, or the like.
A remedy beneficial for weakness and pain: Take a handful of barley, wash it, soak it, pluck the hair of a human or bird feather, and add salt in equal parts. Cauterize and bandage with it, leaving it on as long as necessary.
Then, if after some time you do not see the limb aching or cracking, and the broken bone does not move from its place, then it should not be unbound for many days. If there is severe cracking in that place, or sharp pain, or swelling.
In the beginning, treat it immediately and do not delay this matter. Then take a soft bandage or a wet sponge from the sea, soak it in clear water, wash the area with it until the swelling subsides and the pain calms down. Then leave the limb to rest for an hour.
Then place on it moist wool soaked in vinegar and oil, or rose oil, and tie it there overnight until the heat of the worm is controlled and the swelling of the limb subsides, along with its pain. Then return it to a gentle bandage and light pressure, not as tight as the first time.
Continue treating it until it heals. If you see that the worm, redness, pain, and all symptoms have completely disappeared and there is a need for bandaging and pressure, then repeat the initial treatment as before. However, if nothing happens to the limb as mentioned earlier.
Then do not treat it except after three, four, five, or seven days, and it may be left for twenty days. All this depends on the condition of the limb as we have said, until the fracture heals and the flesh begins to close over it.
He also increased [the swelling] at that time, more than the first swelling altogether, and he also increased in irritating the patient's food as mentioned before. So if you see the place of the fracture becoming dry and loose beyond what is appropriate, know that the food has been prevented from reaching it.
Then, give him abundant water every time he urinates, and let this be done every three days. This relieves the swelling a little, for by doing so, the food reaches the limb and it is quickly cured. As for what ignorant people do, they forcefully re-break the bone.
For if it is not broken in the first place as required, and it is broken on a mistake, this is an error on their part and a great deception. If it were correct, the ancients would have mentioned it in their books, practiced it, and I would have seen some of them in that matter showing signs of intelligence. And the correct thing is not to do it.
Chapter Two.
On the Depressed Fracture of the Skull.
The types of depressed fractures in the skull are many, their forms vary, and their causes are diverse. Some fractures occur from a sword blow and may either heal completely or extend to the membrane beneath the bone. "As is done with the soles of wood.
"And therefore this type of fracture is called a 'sole' fracture, or if the sword cuts only part of the bone and does not penetrate to the other side, then this type of fracture is called an 'absolute' cleaving fracture, and the wound from these two fractures can be either large or small.
"And among the fractures, there is one that can be a bruise or a contusion, and its cause may be from being struck by a stone or falling onto a stone or something similar. This fracture can either penetrate near the membrane under the bone or be on the surface of the bone.
"The wounds from these two fractures can also be either large or small. Among the fractures, there is one that is hidden within the bone in the hair follicle and it is a creeping fracture.
"And therefore this type of fracture is called a 'hairline' fracture. Among them is a fracture that occurs from falling or being struck by a stone and the like, which penetrates the surface of the bone into its interior, causing swelling in the area as if copper were struck by a blow, causing part of it to penetrate into its interior.
And the most frequent cause of this in the skull is the wet bone, like the fontanelles of infants, and all these types of fractures can have both open and closed wounds. We will mention the treatment for each type in its proper place, and we identify all these types of fractures by incision.
And it is examined with probes and the removal of putrid flesh from around it, and as for the hairy type, it is known by its incision into the bone, washing, and scraping over it with a scalpel, for the fracture appears black. As for the treatment of the fracture, one must first consider the symptoms of the patient.
If you see from his symptoms what indicates a clear prognosis of danger, such as the appearance of cold sweat, pallor, loss of consciousness, loss of voice, coma, severe fever, convulsions, redness and inflammation of the eyes, and similar symptoms, do not approach the patient or treat him, for death is imminent with these symptoms in most cases.
And if you see symptoms that do not alarm you and you hope for his safety, then at that time take him into treatment. This is because if the wounded person comes to you shortly after being injured, especially in the winter months,
It is necessary to attempt the removal of the bone before the fourteenth day, in all cases, even if it is in the days of summer. It is necessary to hasten the removal of the bone before the seventh day lest what is under the bone be corrupted and expose those symptoms that we have described.
If the bone fracture extends to the covered membrane of the brain, and is accompanied by swelling and suppuration, it is necessary to cut off the swollen and suppurative part as I have described to you, which is to shear off the skull of the wounded patient.
And expose the bone in any way you can, according to the shape of the wound and what is hidden from the patient. For if you see bleeding or hot pus when exposing the bone, that is acceptable.
And it is to fill the place with a moistened lint in wine and oil of rose, and to burn the wound until the worm settles and the bleeding stops, then to proceed with the strengthening of the bone and its removal, which can be done in two ways.
As for the first method, it is to cut the bone with a fine, sharp saw, and this is its form:
Then another piece is used after this piece, a small amount is displayed from it, and this is its shape:
Then another piece is also used, displaying some of it as well. It is necessary to have several different pieces, some longer than others and some shorter than others, with edges very sharp and made of Indian steel or good iron.
Use caution in hitting the piece so that it does not shake the head and cause pain, for if the bone is strong and firm, it is necessary to drill around it before using the pieces with trephines called non-blind trephines, but they are actually called blind trephines.
Because it does not exceed the bone of the skull beyond it, for the trephine has a circular shape on its tip that resembles a ring or small circle, which prevents it from sinking and penetrating the brain.
It is necessary for you to take many of these trephines, each suitable for the thickness of that bone, so that you have a trephine ready for each skull area, whose length and breadth match the thickness of that skull area. Here are three types. From the probes, large and medium and small.
As for how to drill around a broken bone, it is that you place the probe on the bone and direct it with your fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated, then move the probe to another place, and make the distance between each hole equal to the thickness of a reed or thereabouts.
Then cut with the sections between each two holes and do this until you can no longer tolerate it as we said, so that the bone breaks either by hand or by some other tool from among the instruments prepared for this purpose.
Similar to plaster and latex bandages, and it is necessary to be very careful that the probe or section does not touch any of the marrow, because if the bone becomes infected with marrow, if it was stuck in it and you remove it, it should be scraped off.
And smooth the remaining surface of the bone with another tool that resembles the section, except it should be thinner and more delicate than the other sections. If there are any small bones or splinters left, remove them gently with the tools you have.
Then treat the wound after that with fat and bandages, as mentioned earlier. As for the other aspect of the work, it is an easy method to perform, far from error, as Galen mentioned and praised greatly, saying: "This is his statement. It is necessary for you to begin by exposing the part of the bone from the place where the fracture is most severe and famous, so that when you expose that part, you will see beneath it this cross section, and this is its image.
The cross section from it will be soft and will not cut anything, and the hard part of it in its length on its sides as you see. So let the cross section be supported by the saw and the face of the hard cutting edge against the bone, then strike the saw from one side.
With a small hammer until it cuts all the bone together as it turns, and you are safe from the sheath in which no feared accident occurs. And if the healer is ignorant of people and deceives them, then yes, even if he is foolish.
If something remains attached to the bone from the sheath in some places of the bone, then scrape it off with the same cross-section blade and remove it together. For it removes it without harm or fear.
And if the bone fracture did not reach the sheath and what broke off from the bone is its surface, where there remains a roughness and some irregularities, it is necessary to scrape away that roughness and remove those irregularities with a file of varying sizes, so that you can use them in each place according to their suitability and adjust them as the work requires.
...and the fractured bone and its form, and it is appropriate to use in your operation initially for the bone a broad blade, then after that a thinner one, and continue doing this until you reach using the thinnest and finest of them all.
As for the other small fissures and fine fractures, it is appropriate to use in each case a treatment according to what leads to its healing, which is not hidden from one who has the least knowledge in this craft. Stop at what we have written and explained about large fractures.
If the covering remains exposed after removing the bone, it is appropriate to take a piece of cloth according to the size of the wound and soak it in oil of roses, then place it on the mouth of the wound. Then take another piece, either double or triple-layered. Soak it in a drink of rose oil and place it on the first cloth, doing this as lightly as possible so that the bandage is not heavy. Then use over it a broad bandage and tighten it only enough to hold the wound alone.
Leave it with this treatment for a day or two until the inflammation subsides, then remove it and afterward use those medicines which have dried juices such as the roots of the saponins, barley flour, poppy seeds, and zarawand, and similar ones. Make a decoction from these medicines.
On the wound, it remains dry and compact; therefore, use a medicine that is softening and not painful. Exert your effort in healing the wound to make sure it is clean, with no harm from fat or pus, and do not leave the scab to gather lice.
For the scab, if it forms on the surface of the brain, it corrupts and spoils it, causing the patient to have a severe headache. It may also cause swelling of the head when the skull is exposed, especially if its treatment is neglected.
If a dark color appears on its surface, and the patient shows the symptoms we mentioned, know that he will inevitably die. And if this darkness is due to the medicine applied to it, then the strength of that medicine caused this darkness.
It is necessary to take a part of honey and three parts of rose oil, mix them well, apply a patch with the mixture on the swelling, then treat it with appropriate methods until it heals.
Chapter Three.
To reset a broken nose.
I inform you that nothing breaks from the nose except the upper part, both or one of them, because they are bones; for the lower part is cartilage and does not break, but it swells and bruises easily.
If one of its septa is broken, it is necessary to insert the little finger into the nasal opening and to straighten that fracture from inside with your index finger, while pressing from outside until the nose returns to its natural shape. May this be done by you with skill and care so that the patient does not experience pain due to your action.
If the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and the finger cannot reach it, it should be straightened with a blunt instrument, applying slight pressure. If the fracture is in both directions, do likewise. And act promptly on the first day of the fracture.
If possible, and if not, then after the seventh or tenth day, when the heat of inflammation has subsided, insert a thread of cotton cloth into the nasal opening if the fracture is in one direction, or two threads if it is in both directions.
And let the thread in them be blunt to fill the nasal opening. Some of the earlier practitioners mentioned that the thread should be greased with oil and changed every day, but I do not see this as necessary. Instead, the thread should be dipped in egg white mixed with flour dust.
Then leave the bandage until the bone sets and the cartilages harden, and you may put tubes of walnut shells in the nose where the bandage is, after softening them with boiling water. This will make the holding of the broken nose firmer, so that the patient does not resist breathing.
This is not necessary, if you wish to make it or the bandages; for if during your work, the nose feels hot and swells up with inflammation, then treat it with a poultice of cotton wool soaked in wine and rose oil, or something similar to that which physicians use.
But if there is no inflammation, it should be swollen externally with a poultice made of fine flour and egg whites mixed together, then apply a soft bandage to it, but do not tightly bind the nose, for fear that small bones in the nose might break.
Or if it is broken, it should be drilled and the bone removed using an appropriate instrument; then suture the drill hole and treat it with what adheres and soothes from the appropriate ointments. If there is a wound inside the nose, it should be treated with bandages and lead pipes used. Until he is healed.
Chapter Four.
If the lower jaw is broken.
If the lower jaw is broken without a wound, then if its fracture is only external and it has not been splintered in two and the pieces have turned inward, its recognition is easy.
If the fracture is in the right side of the jaw, then it is necessary that the little finger of the left hand should enter the mouth of the patient and likewise if the fracture is on the left side, the little finger of the right hand should enter and raise the piece of the fracture from inside to outside.
And with the other hand from outside the bone, control it to straighten it. If the jaw fracture has splintered in two, it is necessary to use a wedge from both sides for stability until its straightening is accomplished. If the teeth are loose, fix them.
Or separate with a ligature of gold, silver, or brass thread, then place a cone on the fractured jaw, then place a double bandage over it, and place a large, tight binder or a piece of leather sole equal to the length of the jaw over the bandage. Then connect it from above according to your preparation for the stitching and matching the suture until it does not break, and instruct the patient to remain calm and quiet. Make his food soft and easy to digest. If you think that something has changed in appearance, then proceed with its treatment on the third day.
Then connect it from above according to your preparation for the stitching and matching the suture until it does not break, and instruct the patient to remain calm and quiet. Make his food soft and easy to digest. If you think that something has changed in appearance, then proceed with its treatment on the third day. Then remedy what has swollen with powdered wheat flour mixed with egg white or semolina after removing the bandage from it, and place a soft compress on the swelling. If that swelling adheres to him and there is no change in the condition of the bone, leave it.
Do not treat it until the wound heals and the fracture consolidates, for often this fracture takes three weeks to heal. If during that time a hot inflammation appears, apply repeatedly what we mentioned for its soothing until the inflammation disappears.
And if the fracture is accompanied by a wound, then if any splinters have separated from the bone, be careful in removing those splinters using what you find suitable for their removal from the wound. If the opening of the wound is narrow, enlarge it with a probe according to your need.
Then, if those splinters are removed and nothing remains of them, suture the mouth of the wound if it is wide; otherwise, place on it one of the bandages that are suitable for this purpose. And let the wound heal completely.
Chapter Five.
And set the fracture if it is broken.
The bone most commonly breaks from the front of the elbow and can fracture in three ways: it may break and shatter into two pieces without splinters, which is easiest to set.
If splinters occur in the fracture, it is more difficult to set; or if the fracture is accompanied by a wound. In such cases, if there is no wound, prepare two assistants: one to hold the limb above the broken bone, and the other to pull the neck towards the opposite side.
Then, straighten the fracture with your fingers until it takes its correct shape without any prominence or crookedness. If you need to stretch more, place a ball of linen or wool under the bandage on the patient's limb.
And the bone will be at your discretion in length and width, raising the bone and pressing the ball with your hand until the fracture is straightened as needed. If you cannot pull the end of the bone out because it has penetrated too deeply, the patient should lie on their back.
A medium-sized pad is placed under the cheekbone, and the servant presses the cheekbone downwards until the bone fragment that is deep rises above. Then the fracture is corrected and smoothed with your fingers.
If you feel that a piece of the bone has broken off and is moving, it should be cut on and removed with a suitable instrument; if the piece is attached to the bone, it should be sawn through in cutting it. After the instrument that retains the cheekbone is placed under the cheekbone, which is a wooden or iron instrument and its shape is as follows:
It resembles a spoon, but without a handle; its width depends on the size of the bone, whether large or small, and its length also depends on what is convenient for use. It should have two ends, as you see one end is wider and the other narrower.
If the wound that you opened to remove the bone fragment is wide and hot, suture its edges together with stitches; if the wound is superficial or there is fear of hot inflammation, cauterize the wound with a heated iron rod according to the width of the opening.
If the wound is hot and inflamed, place a poultice in rose oil or vinegar or wine, and apply it. And if the bone is painful without injury or fracture, then place on the bone an ointment made from flour and egg white. Place a soft bandage on it, then place the ball under its wrap if needed. Then take a very long cloth whose width is like a strip or similar. Apply two layers of padding over the bandage and the ointment, then take a thin sheet from a board. Its width should be three fingerbreadths, and its length the same. Then insert it into a bandage, then place that bandage with the board into the place on the cloth that covers the fracture. Then tighten the cloth around the fracture as you go. And place the bandage around his neck, under the correct wrap and under the patient's wrap, turning it several times on each side. As you see, this tightening secures the fracture firmly, which is evident to you.
And it is important that the splint does not slip off the fractured bone. To ensure this, the patient should be examined every day. Whenever you see the swelling has subsided and the suture is loose, tighten it. Make the patient sleep on his back, and place a small cushion under his hips at night.
To raise his limb so that the fracture is elevated, lift it along with the humerus or bind his arm to his neck, and do not remove the bandage unless there has been no swelling or inflammation at the site for twelve days.
Then renew the splint if you see a need for it. And wrap tightly and leave it until the fracture of the humerus mends and strengthens, which is more in twenty-eight days. And some people may experience this in less time than that.
Chapter Six.
Treatment of shoulder fracture. The shoulder rarely breaks except in its joint, and if it does break anywhere else or if it breaks in the middle, this is recognized by touch according to the shape of the fracture.
Set it and bandage it in its natural shape from all sides as you can, then apply powdered flour with egg white and soft wax on the site, place a double layer of cloth over it, and then put a broad pad of wood on top of it.
Thin on the shoulder to the extent of all or a little wider, for if it is under the breastbone twisted in any place of the shoulder then straighten that twist with a soft pressure until the breastbone descends evenly, then tighten from above with a long bandage.
Tighten firmly and support the breastbone so that it does not move from its place, and check the bandage every day; whenever the bandage loosens, tighten it and straighten the breastbone if it has moved from its place. Let the patient lie on his healthy side, and the shoulder should be pulled forward for twenty days.
After one or twenty-five days, if this period is completed, remove the bandage while you are in a safe place, for it is from the bones that do not fear its fracture or displacement. If a spur appears from the bone and was under the skin, cut over it and remove it. And do what was mentioned in the treatment of humeral fractures to relieve any burning pain if it occurs.
Chapter Seven.
About the treatment of sternal fracture.
The sternum can fracture in the middle and rarely does this cause an issue, but its edges are what fracture most often and become displaced. Among its symptoms, if it is broken in the middle, there is a tendency to lean downwards and it causes severe pain, difficulty breathing, and coughing.
It may be necessary to apply a tourniquet to the blood, and the swelling in the broken bone becomes evident, and it is not hidden from the sense, so he must turn the patient onto his stomach, and place a pad between his shoulders, then press on the neck, and gather the ends with both hands from the sides, and delicately adjust in straightening as much as possible.
And continue until the bone returns to its proper shape, then place a bandage and splint on top of it, putting on it a board from linden or similar wood in the sole after having soaked it in brine. Then delicately wrap it around the broken bone so that it does not slip, and pass the bandage around to the back several times, tightening it firmly; then inspect the bandage at all times, and whenever it loosens, tighten it again.
And if necessity forces its removal, for example, due to pain or swelling at the site, then hurry to remove it and correct what has occurred from that with appropriate treatment, then return the bandage if you see fit. And leave him in this position and maintain the pressure until he recovers.
Chapter Eight
In the case of fractures of the ulna, you should know that they only occur in rough areas that are followed by the back and its edges from the front because it is hollow and this fact is not hidden from feeling when examining with the fingers.
Treat it by straightening the fracture with the fingers in the direction that is possible until the shape becomes aligned as it should be, then bind and tighten the broken bone with a splint if necessary. If the ulna fracture is displaced towards the inside, it will cause the patient severe pain.
It behaves like a wound with swelling, because the bone swells in its sheath, and it also causes difficulty breathing, coughing, and profuse bleeding, which makes treatment difficult, and many early attempts have failed.
Some say that it is appropriate to make the patient's food cause bloating and gas, so that the abdomen expands and the fracture is pushed outwards, but we reject this because if there is no heat or inflammation, it will cause it to occur; and if it has occurred, it will increase and intensify.
Some say that a poultice should be placed on the wound, then firmly pressed with something resembling a ruler, except they fear that the poultice will draw into the wound due to its weakness. Others say it is better to cover the wound with wool soaked in hot oil.
And a bandage is tied between the thighs so that it fills up and makes the bond even, if you roll it around a stick, then treat the patient with the treatment for phlebotomy from food and medicine, because the condition of the patient is severe and he cannot endure it. And the bone was cutting through the flesh in a painful manner, which frightened us for the patient, so we decided to cut on the site and expose the fractured thighbone. Then we placed under it the device that preserves the joint that we previously described and we cut the bone with a saw and removed it.
Then we close the edges of the wound with stitches if it is large, and treat it with bandages until it heals. If during that a hot inflammation appears, we quickly prepare bandages in rose oil and place them on the site, and treat the patient with what will also settle the inflammation from within.
And he should rest on the side that is not affected by sleepiness until he recovers.
Chapter Nine.
Fractures of the back and neck.
If the bones of the neck are broken and little swelling is seen, this indicates a poor prognosis for recovery, as does little swelling in fractures of the back. If someone experiences this, to determine whether they will recover or not: If you see his hands have become paralyzed, numb and lifeless, and he cannot move them or straighten them or clench them, and if you prick them with a needle and he does not feel it and there is no pain in them, then know that he will not recover in most cases; he is dying.
And if he can move them and feels the prick and the pinch, then know that the paralysis of the bone has passed and the patient will recover with treatment. If someone is afflicted with a similar fracture of the back and you wish to determine whether they will also recover or not:
Examine his feet; if you see that they have become paralyzed and the same thing happens to them as happened to the hands, then, when he lies on his back, wind and flatulence are expelled involuntarily, and when he lies on his stomach, urine is expelled involuntarily. If a person urinates on his back and wants to urinate but cannot, know that he is dying, so do not worry about treating him. But if nothing like that happens to him, the matter is milder. And the treatment for what happened is to apply a poultice to relieve the hot inflammation.
To place on the affected ulcer pure rose oil, or with roasted eggshells mixed with it, three times a day until the hot inflammation subsides. Then apply one of the strong cloths, bandaged tightly and order him to rest and remain still.
And he should not sleep except on the side that does not cause him pain until he recovers. If there is a bone spur or something similar near the joint, it is necessary to cut into the skin and remove that bone. Then, if the wound is large, close it with stitching, and treat it with honey-soaked bandages until he recovers. If another bone in the joint breaks, specifically the tailbone, it is necessary to insert a probe from the left hand into the anus.
And smooth the broken bone with the other hand as much as possible, then apply a bandage and splint if necessary, and then bind it tightly.
If you feel a stone with a crack in it, crush it and remove it, and treat the wound with the treatment mentioned until he is healed.
Chapter Ten.
In fractures of the ribs.
When the ribs are broken, their fracture is such that they splinter at the ends and split along their length. The bone will lean inward, causing pain in the area of the break, numbness, and swelling in the leg below the break.
If you must pass your hand over it until you reach the break and know its shape, for if the break is only at the ends, set that break as straight as possible according to what fits naturally.
If the break is along its length or if it has leaned inward, place the patient on his back until that break is set for you. Once you have straightened it, apply pressure and then place a splint of wood or leather upon it, tightening it firmly.
Do not fear the shifting of the break or the loss of the splint, and align the bent part of the ribs with what fills it until it takes a firm hold. Instruct the patient to sleep on his back or on the healthy side if there is hot pain.
Flee from his swelling and compress it until the inflamed worm settles, and place upon him that which will settle him as mentioned before. Then return to compressing and tightening him as is necessary. If there appears in the bone splinters or something comes off from its edges, it should not be removed.
And do not touch it, but smooth the surface as we said, and leave the compression until he recovers.
Chapter Eleven
In compressing a bone fracture.
The bone is that which is between the arm and the shoulder. If it fractures, compress it in one of two ways. One way is to take a flexible, soft, moderately hard wood piece shaped like this:
And attach two straps to its ends, then suspend it from a high place. The patient sits on a chair, and the fractured arm is placed on the wood until the bandage is tightly secured in the middle of the wood's curve. Then something heavy is hung above it.
Or, the servant supports it from below, and the doctor smoothes the fracture with his hand until the bone returns to its proper position. The other method is for the patient to lie on their knees, with their arm hanging by a strap from their neck.
Then he orders two servants to grasp each end of the break with their hands, one above it and the other below. Each of them pulls in his own direction. And if you want the pull to be stronger, tie a band below the break and another above it, and let each servant pull towards himself.
And if the break is near the shoulder, it is necessary that one of the bands be placed under the armpit and the other under the break towards the elbow. Likewise, if the break is near the elbow, it is necessary that the band be placed in this position and on the elbow itself.
Then, the break is straightened with a splint without force until when the break is set right and it unites nicely. If there is no hot worm, then bind it; but if there is a hot worm, leave it to be bound on the seventh day. Place on it a woolen compress soaked in vinegar and rose oil.
Until the worm settles, then bind it at that time. The method of binding is to place felt on the break, then place a new linen bandage on the felt, then gather the arm onto itself and place his hand open on his shoulder.
And carry the splint and bind it on the finger or arm so that the arm stands like a mast if nothing prevents you from doing so, and there has been no change in your broken bone. But if you fear that something will change, use the splints.
And place on the fracture itself a splint that is wider and stronger than the other splints, and let there be a width of one finger between each splint, and let the length of the splints be according to the fracture with an addition of three fingers from each side.
Then bind the splints with the bandage mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
And let your binding on the place of the fracture be tighter.
And whenever the fracture is healed, let the binding be lighter, for if you see that the splints and binding are as we have said at the time of fixing the member from your arm, then do so.
And if you fear the hot swelling, then leave the binding and splints until the seventh day as we have said, then check the bandage every three days lest there occur in the place a wrinkle or swelling, or that food is prevented from reaching the member due to excessive binding. This can all be remedied as we have mentioned. ‌
If you are confident that nothing will happen from this, then do not remove the bandage except after many days, and let the patient lie on his back with his hand on his chest, and place a pillow filled with moderate wool under the shoulder.
And check at every hour of the night or day, lest the shape of the broken limb be distorted or the bandage become loose; fix all this with your effort. Make the patient's food light at first until the bone begins to heal.
Then his food should become harsh, for it is the custom of the bones and joints to heal within forty days. At that time, the bandage should be removed and a bath should be used, treating with plasters suitable for this purpose, especially if the fracture is severe and rough.
Then do not remove the bandage from him for fifty days or two months.
Chapter Twelve.
On the fracture of the humerus.
The humerus is made up of two bones, one of which is small and lies above the elbow, while the other is large and lies beneath the small one from below. Sometimes only the larger bone breaks, sometimes only the smaller one, and sometimes they break together.
When the upper end of the jawbone is broken, it is easy to set and heals quickly. If the lower part of the jawbone is broken, the break is bad and the healing is slow. If both ends are broken together, then if the bone that broke the upper part of the jawbone was...
The physician should make the jawbone's fracture smooth and easy to set until it is straightened. If the large jawbone is broken, he should make its setting stronger. And if both ends of the jawbone are broken, then he should make the setting very strong.
When setting and aligning the jaw, it is necessary to place the hand on a pad so that the palm faces up more than all the fingers. The little finger should be below the other fingers, and the patient should sit upright on himself.
And let the pad be at his level in height so that the patient does not experience discomfort.
Then, one assistant supports the arm from below either with his hand or with a bandage, and another assistant supports from above in the same manner. The physician then straightens the bone until it returns to its best possible shape, for if there is a fracture of the bone, it will heal.
Return every spur to its place, and if a spur appears in it that is clean and the skin is intact, but you are not able to force it, then cut on it and remove it according to what we mentioned earlier. If the fracture is accompanied by a wound, it has been given an opening.
Treat that with this: if in the first attempt, there is a hot inflammation, then burn a puncture with a lancet soaked in rose oil and white wax, and let it be moderate between the flesh and the skin, and tighten the ligature on it gently until the inflammation subsides.
Then remove the lancet and place a poultice prepared from flour of barley with egg white, then bring the splints and let the splint that is placed on the fracture be slightly wider and stronger. Know that the number of splints for the arm is usually six.
If the fracture is in one or both bones, then make your ligature on the place of the fracture stronger and tighter, and whenever you tighten the ligature upwards or downwards, make the ligature slightly looser than what was mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
The stitching that is made over the fracture should be soft, wet, and not very hard. The thread used to tie it should be of medium thickness between rough and smooth as we have described. Examine the limb and the joint after a few days.
If something needs correction, such as a swelling on the limb, it is necessary to soak the limb in clear water until the swelling subsides and then leave the limb unbandaged for one night to rest, then bandage again.
If the swelling has subsided and the bone has healed or is near to healing, correct that entirely with your best efforts. Also look if food is being prevented from reaching the limb due to excessive bandaging; it should be loosened a little and left for some days until the food can reach, then re-bandage.
If nothing has happened to the patient as mentioned earlier, it is not appropriate for him to move [the limb] until after about twenty days; then tie the patient's hand to his neck so that his arm hangs freely and protects his efforts from disorderly movements, and let him sleep on his back.
Know that this fracture of the arm heals in thirty days, or sometimes forty, and it may heal in twenty-eight days, all depending on the state of the mixture and the strength.
Chapter Eleven.
On the fracture of the wrist and fingers.
The wrist and the fingers of the hand are seldom exposed to fracture, but rather to dislocation frequently. Therefore, when the wrist suffers from either fracture or dislocation
The patient should sit with his knees bent and a chair placed in front of him to lean on.
Then he places his hand on it, stretched out. The servant of the broken bones then pulls and the physician straightens them until they are set well. At that point, he should carry a weight and endure pain if there is no hot swelling. Afterward, a splint should be placed on top according to its position.
It has been placed in a soft bandage, and if the fracture is downward toward the inside of the wrist, make a shape resembling a ball from bandages, and instruct the patient to squeeze it with the broken hand, then bind it with a long bandage.
The bandage should be of soft leather to fit the skin with all its folds and tighten it as needed. If the fracture is outward, you should place one bandage on top and another below the palm so that the hand remains open and upright.
Then the bandage is carried as the hand rotates, and it is woven between the fingers with a strap. If the fracture extends to one of the finger bones, if there is swelling, align it accordingly, then bandage it with the palm. And if you wish to make for it a small upright splint to hold the fracture steady.
And it should not move, for if the fracture is of all the fingers like the middle, ring, little or index finger, align and bind it with the adjacent healthy finger, or bind them all together in a sling which is better, or place small upright splints on them.
As we said in the case of swelling, examine during bandaging and after it for heat and inflammation. When any of this happens, treat it as necessary whenever it recurs, following its description.
Chapter Fourteen
In bandaging the fracture of the thigh.
The bone of the thigh frequently breaks, and this becomes apparent to the touch because it twists to the front and back. Its treatment is that a bandage be placed above the break and another below the break, with the patient lying on his back.
Then a servant should extend each bandage to its respective side, following this method if the break is in the middle of the bone. However, if it is near the base of the thigh, it is necessary to place a soft bandage.
When the break is near the base of the thigh, one bandage should extend above and the other below the break. The same applies if the break is near the ankle; let the bandages be close to the ankle so that the extension falls downward. Then the physician should align the bone with both hands until it returns to its natural shape.
Then the bone will knit well together. At that time, it is necessary to carry weight and apply pressure, unless a hot swelling occurs in the limb. If swelling occurs, leave it for days until the hot swelling subsides, then return to its treatment.
As for bandaging it, a broad and hard bandage should be wound twice or thrice over the break, leaving some of it. Then wrap the leg until the ankle reaches the base of the tibia, and insert a long thread between the thigh and the leg near the ankle from below, with both ends of the thread coming out from above on both sides.
Then you place a strip of cloth on the leg and thigh, whatever is left of it. Then you make the same splints on the thigh in the place of the fracture and make one splint on the shin bone. Then you fill the gap between the thigh and the shin with soft wool to equalize the pressure.
Then begin to apply strong pressure from the middle on the place of the fracture, three or four turns, and as you move away from the fracture with the bandage, let your pressure be less, softer, and lighter.
Then turn to the end of the string that you inserted between the thigh and shin. Tie with it what is next to it from the splints above, then pass the end of the string below until it reaches the ankle. Also tighten with it the ends of the splints from the other side.
So that the bandage does not slip from its place, then leave the pressure on it as long as the member does not complain of pain or swelling or inflammation and such things. If something like this happens, hurry to remedy it and repair whatever has happened completely, according to what we mentioned earlier.
If there is a splinter in the bone that is sticking out, it is necessary to smooth it if possible, otherwise break over it and remove it, and treat the wound as previously described until it heals. This fracture from the thigh can be bound without adding the shin with the splints.
As we mentioned in the fingers and arms, except that its dislocation is not accompanied by swelling in the joint, even if it is dislocated alone without involving the leg, so it must always be reduced.
Know that the thigh swells for fifty days or a little more, or a little less, all of this according to the difference in the mixture and other circumstances.
Chapter Fifteen.
In the fracture of the femur.
The femur is rarely affected by fractures, but it is often affected by bruises. If a fracture occurs in it, it will be either a cleavage or a comminution of its parts, and this can occur with or without a wound.
And all of that is determined by touch, and its reduction requires aligning what separates from its parts with the fingers until they come together and reassemble according to what can be achieved in alignment and balance, then it is carried on a wooden splint, and if necessary, a round tourniquet is applied.
And it is immobilized with an appropriate splint above that, then all the conditions we described for other fractures are followed, such as hot inflammation and similar things by treating each condition with what suits it until healing occurs.
Chapter Sixteen
"On the Treatment of Fractured Shinbone
"The shinbone has two bones, one thick and called the tibia, and the other thin and called the fibula. They are exposed to types of fracture similar to those of the arm bones. "Therefore, its treatment is the same as that of the arm, and there is one method for it. If both bones are fractured together, the shin turns in all directions. If the thin bone is fractured, the shin turns forward. If the thick bone is fractured from below, this is obvious to you.
"Therefore, use splints and alignment, and bandage with splints accordingly. However, if the shinbone fracture is rough and has many fragments, the splint should be smaller and lighter, and less effort should be expended on its treatment.
"As for the shin, there is an additional procedure compared to the arm, which is: After you have aligned the splints and finished all your work, take two strips of reed that are used in sealing the joints between the boards or made from palm fronds or similar. Place them on the outer sides of the shinbone where it bends, then wrap a bandage over them to hold them in place.
Choose from them that which has slight thickness and is not thin, and let its length be along the entire leg from the ankle to below. Then wrap around each one a double bandage along its length, placing one on the leg and the other from the opposite side.
From the ankle to below the foot, then tie the bandages in three places: from both ends and the middle. With this binding, the leg will not bend to the right or left and will be well secured. A wooden splint can also be used along the length of the leg.
It should be placed to prevent movement, and this is especially important in the case of a fracture if there is a specific wound. Then examine the leg every day and take great care against worms or inflammation or any of that. If any of that happens, deal with it as needed until it heals. The bone in the leg takes about thirty days or so to mend.
Chapter Seventeen
On the Fractures of the Foot and Toes
As for the heel, it is not prone to breakage. However, the bones of the foot may be prone to fracture, and the toes are also rarely prone to fracture; rather, they are usually dislocated in most cases.
If there is a fracture in the bones of the foot, and you see that some of those bones have overlapped each other, let the patient place his foot on the ground as if walking, then stand up and place your foot on what has risen from those bones, then push it down and make it even.
Until it returns to its place, then take a bandage and some padding and place a small flat board under the sole of the foot with two handles, then bind the foot tightly with it after loosening it with cloth and whatever else is needed.
After three or four days have passed, release the bandage, and you will find the bones level if they were fractured or displaced. Then proceed as you see fit. If any of the toes are broken, force them back into place and align them as described for forcing the fingers of the hand.
Then make a splint for the broken toe along the length of the toe, and it should be slightly wider than it, then place this board under the foot as described and bind it tightly if the fractured bones are two or three or more.
Make a splint for each finger, fitting it into a soft bandage, and place a board under the foot, ensuring that the ends of the board protrude from the bottom of the foot to secure it well.
And it is necessary for you not to forget to apply everything we mentioned to all other fractures and their symptoms, and to treat each condition appropriately.
Chapter Eighteen.
In the case of a fracture in the woman's pelvis, the femur bone, and the man's penis.
When the woman's pelvis is fractured, let her sit with her knees bent, then gradually lean her back until she is on her back, and hold her from behind. Then prepare a pad of cotton to fill the vagina until it becomes like a ball inside her.
Then shake the woman and lift her gradually, for that cotton will come out until it is at the entrance of the vagina like a ball, and the bone fracture will be corrected. Then place a pillow under her back. When she wants to defecate, remove the cotton carefully until she defecates.
Then replace it in the same way you first inserted it, and return to her initial pillow. Do this for seven days or so, as it will heal. If you want, take a sheep's bladder, insert a reed pipe into its mouth, and place the entire bladder inside her vagina.
Then blow into the tube with force until the bladder inflates inside the vagina, for the fracture will return. Then bandage it with cotton and keep it on as we have described until it heals. If the thigh bone of a man or woman is broken, use this method in its treatment.
Then treat it as we have described for the shinbone, and the correctness of this will not be hidden from you in these unusual fractures which are rare, especially for those who have some education and understand this book well, because the fracture itself guides you in most cases.
On the correct way to treat and bandage it, understand. As for a man's penis if the thighbone is broken, wrap it with a linen bandage and leave it for three days or thereabouts until it heals.
Chapter Nineteen
In the treatment of bone fractures when accompanied by a wound.
It is necessary for someone who has a fracture with a wound, and especially if the bone is large like the thigh bone or shinbone, to rush to remove it as soon as possible, if you are assisted by the conditions of extraction as we have presented.
If the wound is bleeding, it is necessary to rush to cut it by placing powdered resin on it, if you have nothing else. Then take a splint for the fracture on that day, without delaying it.
If there is no inflammation, then if there is inflammation, leave the splint until the ninth day, so that the hot inflammation subsides, and do not approach it on the third or fourth day with a poultice, for he will be exposed to unpleasant symptoms.
If the broken bone protrudes through the skin, it is necessary to reduce and straighten it with your hand by gently pulling, and if it does not submit to being reduced and straightened by your hand, then reduce it using this device, which is made of iron, its length being seven or eight fingers. And place it on the wound as needed.
Therefore, it is necessary for the physician to take three or four of them according to what he needs for treatment in each type of fracture, and they should be rounded so that there is a slight thickness in them, so that they do not slip when pulling on them during work.
It will have a sharp tip and its upper part will be thick, while the lower half will be very thin, as shown in this image.
It is called "Greek" in Greek. They want a small chip, so its sharp end must be inserted into the tip of the broken bone and pushed with it until the bone returns and matches part of the level, then cut to make the edges of the fracture match each other.
If the fractured end is thin and the instrument did not take a good grip, then that bone end must be cut until the instrument can hold it. If it cannot return the bone as described by the method of retention, then cut it with what matches its sections that we mentioned.
Or saw it with one of the saws as much as you can, then scrape off what remains in the bone from the skin and thin membranes. If after returning the bone the patient finds severe, painful pain, know that the bone has not returned to its natural place.
If you succeed in returning it to its natural place, then do so, for you will greatly benefit the patient. When the bone has healed completely, dip a piece of cloth in strong black wine, especially if it is summer, and do not put anything on the wound, whether ointment or any other thing.
"So that rotting and decay do not occur, then use the cautery in your free time after extracting the bone, leaving the wound open by piercing the vessels with scissors according to the size of the wound.
"And be extremely careful not to close the wound with the fracture, for many ignorant physicians have done this and caused death or diarrhea in their patients. Close the wound gently and softly, contrary to the closure of other fractures.
"If the wound is superficial or if it is a large wound and you fear some of the unpleasant symptoms we have described, and he finds pain in the place which is disturbing, then it is not appropriate to apply cautery. Instead, make sutures from strong linen thread in the place of the cautery and close it with them.
"So if after a day or two, and you see that the wound has begun to suppurate, then remove the thread that you have put on it with wine, then use the poultice and bandages that we are accustomed to using for wounds, such as the four-sided bandage and its like. And it is fitting for you to apply the dressing.
The wound should be examined every evening and morning until it heals and clears, and the member should be set in a position that allows the pus to drain downwards easily. If many days have passed since the injury without the formation of pus or the discharge stopping, know that there are small bone fragments present.
The wound should be probed with a probe, and any of those fragments that are clean should be removed and extracted. If any are not clean and cause swelling or pain in the member, cut them into pieces and remove them completely as much as possible.
If the wound shows any swelling, inflammation, or other forms of corruption and decay, each form should be treated with the corresponding remedy described in its respective chapter.
And remember that if a large bone such as the femur or humerus breaks and protrudes from the limb, you should not attempt to pull it out or push it in. For often, death results from attempting to do so, but rather leave it alone until it decays on its own; perhaps it will fall out after twenty or thirty days.
When treating a wound, if you see a place for treatment in it, then treat it; otherwise, leave it alone.
The Twentieth Chapter.
On the treatment of adhesions that occur as a result of some fractures.
Often this adhesion occurs after the fracture heals, especially if it is near the joints, and from it deformity of the limb may arise, or possibly preventing the limb from functioning naturally.
If the adhesion is recent, use drugs that contract, such as saber, milk, mastic, and others of their kind, taking some or all of them and making a plaster with a constricting drink or egg white or vinegar.
And you apply them to the adhesion with pressure, and you tighten it over them with a good tightening, and you leave the tightening without removing it for many days, then you remove it and repeat another until the adhesion disappears, if God wills, or you tighten over it a plate of lead.
For lead has the property of removing all that appears in the limbs, so if the adhesion has become hard and severe and necessity demands its removal, then cut it from above and remove the attached part or grind it with some grinding agents until it disappears and treat the wound until it heals.
Chapter Twenty-One
In the treatment of fractures, if it is not properly set and the limb remains thin compared to its original shape.
If a fracture of the bones is not properly set and the limb remains thin and weak afterwards, this occurs due to many reasons. This can be due to the excessive loosening or overly tightening of the bandages, preventing nourishment from reaching the limb, or excessively rubbing the affected area, or moving it too much before it is ready, or a lack of blood in the patient's body and its weakness.
The treatment for this is to nourish the patient and strengthen their body until the blood increases in it, and to use the baths and bring joy and happiness to them, and similar things. Then, apply wax on the limb so that the wax attracts a lot of nourishment to it, or continue rubbing it with cold water. Until the nourishment flows into it and returns to its natural shape.
Chapter Twenty-Two
In the treatment of fractured bones, if they are not properly set and prevented from doing what is necessary.
The appearance of the limb when it is fractured, or dislocated, or has a broken bone, and its swelling and bruising due to that. However, the limb has not refrained from its natural function, so it is not right to accept what some unskilled physicians and barbers claim, that the limb could be broken at the head, for many of them do this in our country.
This action is extremely condemned, leading to great delusion and difficulty in healing. However, if the swelling and bruising are severe, it is necessary to soak the limb in water that has been boiled with herbs such as willow leaves, their roots, and the like.
It should be bandaged with herbs such as well-made diachilon, or the root of willow is taken and ground with chicken fat and shirag oil, and it is bandaged with it, or the fruit of the fig tree is taken and crushed with pigeon dung and similar drugs that are called dissolvers of swelling.
And it is permissible to dissolve the bruising with persistent thin ink, which is found in the hands, and the movement of the limb in all directions at all times is used. If the swelling has advanced, intensified, and hardened, and necessity has called for its treatment with iron.
It is necessary to cut above it, severing the bone connection and cutting any remaining tendon or bone with circular cuts, using forceps with effort and care. Then treat the wound with what was previously mentioned until it heals.
Chapter Twenty-Three.
When a dislocation occurs, it obstructs movement and deforms the limb, causing severe pain in the patient. Therefore, when someone experiences a dislocation, prompt reduction is necessary.
It should not be delayed, for if it is delayed, the inflammation will make reducing the dislocation difficult. Therefore, it should not be delayed or moved or stretched while it is inflamed because this often causes pain and distressing aches in the patient.
But if this happens, it is necessary to rush to soothe the patient, then leave him until the inflammation subsides a little, then place the limb in hot water and oil, then reduce with forceps and treat each joint as mentioned for its proper place.
The types of dislocation have also been arranged in the same way as fractures, from the top to the bottom of the body.
The Twenty-Fourth Chapter
On the Treatment of Lower Jaw Fractures
"A fracture rarely heals except in rare cases, and its extraction will be on two sides: either it will move away from its place slightly, so it will need a little suture, or it will completely separate, requiring complete suturing. "Towards the chest, causing the patient's saliva to drool and making it difficult for him to speak, and his tongue stutters when he talks. However, if the extraction is slight, it usually returns to its place with greater ease.
"But if the extraction is complete, it is necessary to return it quickly without delay, which is for an assistant to hold the patient's head and the physician to insert a probe with his single hand into the root of the fracture inside the mouth if the fracture is on one side.
"Or he can insert both probes if the fracture is on both sides, and with the rest of his fingers from outside, he should align it, instructing the patient to suture his fracture and release it to go in each direction, and the physician aligns the fracture and pushes until it returns to its place.
If it is difficult to remove, especially if the teeth are all together, use poultice with hot water and oil until they become easier to remove. Do not delay their removal as we have mentioned. When they return and become even, and the patient's mouth does not bleed, then at that moment place on them plasters made from linen along with cones that have been made from wax, oil, and rose water.
Then tie with a soft bandage, and the patient's sleep will be on his back with his head supported between two pillows so that he does not move right or left, nor does he feel any strain to chew anything. Instead, make his food into a liquid.
Until the pain subsides and the jaw heals, let him eat what is comfortable for him, and use a bandage for this purpose. Do not allow opening of the mouth during eating, drinking, or speaking until the jaw has healed and recovered.
If the teeth are difficult to remove after they have fallen out at any time and do not return to their places, often this causes chronic swelling and toothaches, and sometimes the patient's abdomen may become disturbed or feel constant cramps. Therefore, if you see this happening, know that it is a case of decay.
And often he dies from that within ten days.
The twenty-fifth chapter.
In the treatment of fractures of the femur and hip joint.
As for the femur, it does not dislocate to the inside due to its connection with the chest; however, it can dislocate outward. This is evident through touch. The patient must lie on his back and extend his arms.
Then press the place with your palm strongly, and it will return to its original position. After that, apply a bandage and splints, and bind them tightly. As for the part near the hip joint that connects with it, it rarely dislocates. If it does dislocate one day, it should be reduced and set as mentioned earlier, and what is prepared for you.
Then place a bandage, splints, and tight bindings on it, and order the patient to stay immobile until healed. With this treatment, the hip joint can also be reduced if it has moved from its position.
The twenty-sixth chapter.
In the reduction of hip dislocation.
Know that the hip dislocates in three directions: one is that it dislocates downwards towards the buttocks, the second is that it dislocates upwards towards the chest, and rarely does it dislocate above the hip.
And it does not burst towards the back of the shoulder blade, nor towards the front for the nerve location, and most often it bursts and exits downwards towards the belly button, especially in those with little flesh, because it exits quickly and enters quickly in them.
As for those with much flesh, it is the opposite: that is, it exits and enters with difficulty. And sometimes a blow or fall may bruise the neck, which will feel hot, so one might think that it has burst. It is necessary to investigate this until one is certain of its soundness.
At that time, you should begin his treatment. The burst can be recognized if it is downwards towards the navel, for between the burst neck and the sound neck there will be an obvious difference: you will find the tip of the neck in the former is twisted, and under the navel when the tip of the neck is touched, it feels like a egg.
And the patient cannot raise his hand to his ear or move it in all its movements. Similarly, if the burst is towards the chest or above, you will find that apparent upon touch; nothing is hidden.
And this fracture may be easily returned if it was fresh or the patient was a child, and to return it, you have the assistant raise your hand above and then make your hands as if under the elbow and lift the joint with force above its place, and the assistant raises his hand and extends it upward.
Then place it below and it will return quickly, but if it does not return with what we mentioned and the fracture has been since many days, then it is necessary for the patient to soak in hot water and use the lotion that softens like cooking the root of the dandelion, milk thistle, and cleavers in water and use it.
Then the patient lies on his back, and a ball of wool is placed under the elbow, being moderate between softness and hardness. The physician places his knee on the ball, holds the patient's hand with his own hand, and extends it downward.
And he pushes the ball with his foot, and it returns to its place. If you wish, return it in this manner: prepare a man taller than the patient and position him from the side, inserting his arm under the patient's elbow and raising the elbow until the patient is suspended in the air. And another servant pulls the patient's hand down to his abdomen. If the patient is light, it is necessary to attach something else to him to make him heavy, for the fracture returns to its place, and it may also turn to another side.
It consists of placing on the ground a long piece of wood with its end in the shape of the handle of a scythe, not thick nor thin. Then this wooden handle is placed under the patient's armpit after a soft bandage has been placed over the end of the wood, and the patient stands on the length of the wood.
Then his hand is extended downwards from the other side, and his body is also pulled strongly from the other side. The fracture returns quickly to its place. If it is difficult to return with all that we have mentioned, then this treatment should be used: take a piece of wood about two spans long. And make its width four fingers, and thicken it two fingers, so that it has a round head to facilitate its insertion into the depth of the armpit, like this:
Then a soft bandage is tied to the round head so that the wood does not hurt the patient. Then it is placed under the armpit, and the entire hand and arm are stretched down on the wood. The wood is then secured to the forearm and upper arm and the tip of the hand.
Then place the arm on a stretcher. Fasten with a bandage and extend the hand downward, leaving the rest of the body suspended from the other side, for the joint will enter from its socket. If it enters on any side possible, a moderately sized wool ball should be placed under the bandage.
Then, the prepared pad of flour mixed with milk and egg white is placed on the entire mound. It is then firmly secured under the bandage, wrapped tightly around the pad from above, and the hand is hung by the neck.
And he is not to move his hand for seven days, and it is necessary that the patient's food be reduced so that the limb may strengthen; thus, its healing will be faster. Then, after seven days or five, the bandage is removed and exercise is practiced. If it is stable and does not dislocate, then he has recovered.
If the joint dislocates frequently due to moisture or another cause, it is necessary to use a splint with three straps as described in the chapter on splints. If this is done and the bandage is removed after seven days, and the joint is still not stable.
The tendon and the muscle contracted repeatedly, but did not stay in place; it fell and was paralyzed, and could not be raised again. Therefore, I knew that its nerve, which is at the beginning of the armpit, had been severed or extended or paralyzed. At that moment, I realized that the joint would never stay in place again.
As for the fracture that occurs around the chest and back, it is reduced by pushing and pulling with the hands until it returns to its place, and all the rest of the swelling and treatment are applied until it heals. If, after healing, the limb appears twisted and movement is slow.
The patient should use the bath frequently until that twist softens and returns to its original state.
Chapter Seventy-Two.
In the treatment of fractures of the elbow.
The elbow joint is difficult to fracture and also difficult to reset, as it may fracture in all directions, especially forward or backward. Its fracture cannot be hidden from you because it is visible under the sight and touch in any form of fracture.
If the fractured elbow is joined with the normal one, this will be clear to you by an obvious sign: the joint will swell, and the arm will not be able to bend or reach its armpit. Therefore, it is necessary to act quickly and reduce the fracture immediately before pus forms.
It is a difficult wound to treat, and sometimes the pus does not heal, especially if the fracture is in the back. For it is the most painful of all types of fractures and its pain is intense, and often death accompanies it.
If it is possible for it to return, then the servant should extend both of his hands and arms fully, while the doctor holds from above the joint and below it, and he pushes the dislocation with both of his hands together or with the base of his palm until it returns to its place.
And if the fracture is in the front, it may return by bending the hand once until it strikes with the base of its palm the cheek next to it. If the fracture does not return, then use strong force, which is that two servants should extend the arm.
And the patient should also be held by two servants, lest he move during the extension. Then the arm is turned in every direction after a cloth or a wide belt is wrapped around his hand. If the doctor touches the dislocation with his hand, he should smear it with oil to make it slippery for easy reduction of the dislocation.
Then he pushes the joint back with a strong push until it returns, and after its return, it should be bound with a poultice that contains compression and drying along with egg white, tightly and firmly, and the arm is hung from the patient's neck, and it is left for days.
Then, if the joint has remained in place, loosen the bandage from it and leave it; but if you see that the joint is not yet firm, prepare another poultice and bandage, and leave it for more days until it becomes firm, then loosen it. If there is swelling after the return of the joint and its release.
And if there is difficulty in movement, use warm baths and gentle massage until it becomes soft, or place a fat-tailed sheep's tail on the joint, then bandage it and leave it for a day and night, then remove it and put him in the bath. If there is swelling, swell the joint with a moderate swelling.
Then prepare the poultice for him again, a second and a third time with entering the bath until it becomes soft. And if you wish to put wet, fresh cow dung mixed with fat on him, do that several times, for it will become soft and return to its original state.
The twenty-eighth chapter
On the treatment of fractures.
The fingers often fracture, and setting their fractures is easier than in other joints. However, it is necessary to set the fracture quickly within an hour after it occurs, before the place swells or a hot abscess appears.
To set the fracture, place the patient's finger on a board, and have an assistant hold it. The doctor should then place his palm over the back of the joint and push until it returns to its original position. However, he must ensure that the fracture has not moved to the inside of the hand.
The patient should place the front of his hand on the board during extension and reduction, but if the fracture is on the back of the hand, he should place the palm of his hand on the board so that the doctor's hand can be placed in the same position as the joint. If it returns to its original position, well and good; otherwise, immobilize it with a splint until the swelling subsides.
And leave it alone, for it does not bear repetition or allow for re-setting after a few days have passed. However, the joint will remain crooked, and the patient will suffer no harm except if the hand becomes paralyzed and unable to grasp anything.
When you learn that the nerve is cut or torn, there is no remedy except to apply the cauterizing iron. It may be of benefit, or it may not. If the nerve has been severed, place on it the instrument we described and then burn and leave for five days.
Then it is washed and the hand is exercised, but if its movement becomes difficult and stiffness appears in it, let it be bathed with warm water and olive oil repeatedly until it softens.
Chapter Twenty-Nine
On the treatment of finger fractures.
When a finger fractures in any direction, if the fracture is from the little finger towards the palm or the back of the hand, extend the finger and push the fracture back with your thumb until it returns to its place, then tie the head of the finger and bandage it towards the side where the fracture has occurred.
Leave it for two days, then release it and extend it until it becomes straight and can stand by itself during the day. If this is done at night, bandage it in the same manner and continue to wash it in the morning and exercise it with movement and bandage it again at night. Do this for several days until it heals.
Do the same to it if it extends into the palm of the hand, tie it towards the same direction and do with it as you did first until it heals, and do the same when it extends to other parts.
Chapter Thirty-Three.
Treatment of a fracture in the spine.
When a fracture occurs in one of the vertebrae or the neck, and the fracture is complete or many fragments have separated from their place, there is no treatment for it because death approaches swiftly for the patient.
And the sign of that is that the patient’s body exits involuntarily, he cannot control it, and often some of his limbs, either a leg or an arm, or one of them, become paralyzed. However, if only one fragment has separated from its place, paralysis usually occurs.
Paralysis can occur in four directions; the one that paralyzes towards the back is called sciatica. As for its treatment, it is to observe: if the sciatica has occurred from childbirth, there is no treatment for it and no hope of recovery. However, those that occur from a fall or a blow and the like.
The ancients have mentioned its treatment in long speeches, most of which do not add much benefit. I have summarized from that what is sufficient to replace much of what has been brought from the approaches to the meaning and explained it, and represented the tool differently than they described and explained it.
It is said that the swelling which occurs in the chest has no cure and cannot be healed, as well as those on both sides. Only the one which occurs in the back can be treated as I will describe: the patient should lie face down.
A mason's bench should be set up near the wall, with a moistened cushion placed underneath. Then, an upright piece of wood should be placed in a hole dug into the ground at the head end of the bench, and another piece at the foot end of the bench.
And a servant should hold the piece of wood, so that it is not fixed in the hole, and another servant should hold the other one likewise. Then he is to be turned onto his chest, with cushions placed under him, and the ends of the cushions are to be stretched out to the piece of wood at his head and tied there.
Then he is to be bound with other cushions on his arms, legs, and ankles. All the ropes are then gathered and tied to the other piece of wood at his feet. Each servant should pull on their respective rope until the two pieces of wood remain in their original positions.
And they are not reliable as we said, and the physician places his hand on the thread with force until it returns, or he places a board on it, then stands on the board with his legs until it returns. If it does not return with this treatment, take a board whose length is about three spans.
And a hole is dug in the wall, as we have said, near the patient, into which one end of the board is inserted. Then a fulcrum is placed in the middle of the board on the projection, and the physician places his feet on the other end and presses strongly until the thread is pulled taut.
And it returns to its place, or if you wish, you can make it with a rope that is rolled in the hand and is inserted into the ground at the patient's head on either side of the bed. And at his feet, on either side of the bed as well, two pieces of wood whose length is a cubit.
And let there be a gap of one finger's width between each piece of wood, and in each piece of wood there is made a hole through which the rope passes, and all the pieces of wood are firmly fixed in the ground until the peg does not move. A reed pipe is inserted, and it is this rope that is wound around the two wooden pegs.
And on its end, make a hole in which an obturator of one finger length is inserted, and likewise in the other two pieces of wood. Then tighten the bandage that was tied around the patient's chest in the loop at its head, and the bandages that were tied around his legs in the loop at their feet.
Then, by each loop stands an assistant who turns the handle that fits the loop, and the physician adjusts the clamp as we have described. This is a picture of the loop, the turner, and the patient.
Then, after the swelling has subsided and the place is leveled, it is necessary to apply a dry bandage with egg white, then gauze, and above the bandage, place a splint made of board, whose width should be three fingers or thereabouts, and its length should match the space for the clamp.
And on some of the correct string, then tie it with the necessary bandage. The patient should consume light food until they recover. If there is any swelling left in the area at the end of recovery, it is necessary to use medicines that dissolve and soften, along with using the splint we have described for a long time.
They used a lead plate for this, and if there is still swelling in the other parts of the back, it will be considered a surplus bone that has appeared, so do not expose it to this treatment, as death may occur.
Chapter Thirty-One.
In the Treatment of Ruptured Hernia.
Know that only dislocation is exposed to the joint of the hernia and the ankle, but not what is exposed to the rest of the joints from slight weakness and relaxation. The hernia joint opens in four directions.
This is because it dislocates inward, outward, forward, and backward; most often it dislocates inward. Rarely does it dislocate forward or backward. The sign of its inward dislocation is that if you place the healthy leg of the patient next to the affected one, it will be longer.
The thigh will be shorter than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend his leg at the knee. The place that is above the knee will be swollen and swollen, clearly before the head of the thigh has reached there.
The sign of one who has dislocated outward is that his symptoms are the opposite of these symptoms. And the sign of one who has dislocated forward is that he extends his leg completely, except that he cannot bend it without pain in the knee, and even if he tries to walk, he cannot do so forward.
And he retains his urine and becomes constipated, and when walking, his gait is on the heels, and a sign of that is that he turns his face backwards, not extending the knee, nor can he flex it before flexing the heel, and his leg is also shorter than the other.
And the heel is contracted, and the head of the thigh at the location of the tendon is visible. As for reversing this deformity, if it has persisted with its owner and he did not attempt to reverse it and remained in his condition, there is no treatment for it.
It should not be exposed to it, and as for the one whose deformity is recent, whether it is from any of the four types of deformities, hasten to make the joint supple and move it inward and outward gently and easily, perhaps.
He returned and did not need anything other than that for treatment. If he does not return like this, it is necessary to bring a strong servant who extends his leg from below either with his hands or with straps tied above the knee on the leg, and another servant lifts him from above.
He inserts his hand from under the armpit, then tightens soft bandages around the base of the thigh, and another servant holds the ends of the bandages one-third down, either from the front towards the groin or from behind towards the back.
And he lifts all of them at once until the patient is raised from the ground and remains hanging, for this type of lifting is common to the four types, so if the traction returns as we said, otherwise there must be a specific treatment for each type that I mentioned.
If the traction is towards the inside, it is necessary for the patient to lie on his sound side, then bandages are placed around the base of the thigh between the head of the femur and the place under the armpit.
Then the band is extended upwards from the armpit to the highest part of the body towards the groin, then another servant takes hold with strong arms and embraces the affected thigh in its hot spot and extends it outward with a strong traction, for it returns to its place.
And this type is easier than the other types of treatment that involve returning this limb, so if it becomes difficult for you and you are not able to enter with this type of treatment, it is necessary to bind both feet of the patient together with a strong soft bandage on the ankles and on the knees.
After each of the afflicted, there is a measure of four hand spans, and the afflicted leg is more extended than the other by two hand spans. Then he ties the afflicted person to the top of the wooden frame in the house, and there is a distance of two arm lengths from the ground.
Then, order a strong young man to grasp the thigh, and another young man should hold onto the afflicted person. The other young man who is grasping the thigh should then push with force, for the dislocation returns to its place quickly. However, if it is a specific case of dislocation outside.
It is necessary for the afflicted to lie on the bed in the manner described for those with a clubfoot, and the strap should be tightened around his afflicted leg and chest. Then, one piece of wood is placed by his feet and the other at his head, and an additional piece of wood is firmly placed in the middle of the bed.
A wet bandage has been wrapped around it so that the afflicted person is not harmed, and the piece of wood is placed between his thighs to prevent it from moving down during the extension. Then each servant extends in his direction, and the physician adjusts the cord with his hands, for it responds to returning.
And otherwise, place the board on him and press it as we mentioned in the tumor section, except that the patient's face should be towards his healthy side. If the extraction is to the front, it is necessary for the patient's leg to be extended while he is on this description with his eyes open to the carpenter.
The physician places the palm of his right hand on the patient's armpit, then presses it with the other hand, and at the same time extends the pressure downwards to the knee area. If the extraction is towards the back, the patient should not be extended downwards.
And he should be raised off the ground, rather he must be placed on a hard object. Also, his head and neck should be extended outward according to the inclination we mentioned for him with the carpenter while he is on his back, and the bandages tightened.
As we said, and the board should also be used to press on the place where the joint protruded. When the dislocation of the wrist returns to its proper position, a sign of its return will not be hidden from you, which is extending the patient's leg.
If you see them both level and the patient can bend the leg and straighten it without difficulty, then know that the limb has returned to its proper place. At that time, bind the thighs together and carry the splint, and tighten the bandage so that the bandage does not move in any direction.
And it is necessary for the patient to rest for three or four days. Then unbind the bandage and the splint, and straighten the leg with the other one. If you see them both even, then know that the fracture has healed, and release the patient for walking. But if you notice any instability,
then return and bind it again, and tighten it as you did the first time, and leave it for another three days. Then unbind it and let him walk on it gradually until he is completely well, God willing.
Chapter Two: The Thirtieth
On the treatment of fractures of the shinbone.
The shinbone can fracture in three ways: inward, outward, and downward (meaning backward), but it does not fracture forward toward the foot. The sign of its fracture is that the patient cannot bring his leg to his thigh.
If it does not adhere to the thigh, know that the hip is dislocated. It is necessary for all those who treat this condition that the patient sits with their legs extended if they are able, and a servant sits behind him to hold his waist and pull him slightly backward, then you sit on his thigh.
And press your back against his face, and place his leg between yours, then grasp his hip with both hands and interlace them on his hip, then firmly press the side of his hip with your hand, while another servant extends his leg until the hip returns to its place.
And the sign of its return is that the leg adheres to the thigh gently and willingly, then compress it and make the leg adhere to the thigh, then bind them together with three or four bandages for three days or four, then release them, and he should only walk a little each day until he is strengthened.
If you find it difficult to return it as described, then use the strong traction with the bandages that we have described for treating luxations until it returns.
Chapter Thirty-Three.
In the treatment of fracture of the femur.
The femur may fracture easily and completely, and its fracture can be either inward or outward. The sign of its fracture is that the femur appears prominently swollen towards the direction it was fractured into.
As for the treatment of its dislocation, it is easy to reduce it by straightening it with the hands until it returns. As for treating it if it fractures completely, it is necessary that the patient sits and a strong servant holds him from behind his back in the middle.
Then, with your right hand, grasp his leg from above and with your left hand from below the ankle. Then pull the leg to you with your right hand, then with your left two times. Then extend it with your left hand and push the tip of the foot towards the shin with your right hand without force.
Do this twice as described, then in the third time, push the tip of the foot towards the shin while pulling on the ankle. If it returns in one or two attempts in this manner and you see the foot is level, it will return. Otherwise, repeat the procedure, for it will return.
The patient is prevented from returning as described, and otherwise, the patient lies on their back on the ground, and a pit is dug in the ground, very firm so that it falls between his thighs, and he is covered with a blanket to avoid hurting the patient, then an attendant holds his thigh.
Then another attendant extends the patient's leg, either with his hands or with a rope tied around the patient's neck. Each attendant then extends in the opposite direction of their partner, and the stretcher remains upright between the patient's thighs to prevent the body from being pulled down during the extension. Then the physician straightens the dislocation with his hands.
Another attendant holds the sound ankle down, for the dislocation returns quickly. If the dislocation returns and its correct return is evident to you, carry the splint and bandage and bind it firmly with strong bands, and fix the foot with a bandage below, and beware of the nerve that is above the heel from behind.
So that the bandage is not too tight and hurts him, then leave it for two or three days; if the bandage loosens, tighten it again and release it on the third or fourth day, and prevent the patient from walking for forty days.
If the patient walked before this time, it is not guaranteed that the fracture will heal and will not become infected or reject treatment afterward. Therefore, if a hot swelling appears, it is necessary to use what we have described in other treatments and bandages until it subsides.
Chapter Forty-Three
In the treatment of fractures of the fingers.
It is necessary to align what is broken from it by a short distance without force, as this is not difficult but rather easy. If the fracture is in some of the toes on the back of the foot, the patient should place his foot on a level surface of the ground.
Or on a board while standing as if walking. Then, you should place your foot on what is broken from those joints and then press with your foot with force until it returns and you see that it has straightened without any apparent defect.
Then place a board under the sole of his foot, which should hold the entire foot and have two ends. Then tie it tightly and securely with three bands for three days, then remove them and prevent him from walking for many days until the bone heals and recovery is assured, God willing.
Chapter Fifty-Three
Concerning the types of fracture that occur with wounding, or with breaking, or both together.
When this occurs and the treatment is delayed and neglected, death often follows.
Therefore, it is not appropriate for anyone to undertake the treatment of such a condition except one who is skilled in the art, long-experienced, delicate, compassionate, careful, not impulsive or reckless, and that he employs in the beginning only those drugs which soothe inflamed wounds and delivers the patient.
By the power of God, except that which I hoped for its safety from disease with mildness of illness and you showed some hope in it, so return it to your service immediately at the beginning of the matter before the hot inflammation occurs.
So if the limb returns to its proper position, then use the remedy that soothes inflamed wounds and treat the wound with dry dressings suitable for it; but if the fracture is accompanied by a break in the bone with loose splinters, remove them. And follow in that what we have mentioned in the section on simple diseases as preceding in its place.
And exert your effort and purify yourself from entering the path of illusions as I have advised you, so that it remains for your honor and submits to your opinion, God willing.
