O you, most dear son, I have completed this book which is the end of the knowledge of medicine along with its fulfillment, and have finished it through its explanations and declarations. And it has come to me in a vision that I should complete it with this treatise which is part of the work of hands, namely 'surgery'.
And because the work of hands is neglected in our region and entirely abandoned everywhere, therefore its science has perished and been destroyed, and there remains nothing except small descriptions in books that hands have moved. And from this has come error and foolishness, intentions are closed off, and science is disregarded.
But it seems to me that I wish to revive it together with the composition of this treatise according to the way of explanation and declaration and abbreviation; and I will bring along the forms of cauterizing irons and other tools of the work with their arrangement and preparation as is necessary.
And because there are no good masters of surgery found in our time, the art of medicine has been neglected. And therefore whoever undertakes it must climb up into the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the judgment of limbs, and their forms and connections and separations, and has knowledge of bones and nerves and muscles and the number of joints, and the movement and course of veins both moving and resting, and where they originate.
And therefore Hippocrates said that "name is nothing without deed," and in the art of surgery, it is even more so.
At the beginning of this book we told you that whoever is not acquainted with what has been said previously should guard himself lest he fall into error and kill men, just as I have often seen many people who involve themselves in this science but abandon their knowledge and experience.
For I saw a foolish surgeon who cut off one aposteme of scrofula on the neck of a woman and cut the arteries of her neck; wherefore so much blood issued forth that the woman fell dead in his hands.
And I saw another surgeon who drew out a stone from the bladder of a man, and the stone was large; so he took with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
And I had already been called for to remove it, and saw the condition of the sick man and the size of the stone, and knew well that if he were cut open, he would surely die.
And I saw another surgeon who took in hand to cure a duke of our land who had his leg broken, and with the breaking there was also a wound. And the surgeon, full of ignorance, tied up the break on top of the wound with strong bandages, and did not leave any calamine for the wound, and left him thus for one term; and commanded that he should not untie it. And so it remained until the leg became completely swollen and the foot went to ruin.
I was called to go to him, and I hurried to come and untie the leg; and when I had undone it, he was at peace and felt no pain.
But all the way corruption had already spread throughout the limb, and it could not be healed; and corruption did not cease to advance through the limb until the whole limb was lost.
And I saw another surgeon who drained an inflamed black apostume and then cauterized it out of the malice of his mastery.
For a chancre, when it is purged of melancholic humor, should not be touched with iron unless it is in such a place that all that is corrupted can be completely removed.
And therefore, dear son, you should know that surgery is divided into two parts: namely the work where there is danger in many situations, and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
Therefore you should guard yourself so that foolish surgeons cannot speak ill of you.
So take up your arms confidently, and undertake your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you may come to salvation and be praised; and leave dangerous diseases to those with great skill; and put aside your arms from what causes you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you may come from this world to the other of glory.
Galen said in some of his admonitions: "Do not undertake bad diseases lest you be called a foolish surgeon."
I have divided this treatise into three chapters.
The first chapter is of fire cauteries and of medicinal cauteries, and it is ordered from the head down to the feet; and of the forms of instruments and of the tools for cauterizing, and of all that is necessary in the work.
The second chapter is of cutting and piercing, and of cupping glasses and wounds, and of extracting splinters, and similar things; and it is ordered with the forms of instruments.
The third chapter is of reducing dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it is ordered from the head down to the feet, with the forms of instruments.
Before we remember the work, it is necessary that I tell you about the quality of each temperament and its harm.
I say that the quality of each temperament and its harm is the longest speech and most subtle science and secret response. And many wise men spoke about this, and agreed on it. But they allowed me few words because I fear lengthiness.
I say that cautery helps universally every temperament where there is matter, except for two temperaments: namely hot temperament without matter and dry temperament without matter.
In hot and dry temperaments together with matter, some say that cautery is great help in this case, while others say the opposite: that cautery does not help against diseases caused by heat and dryness.
Because the nature of fire is hot, and should not be used to treat hot illnesses with heat or dryness; and he who says the contrary claims that a cautery provides great help in treating hot and dry diseases that occur in the body. But when you compare the body and its moisture to the temperament of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this word. For I have found it so by experience.
And let no one venture to meddle therein who has not proven it and knows by long experience the art of cauteries, and the diversity of temperaments in men, and their dispositions, causes of diseases, seasons and climates; we are not afraid of other temperaments, especially cold and moist diseases. And all physicians agreed on the use of cauteries.
Know this, son, that fire together with cautery is among the secrets of cures and has greater virtue than a cautery made from burning medicine.
For fire is simple, and does not go beyond the member that is burned, and does no harm to any other member if it could.
Burning medicines spread from one member to another by scattering and cause severe inflammation in the member; sometimes they even kill the sick person.
Fire due to its heat and the goodness of its substance does not harm if there is no excess.
And this I have found by experience and by the length of service and study that I have devoted to the art, and was true in its entirety. And therefore I apologize for the length of my speech, for it does not please me to deprive you of the secret that is contained in fire and the quality of the work, how it expels diseases from the body, as philosophers demonstrate. Now receive it in your thoughts.
And know, son, that they agreed on what time cauteries should be made and chose priests for this purpose.
And I say that cautery is suitable at all times, because nighttime pains are alleviated by its help. And especially when cauteries are necessary for sudden and urgent pains that cannot wait until a more serious condition arises in the member.
And never think, dear son, as foolish physicians do; for a disease that is healed by cautery has no recurrence. And they say so; but it is not entirely true because cauteries are not medicine that changes the temperament and dries up the humors that cause pain, and they are worth more than medicine because of their speed and effectiveness in their work and their mastery.
And it is possible that a disease may come sometimes according to the temperament of the sick person and the location of the disease and its virtue. And superfluities are gathered in him through the acquisition of foods and similar things except for cauteries administered where there is little excess or moisture, such as cauteries for toothache, etc., and this pain does not return; but this happens rarely.
And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the last resort of medicine, and it is true; but they do not believe that cauteries are worth anything after medicine. Their intentions are false because when we administer remedies in any disease and they are ineffective then we apply cauteries, which are effective. Therefore it is clear that cauteries are the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish physicians.
The ancients said that cauteries made of gold are milder than those made of iron and they said this only because of the quality of gold and its heat. And they said that the place where a cautery is applied does not cause decay; but this is not true for I have proven it, and I found that it is true in some people. And cauteries made of gold are milder than those made of iron, as they said.
And yet when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know exactly when it is hot because of the color of the gold and it quickly cools down. And if it is heated too much, it melts in the fire, so there are many obstacles to this method.
And for this reason we use iron cauteries that we have better prepared for our work.
Now I have arranged this chapter from top to bottom so that the way may be easier to find.
Of olive oil cautery
This cautery is useful for moisture and coldness on the brain, and there are two kinds made:
The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purged by a dissolving medicine moistening the head for three or four nights, according to what the virtue, age, and constitution of the patient can withstand; and then perform the cautery behind the head of the patient.
Then make the patient sit cross-legged between your hands, with their hands on their knees; after that place the root of your palm on the root of their nose between their two eyebrows; and where your middle fingers come together, then burn and cauterize it using the cautery called "olivare", which is the form:
**And place him on the marked spot with ink, and do it descendingly and squeezing your hand bit by bit while twisting. Then lift your hand gently, and reward the spot if you see the bone even a little; and if you do not see it, then recommence the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you; afterwards take one handful of lint, and put in soft cotton inside, and place on the spot, and leave it for three days; afterwards put on softened cotton in butter; and leave it on until the inflammation is gone; afterwards dress the wound with the ointment called 'tetrafarmaçon' until it heals.**
**And the elders said that when a wound remains open longer, it discharges more, and therefore this is why I assist it.**
"And some of these say that one should allow the cautery to burn until part of the bone is charred, and then remove what has been burnt off the bone, and it should be healed."
"Others say that one should place the cautery strongly enough so as to scrape off from the bone about as much as women use in their spindles, for this will allow humors to flow out; and the wound should be kept open for a long time; afterwards it must be healed and dressed."
"And these two methods of cautery do not seem to me to be good in every way, except perhaps for some people who are afraid; and I believe that one should leave it alone. For the flesh is weakened by continuous solutions from nature, as we witness in other limbs; and even when the flesh of the sick person is weak by nature, the first application of cautery seems to me to be milder and safer, and this is what I now use in practice."
"from the ancient pain of the head"
"When pain comes to the whole head and lasts for a long time, then the sick person should use herbs and pills called "cochie", and also remedies for headaches, oils, and plasters. And if one makes the cautery that we have mentioned before, it is of no avail."
"Be careful if the flesh of the sick person is strong by nature and not too cold; then one should apply the cautery mentioned above a little below that cautery."
"Afterwards, apply the cautery to each horn of the head up to the bone, as we have said before, and make one cautery at the place called "vessels"; this is where cupping glasses are placed. And lift your hand so that you do not see down to the bone: the sick person feels much greater pain in this cautery than in the others, and I will speak of it elsewhere; and the cauteries on the horns must be more subtle than those used for the middle of the head, and this is how it should be done:"
"of the cautery of the head" When sudden pain comes to a part of the head, and the illness extends as far as the eye, and the head is purged by moistifying medicines, and one has made the other treatments that I have mentioned in the division of illnesses, but nothing helps: then apply cauteries in two ways, namely with medicine and fire.
The cautery with hot medicine is done thus: take a garlic clove and remove its skin, crush it into two parts with two kernels, then make an incision on the temple where the pain is felt in such a way that you can place the garlic clove underneath the skin; and when it has been placed, tie it firmly and leave it like that for twelve hours; then untie it and remove the garlic clove, leaving the wound open like that for two or three days; then put on cotton soaked in butter until it protrudes from the wound.
After the treatment with ointment has healed, and if you see that some burning medicines are needed, then use those that I have written about in the twelfth chapter treating burning medicines.
The cautery with iron is done in this way: Heat the cautery which has this shape:
And it is called "closed" because the head of the cautery is shaped like a closed loop with one curve, and in the middle there is a small opening. Place it on the painful spot and hold your hand steady while turning the fire slightly until half of the circle is burned; then lift your hand so that only the artery does not burn, which is located outside, allowing abundant blood to flow out.
Afterwards, apply cotton dipped in vinegar to the wound and leave it there for three days; then put on cotton soaked in butter and continue treating the wound with ointment until it heals. If you wish to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called "cultellare", which has a sharp point, be careful not to burn the artery in this migraine which is not ancient.
de migraine
When you are treating migraine as we have previously discussed in the divisions of illnesses, and it is not improving, and you see that neither cautery medicine nor iron cautery help, then it becomes necessary to heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it turns white. Then place it on the painful spot and make a cut about half an inch long; lift your hand once and press firmly so as not to burn the artery or reach the bone; be careful not to damage the mandible which moves when chewing, and that only the nerve is exposed without causing paralysis or spasms; also beware of excessive bleeding from the artery when it is cut, especially for those who are not used to this procedure. Leave the wound open in mid-air; but I will tell you how to stop bleeding when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it is located in this book.
And if you see that these cauteries are not helping the illness and the patient is suffering, then cauterize the wound on the head as we have discussed, and treat the wound until it heals. If you still see that there is no improvement, use the cautery described in the chapter on artery extraction with a cautery having two blades; this cautery is better and more helpful than the previous one.
Here is the French text for "of the pain of the ears due to cold":
When cold pain comes to the ear and one has opened medicinal solutions thereupon and other remedies that we have mentioned in the division, but the pain does not subside, then heat this cautery called "pointe"
After applying the cautery all around the ear that is suffering, or around both of them if the pain is on both sides, and remove it a little ways from the root of the ear after marking the spot with an "X"; then apply ten points around each ear; afterwards treat the area until it has healed.
Of the Torture of the Mouth
Tortures that must be treated by cautery are only those that move from the lungs, as we have said in our division of diseases; do not apply cautery to swellings caused by congestion and spasm of the nerves.
When you treat this swelling caused by phlegm from the lungs and nasal passages and gargarisms, and it does not improve, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, another a little way off the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips; place the cautery on the part that appears healthy, and make the cautery on the top of the ear a little below the horn of the head, and another on the temple as long as one's thumb; leave the cautery there until half of its width is burnt; this is the form of the cautery.
And this is the shape of the cautery that we have placed before you, but it is a little more subtle and the knife should be a little thicker; afterwards treat the area as I have said above until it has healed.
When apoplexy is chronic and you treat it as we have said, but there is no improvement and the patient has no fever, then apply four cauteries: two on the two horns of the head, one in the middle of the forehead, and one on the spot called "vessels" as we have mentioned before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach; treat them as we have said above.
Of litharge
For this disease, give the patient large laxatives and pills made of mondifyings for the brain; afterwards raise the head of the patient entirely, and place on the occupit the plaster of mustard which is written about in the treatise on plasters; and that is the manner of cautery: do it as I have said.
If he is healed in this way, good; but if not, apply three cauteries from the middle of the head down to the neck, and place two fingers' breadth between each cautery; treat it as you would others, and if there are any swellings, apply one cautery in the middle; and if necessary, apply two more on the two horns of the head, treating until healed. And these cauteries should be those called "olivary," as I have said before.
Of coldness of the head The head must be cleansed with laxatives and other remedies mentioned above. Then raise the patient's head, apply cauteries in the middle of the head, on each horn, one behind, and three on the spine of the neck; if more are needed, and the body is moist and the patient suffers greatly from a severe disease, apply four cauteries on the spine of the back, leaving them there until half of their width is burnt. Then raise your hand, treat until healed, using the cautery called "olivary" which we have mentioned before.
Of epilepsy
The person suffering from epilepsy should not use a fire cautery unless they are phlegmatic. It is necessary to first modify the brain with remedies and other treatments that we have mentioned in the previous division, especially when the patient is large and tolerant of difficult medical treatment.
And if it is a child who cannot tolerate this, perform gargling and chewing remedies that modify the brain frequently with good foods; afterwards, raise the head in the middle, and apply one cautery according to what we have said before, one on the vessel, and one on each horn; and if the patient is strong and tolerant, apply cauteries as I have said for those with paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauteries be made of olive oil according to the method that I have described.
If the patient is a child, apply one subtle cautery according to this manner:
When excesses or corrupt humors are present due to melancholy, then apply the cautery of many cauteries as we have said for those with paralysis.
And if the excess is inclining towards melancholy due to melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give them something to drink by which the brain may be cleansed, according to what is mentioned beforehand in the division.
Afterwards raise the head of the patient; afterwards take a well-made linen towel, shaped like a circle, and place it on the head; and let the patient sit cross-legged, and be held securely on all sides; after that present the linen cloth, and melt mutton tallow gently over fire until the dough can tolerate it; afterwards remove the circle from inside the head and allow it to cool; and do this for the patient once a week with other good governance until they are healed.
Or if you wish to perform the cautery by making several punctures along the entire length of the cautery, this manner of cautery moistens the brain further; and then place on it cotton soaked in butter and chicken fat.
of the water of the eyes When water comes first to the eyes with the signs that I have mentioned in the division, then begin by giving the patient something to drink that cleanses the head and guards against all moistures, and make them sweat or take several baths fasting.
After that, have the patient raise their head, and apply a cautery on the head, and apply two cauteries on the two temples if the descent of water is to both eyes together, or one cautery if the descent is to one eye; and cut all the veins and arteries that are under the heart with the cautery, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; and take care not to cause bleeding of blood, and if too much blood comes out, then stop it with such power as you have.
And I will teach you how to extract the arteries and how to incise the cautery, and how you should stop it; and sometimes a cautery or branding iron is applied under the two rear bones.
of the body of tears
When the tears from the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins or near the arteries that are visible on the surface of the head, and it is seen that they are cold humid excesses, then apply the cautery as I have mentioned at the beginning of the description of water descending to the eyes: one cautery on the head, and two cauteries on the two temples, and two cauteries or branding irons under the two rear bones; and if more is needed, then cauterize carefully above the eyebrow with several small cauteries.
of the body of tears within the eyes
When you treat it according to what we have said in the division and it does not help, then give the patient three roasted pigeons to drink. After that, raise the head of the patient, and apply a cautery with olive oil in the middle of the eyebrow; and apply two cauteries called "clavilis" on the two eyebrows, a little below the eyebrows; and take care not to cut the artery. And this is the shape of the cautery that is called "clavilis":
When the membrane of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery that is called "olivare". Here is its shape:
And if you wish to do so, apply two cauteries on the two eyebrows as long as the eyebrows themselves; and do not let your hand linger there except until about one-third of the membrane is burned, according to the manner that I have mentioned.
of the hair that points the eye Sometimes it happens that the hair of the eyes turns inward and points at the eye, and in this case cauteries are applied in two ways: either by fire or by burning medicine.
For the cautery by fire, command the patient to let their hair grow long and even; and if it points at its origin, pull the eyelids so that they do not move until the hair grows.
When the hair has grown and is even, then have the patient lie down in your bed. Then place on the membrane of the eye a shape that is like the leaf of a myrtle plant, with the beginning of the sign near the hair; then place cotton moistened in egg white and powdered musk on the eye, then heat the cautery whose shape is as follows:
Then cauterize on the shape that you have marked little by little many times until the heart is burned there. The sign of the work's health is that you see the membrane retreat and the hair stand up pointing at the eye. Then lift your hand and let it be like this for three days, then place cotton moistened in butter until the burning is healed; after that, treat with ointment until it is healthy.
And if afterwards the hair comes back and the membrane is softened again, then start the cautery on that same spot as you did first. And if the hair falls out, then cauterize until the membrane rises to its natural place and is even, so that the hair does not point at the eye.
The cautery by burning medicine is done by commanding the patient to let their hair grow long and even. Then make a shape out of parchment like the leaf of a myrtle plant. Then take three ounces each of French soap and quicklime, grind them together well, and use it immediately so that it does not cool down. Then spread it on the shape you have made like the leaf of a myrtle plant and place it on the membrane of the eye. If the disease is in one eye only, work on one; if it is in both, work on both. Place cotton moistened in egg white under the eye. Have the patient lie down in your bed and place your two fingers on the medicine, pressing a little each time that the patient feels the bite of the medicine, for they feel the bite just as with fire. When you have done this for some time, then remove the medicine from your finger. "And when the cauterization has passed, then lift up the affected area, and observe if you see that the paper has lifted up as it would have been by constraint of fire or by incision; and if it is so, then all is well. If not, then apply more medicine to the spot where the medicine had not opened, until your work is even and your eyes are sharp; then place cotton moistened in butter over it until the burning sensation has subsided, afterwards cleanse the affected area with ointment called 'dyafenis' and others until it is healed."
"And if it is necessary that you take great care in your work to ensure that no medicine falls into the eyes. And if the paper becomes soft afterwards, and the hair stands up on end, then recommence applying the medicine onto that spot where the paper has softened properly, just as you did before; afterwards cleanse it until it is healed; this is the form of the poultice for burns."
"And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and smallness, and according to this you should adjust your procedures; do not follow the straight path blindly for whoever studies this art."
The translation of "de la cure de fistule par cautere" is:
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not help at all, then you must perform a cautery on it according to this manner.
Command the patient to put their head in your hand, and hold their head between your hands so that it does not move or turn. After this, apply moist cotton with egg whites or leek juice on their eye. Then heat the cautery which is shaped like a vaulted feather, ensuring that the tip of the cautery touches the head. If you see fit, point the cautery from one end to the other, like a tent. However, the raised part of the cautery is useful for your work.
After that, press the fistula if it is open and remove the pus and dry it. If it is closed, make an incision and release the bowels. Then apply the hot cautery firmly, holding your hand on the part of the cautery near the eye, ensuring that your hand does not slip. Place the cautery in the fat around the eye until corruption occurs.
If you reach the bone at the beginning of the cautery, it would be good. If not, repeat the cautery once more and even a third time if necessary, then leave it for three days. After that, apply moist cotton with butter and dress the wound with a drying ointment until it is healed. If after forty days it has not healed, apply a corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed. Then treat according to what is written in its chapter.
There is another method of cauterizing a fistula which none of the ancients mentioned. Here it is: "And they pour one-and-a-half ounces of lead; and hold your hand firmly over the wound, ensuring that the invalid does not move or twitch, so that the molten lead does not run into his eye. It is necessary to place moistened cotton wool in front of the eye, dipped in egg whites or milk: the lead will adhere to its place and heal miraculously."
"If the fistula has been healed by the cauterization we have mentioned, that is good. If not, then it is necessary to administer a needle puncture and bring the fistula back into its proper place in the flesh according to what is necessary."
"cracks in lips" "Often, cracks in the lips called 'splits' occur, especially on children's lips."
"If you treat these cracks according to what we have said in divisions and the treatment does not work, then heat a small cautery knife according to this shape:"
"And press it quickly into these cracks until it reaches the bottom; afterwards, dress the wound with wax until it is healed."
"of the boil on the throat"
"When a boil comes at the root of the throat or in the tonsil, or on the palate or at the roots of the teeth, after it has become infected and rotten and becomes a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in divisions, but if it does not improve: then you must have a cautery according to the size of the fistula; afterwards, cut or puncture the fistula, and hold your hand until the hot iron reaches the bottom of it and on the back side; and do this once or twice, after that treat it as we have said in treatments until it is healed. And if it is cured thus, that is good. But if not, then you must uncover the area and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter."
"of the movement of teeth"
"When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth are moving, and you treat it with medicines but it does not help: then put the head of the sick person on your lap; afterwards heat the cautery whose shape will come hereafter in this manner so that you place a tube over the tooth; and put the hot cautery inside hastily, and hold your hand until the sick person feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; after that, remove your hand and recommence the cautery according to your desire; afterwards, let the sick person rinse their mouth with salted water, and keep it in for an hour and then spit it out."
"And in this way the tooth that was moving becomes fixed, and the softened gum is strengthened, and the corrupt moisture dries up."
"of toothache"
"When toothache comes from coldness, or there is coldness or wind, and treatments with medicine do not help, then it is necessary to use a cautery in two ways: a grease cautery and a fire cautery."
"A grease cautery is made in this way: you take wax and put it on an iron or brass spoon; afterwards, take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a needle, and dip it in boiling wax, and press it quickly onto the aching tooth and hold it until it cools; and do this often until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth. And if you see that wetting wool and cotton in cold wax does not help, then put hot iron on it until the fire reaches the tip of the tooth."
"A fire cautery together is made in this way: you take an iron or brass tube that is thick enough so that the fire does not reach the mouth of the sick person; afterwards, heat the cautery whose shape will come hereafter, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools. Do this often, for the pain will be gone the same day or the next day. And it is necessary that the sick person fills their mouth with good butter during the application of this cautery, and then spit it out. And this is the shape of the cautery:"
"When scrofula is caused by phlegm and cold moisture, and does not respond to treatments with medicine: then heat the hair cautery whose shape comes hereafter, and has two openings for the smoke to come out of the other side of the cautery; and put the hot cautery on the abscess once or twice until it reaches the base of the abscess. And if the abscess is small, use a cautery according to its size, and leave it like that for three days. And then put on moist cotton dipped in butter until the burning is gone. After that, treat the wound with ointments and dressings until it is healed."
"When moistures overcome the channels of the lungs, especially when this happens due to a cold complexion: then it is necessary that the sick person be first purged by solutive medicines. After that, make a cautery at the root of the throat, and make sure not to come too close to the throat, and do not burn the heart but only a little bit. Afterwards, make another cautery at the junction of the neck with the head of the spine, and use the cautery called 'clavile' whose shape we have before. And treat it like this until it is healed, as we said earlier."
"of cough" When all diseases of the lung are from cold moistures, and the patient has no fever or dry heat, and the disease is old, make two cauteries on the fleshy part in the places shown; and another cautery between the two breasts; and let the cautery called "clavile" be made according to the form mentioned above.
And if you see it, make a cautery with the point that is called "poins," of which the form is shown here in the disease of the ears; and let the points be up to thirty, or as many around [as necessary]. Afterward, cure the place according to what is said above, and let there be three cauteries each on this side:
"And because cauteries are lighter by making three at once."
"of the dislocation of the auxiliary ligament" When the head of the shoulder blade is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Afterward have the patient lie on their back and side; afterward lift the heart that is inside the chest with the two fingers of your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated within, then heat the cautery which has 2 inches until it reaches this form:
and cauterize the heart until it pierces through to the side, and there comes the figure of the cautery together with 4 cauteries; therefore the cautery is made with the cautery that has 3 inches, because the figures of cauterization are 6 cauteries; and the nerves are according to the fineness of a thread, and this is the form of the cautery that has 3 inches
And sometimes it is added onto this 1 nerve, therefore there are 8 cauteries.
Afterward place the cautery on with a bandage of cloth; afterward let the patient rest and do not move their limbs for some time until they are well comforted.
And if it is dislocated again afterward, which happens rarely, then make a cautery on the thickness of the clavicle cautery, or many cauteries pricking. For the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed, and the patient is healed.
Regarding the cautery for pleurisy
The ancients said that one must make for pleurisy cauteries of roots of aristolochia, and in this manner: take a root of aristolochia long and thick as you can find it, dry and also thick and also long like your two fingers; and moisten it with oil, and heat it at the fire, and cauterize 1 cautery between the armpit and the neck, and 2 small cauteries a little lower in the part that is under the beard; and 2 cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, leaning backward a little; and 1 cautery inside the breast, and another on the stomach, and 1 between the two shoulders, and 2 on the sides of the breast away from the cautery that is between the two shoulders; and do not press your hand, but rather do it openly as if you were smelling something.
And some ancients said that some people used a cautery like a razor, and they heat it and place it between the ribs until it reaches the aposteme; and if pain goes away, as we have said in the aposteme of the liver. But in this operation there is fear that the patient may die now, or that a fistula comes which cannot be healed.
Regarding mice
When you treat the disease of mice according to what we have said in the division of cures, and it does not help at all, then there are 3 good ways of cautery that can be used:
Of these [methods], one way is such that you make three cauteries, or four, lining up according to the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the liver cautery that we have described earlier; and do not press your hand on the entire cautery, and let the patient always lie on their back.
And another method of cautery is that you heat the cautery which has two nerves, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the heart which is located at the mouse, where the rib cage of the patient comes towards the left, and let the elevation by which you lift the heart be according to the height of the body, according to the length of the body, and the cauteries should be according to the width of the body.
After this, you insert the two inflamed nerves until the heart is pierced from the other side, and then pull out the cautery, and thus there will be four. And if you see fit, cauterize the entire cautery with three nerves. Afterwards, when the cure has thrown off decay for a long time, this is better than the other cures mentioned earlier.
Hydropsy
Cautery is not effective for hydropsy, except for the manner called "ascites". When you treat it according to the methods that we have described in divisions, and your cure does not help, then you must make four cauteries around the belly, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the mouse, two behind the back on the spine, and one near the breast; and let the cauteries be well close to the chest wall.
Afterwards, leave the cautery open for a long time to throw off decay, and do not neglect the care of the patient after the cautery; and healing will hasten, and both intentions will be together with the help of God.
The shape of the cautery for the belly should be like the key that we have shown before; and those for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what is depicted here.
Edema of the feet When the feet are swollen in a hydropsy patient and filled with yellow water, you must cauterize on the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring finger; lift your hand with the cautery without turning it. And do not enter too deep, thus all the yellow water will come out, and let the cauteries be according to this shape:
Afterwards make two cauteries on each leg, two on each leg at the point of the shinbone; and let one cautery be long before the knee and another behind it in the middle of the leg; leave the cauteries on for a long time without dressing until the wound closes; afterwards dress the other wounds as we have said.
Of the dislocation
When the stomach suffers from coldness and moisture to such an extent that the retentive and digestive virtue which is in the stomach and intestines is weakened, and cannot be cured by any means of treatment; and you see the patient suffering greatly but with strong vitality, then make one large cautery on the stomach according to what has been said above about the cautery of the stomach, at the circumcision cautery; and four small cauteries around the mouth at intervals of one small cautery's width, and two cauteries on the hips.
"And if you see the moistures abundant and the patient suffering, make them a cautery on the point, and one cautery on each side, and two small cauteries on the stomach near the large one, for the treatment is beneficial when there is good aid."
"Of the Cure of Hemorrhoids"
When the hemorrhoids are at the fundament, or one or more, and are old and consist of large amounts of cold and moist corrupted humors, and they are treated as we have said in sections, but it does not help, then perform cauteries: three on the spine of the back, that which is entirely below the nape of the neck and slopes downward in a triangular shape, and one cautery below the armpit. Two cauteries;
"And if you think that his stomach is cooled down and the food is not cooked, and swelling of the face is seen, then perform one large cautery on the stomach as mentioned earlier, and another on the liver, and another on the navel with a complete claw-shaped cautery; leave the cautery on for a long time. Afterward treat the wound until it is healed."
"Of the Fleshy Growth Called 'Thelul'"
When you remove the thelul, heat up the cautery that resembles a razor, and then place it burning hot on top of the removed thelul; hold your hand there until the cautery reaches the base of the vein, from which the blood flows. Do this once or twice, and if there is much thelul, cauterize each one as we have said earlier. Afterward treat them with beneficial ointments until they are healed; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the thelul, it will be more helpful.
"Of a Wound Poorly Treated"
When the patient cannot bear cutting or opening,
When a fistula forms and is filled with rottenness and corrupt moistures, you should probe it with a subtle tent throughout its entire length, ensuring that you know the depth of the tent's tip entirely. Afterwards, heat the cautery which resembles a razor, and insert it into the fistula according to the quantity that the tent has entered. Begin again with the cautery until all corrupt flesh is burned once or twice depending on necessity; be careful not to burn the nerves which lie nearby nor the large veins. If the fistula extends towards the bladder or intestines, beware of these areas and perform this only in a narrow space, ensuring that it does not permeate. Then heal the area until it is clean; if the wound is sealed and the matter has been removed for a long time, know then that the wound is entirely healed. But if the matter has not been removed, know that the wound is still festering, corrupted bone lies at its base; thus we will discuss this further in its own place.
Of the disease of the kidneys If pain of coldness comes upon the kidneys with great windiness and no desire for womanhood, then you should make a cautery upon the kidneys on either side using the clavicle-shaped cautery that we mentioned earlier; if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a line, and this will provide greater relief.
Of the bladder If the bladder is weak and moist from coldness and moisture such that the patient retains urine, then make a cautery on the outside upon the bladder where the pubic hair begins, one on the right side and one on the left, each cautery being as long as a hazelnut. And make one cautery on the back or two if necessary; let these cauteries be clavicle-shaped according to the form mentioned earlier.
Of the marrow When the womb is cold and moist,
Of the hair
When viscous moistures descend to the box of the hair, and therefore it moves from its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and the place of departure is found empty, then you should cauterize the patient above the box of the hair at one cautery like a circle, and draw lines before the place around the box as it curves so that the box is inside the circle; and let the cauteries be such as those with which the stomach was cauterized.
And if these cauteries are not present, make three cauteries of the olive-sized kind, and let the cauteries be also deep as all the hearts; and perform the cure until it is healthy.
Of the pain in the hair When pain comes in the box of the hair, and it is from coldness and moisture, and the patient is cured with what we have said in the division but the cure does not work, and the disease is old: then you must purge the patient of thick humors with foul-tasting pills or other good pills resembling them.
Afterwards do cautery; and the manner of cautery is in two ways: namely, together medicines burning, and cautery of fire. Cautery of fire is according to many manners, of which one is such that you cauterize above the box of the hair three triangular cauteries according to this form, and make them deep and large, and have between each cautery the width of two fingers, and let the cauteries be olive-sized; sometimes a cautery is made in the middle on top of the head for which there are four according to this form:
And if you see, then cauterize with the cautery of the circle that we have mentioned earlier in the division of the hair; but do it in such a way that the circle contains all the hair, and all the thickness of the heart is burned.
And this is the manner that one does in sciatica, when the pain holds in the hair and does not reach the thigh nor the leg. And if it reaches the thigh and the leg, make two cauteries where the patient says the pain holds, and one cautery above the ankle four fingers to the left side; and let the cauteries be scalpel-sized, and let the thickness of the heart be burned; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two fingers of the foot or near it, then cauterize where he feels the pain with three or four points at the cautery which is called "points".
And if it is necessary, do more; and if you know that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, make a cautery with the scalpel-sized or circular cautery, and be sure in all your cauteries not to leave too much of the cautery so that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and thus cause great harm and contraction to the patient.
And I myself have seen many who made cautery on the ankle of the foot and left too much so that the leg was all swollen, and the foot also, and it was pierced and corrupted entirely, and after a bellyache from which he died.
"And if the pain is in two parts at once, perform cautery on one and the other, according to this manner.
And let it be heated until it is entirely red and glowing hot, then place it on the sore of the sick person's hair, and turn it on the sound side; and cauterize once with one cautery, and leave it for three days; then make an emplaster of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time; afterwards treat with ointment until it is healed.
Albuzalam says that we use this cautery little because of its heat, and we see few who use it; nevertheless, those who can endure it find it a good cautery, where it applies.
of the pain in the back
When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or impact or from too great an evacuation, or from signs of spread cold matter, none of these signs warrant cauterization except for that which comes from infusion of cold matter.
It is necessary, after the patient has voided fetid pills or other such remedies, that one apply to his back where the pain resides three lines marked with ashes, and in each line five cauteries or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure; and let the cauteries be made according to the cautery called "pointe"; and if you wish, make three cauteries or four at the middle clavicle thus:
Many times this illness comes upon young children, and the sign of its onset is that they have narrow breathing when they stand up, and are afraid; and you find on the back spine and our appearance which comes upon the other spines.
When you see this, if you wish to cure it, then cauterize with the clavicle cautery according to this form:
So that the cautery grips each part of the spine evenly. And if you wish, then cauterize around the spine with the pointing cautery two lines or three, and let the points be near one another. Afterwards cure the wound until it is healed according to what we have said, and take care that you do not apply cautery in any place where there is inflammation next to a nerve.
of pain in the joints
When pain in the joints is caused by moistures that are spread throughout each limb of the body, and when pain comes on in the feet, which physicians properly call "podagry," and when it is from a cold cause and cannot be cured by medicines, then it is treated with cauteries in this manner: make many cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive oil according to this form
And if it is necessary to apply the cautery to the face of the foot, then make one cautery at each spot where they call a "point." And if the pains extend up to the knees and to other joints, and this happens often, then apply three or four cauteries on each knee, with each cautery being made of olive oil; and if you need more, then do more, but do not keep your hand outside longer than it takes for the thickness of a finger to be burned.
And if the pains extend down to the knee and back, then apply the cautery that we have spoken of in its chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, make points around the fossa .ii. lines; and if there remains any pain on the backs, then make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains extend to the elbows or shoulders, cauterize each part, and give good care to the sick person and take medicines. For if you give him good care and purge phlegm, he will be healed with the help of God.
Here is the chapter on the cautery of the face:
When rupture comes upon the sinews,
As long as it is white and throws off sparks. Then reset the bowels to their place; and the assistant hold his hand over them so they do not move back; and open the thighs of the patient well, and put a cushion and a servant under him on the thighs, and another one on the chest who holds his hands; then put the cautery on the sign until your whole hand is covered, and your right hand and your thumb until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, then start again until you arrive at the bone; and be careful that the bowel does not jump out when you are performing the cautery; so that you do not burn it; and so that by this the patient does not die, nor anything else bad.
And know that if you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your efforts are worth nothing. And it is necessary that the cauteries for children be subtle according to their size, and those for large people also large according to theirs; afterwards, on the third day, dress the wound of the cautery with butter until the scalding is removed; afterwards dress it with other ointments until it is healed, and have the patient lie on his back for forty days until the wound is well healed; and it is necessary that his bandages be left on for a long time so that the bowels do not jump out when he gets up to go to bed.
And after forty days, when he wants to get up, have him brought a well-made bandage, and wear it for another forty days; and have him rest well, so that he does not tire himself out too much, and beware of excess drinking and eating, and excessive laughter; and when this teaching is done, then he will be completely healed. And I will tell you later about the cure for cutting in its chapter. Here is how to perform a laparotomy:
When worms come into other bellies and are visible,
But first mark the spot of entry and draw a line along the width above the break, and another below it, and hold your hand amidst all the fire cautery. But the first cauteries are lighter and gentler.
"From ancient pain in a certain limb" When pain comes upon any limb, either from a fall or an injury, and this pain persists for a long time, and the remedies of medicine are ineffective, then it is necessary to cauterize with the cautery called "point", and the cauterization should be according to the length of the limb and its smallness, weakness, strength, location of twists, and degree of pain. If he is cured by the first cautery, that is good; if not, then begin another cautery on top of it, for it is customary for them to move to the limb that is nearby. Therefore, you should make as many cauteries as are necessary until the patient is healed.
"Of dislocation"
The boilings are helped sometimes by cautery with great aid, and even the sickness that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy. When you wish to cauterize it, beware if the sickness is at its beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not spread nor remain, and you doubt that corruption may seize all the sick person, then make five cauteries on top: one amidst the head towards the nape, and another towards the forehead at the end of the eyebrows; and two on the two horns, and one behind on the haunch; and leave your hand there until the cautery reaches the bone, and so that the scabs come out forth such that the vapors of the thick humors may exit; and cauterize it on the mouse according to what is before.
And if the measles are spread everywhere and they appear manifestly, then it is necessary that you cauterize them with these cauteries that we have said on top, and one cautery beneath the nape, and two cauteries on the spine of the neck, and six cauteries on the spine of the back, and one large one on the thigh and another beside it, and two on the two shoulders; and two on the ribs, and two on the tendons of the breast, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and beware of the nerves that are above the back calves so that you do not burn them; and sometimes make a cautery on the bone of the elbow, and one on the bone of the stomach, and one on the liver.
And know that the more cauteries you make, the more help you give, and the less profit there is; and know that the sick person does not feel pain from the cautery as the healthy do, because the body is already entirely corrupted. And it is necessary that the cauteries be large and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the manner of irons. Afterward, cure the place with barley flour and honey, and other remedies until they are healed.
The inflammation of the skin can occur due to various causes such as wounds, infections, or allergic reactions. Here are some possible treatments:
When swelling comes to any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and poultices, but it is not yet gone, then apply cauterization to the limb according to its size and thickness; and let the cautery be a little entering into the space of the heart. Then continue treating with ointments until it is healed. And sometimes cauterization is done on the hand, foot, back, at the exit of the nerve that moves the limb, and thus the swelling is removed. Nevertheless, no one should interfere unless they are knowledgeable about limbs and the exits of moving nerves in the body.
de Albares
When the disease called "albaras" has been contracted and medicine provides no relief, then cauterize it with a cautery that is somewhat deep, according to the size of the space in the heart, until the white blister is removed and its color changes. Then treat it with flour of fitches and lentils mixed with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood from a pigeon and blood from a thrush, each one part; mix everything together and tie it up with a cloth, apply it to the place until it heals.
Li cure de chancre par cautere est bonne chose et utile; quar quanque il est enveilli et eschauchié et dure longuement, il s’ensuit que la membre devient chee et que l’en est empeschie. Donc adonques le cauterise d’un cautere de fer ardant qui soit un pou entre en l’espés dou keur; puis ensi come li cautere est ostee, prent on une espice d’arsenic et de salemongier et les met ensemble, et fait on de la farine. Ensemble met on une partie de sanc dou chancre et une partie de sanc de chèvre ou de brebis, ou de sanc dou chevaulx ou de l’autel; puis prent on un peu de la farine d’arsenic et de salemongier et la mele a ces sanz et a oile roset. Et soit ceste medicine mise sus le chancre tant que li cautere y soit ostee et que li sanc dou chancre ne chei plus; puis fait on un emplestre de farine de fuces et de lentilles, de plantain et d’ache avec oile roset, et met on ceste medicina sur le chancre. Et quant il est tout gueris, adonques on l’envele et on mete y une medicine de vinaigre de vin blanc et de farine de fuces et de lentilles avec oile roset; et puis fait on une cautere plus petit que li autre, qui soit un pou entre en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure continue de la medicina de vinaigre et d’oile jusques a tant qu’il soit tout sanez.
When a chancre appears at the beginning, and you see it arrested, cauterize it with the cautery that seems like one circle, all around the edge of the chancre. And although wise men say that one should also make a cautery in the middle of the chancre; yet this does not seem good to me, for I fear that it may be ulcerated and corrupted, which I have already seen happen several times; and it is more advisable that it be cauterized around, with the cautery called 'circule', as we have said concerning many cauteries.
de l'enfleure qui ne peut meurer
When someone has an illness called "adubelati", and it takes a long time to heal, either because of the excess it produces or because of the water of the sick person when they are decrepit (that is, too old) and have little blood, or because of the air; and you see that it hastens to heal: then cauterize it all around with many small cauteries by pricking; afterwards leave it like this. For it will hasten to heal itself.
Et se tu la ves percir à tot le cautère,
"Put your hand in the middle of this illness called 'adubelati' so that the cautery pierces through the heart, and let it be such a cautery that the patient feels it leaving in such a manner that the course of corruption is alleviated. Afterwards, perform the treatment until it is perfectly healed."
"The treatment with fire by iron"
"There is another kind of illness called 'corrodens', which is nothing other than a consumption of the limb, for it consumes the limbs just as fire consumes dry logs. If you see this disease in a place that can tolerate cautery with fire, then heat small and large cauteries made of iron according to what is necessary for the affected area; afterwards cauterize all around until you remove all corruption, leaving nothing remaining that is corrupted. Then leave it for three days, and apply powdered plants with oil on the cauterized areas so as to remove the burns from fire and all corruption. After this treatment of ointments that generate flesh, if after three days healthy flesh does not grow, then recommence the cautery on what remains of the corrupted areas. This consumption has sometimes been cured by hot medicine instead of fire cautery; but nonetheless fire cautery is more helpful, as I have already said in the division: take as much as you need."
"Porrelz" refers to swellings or tumors. The phrase "des porrelz qui vienent as piez" means "swellings that come from the feet." Here's an example of how it might be used in a sentence:
Many times at the feet, from behind, a disease arises called "clos" according to our understanding, and it is a large broken thing that wounds the foot. And the cautery for this disease is in two ways: fire cautery and warm water cautery. The fire cautery is as follows: you heat one cauterizing iron like a pigeon's feather, made of good iron with subtle edges to fit around the nail on all sides; then put it hot onto the nail, turning your hand around the nail until it reaches the tip of the nail; leave it there for three days until it begins to ooze corruption; then make a poultice of wild mallows crushed with salt and lay it on overnight, and the nail will fall out and be removed from its roots. Then treat the area with soothing salve until it is clean.
And if they are converted from behind the body, and this happens often in hands and feet, you must bring hot water cautery; and it is done thus: take a cane of iron or bronze, or a pigeon's feather, place it on the nail and around it, that is to say for warts; then put the cane on so that it surrounds all around, then pour some hot water onto it and hold your hand tight, pressing your hand while turning until the edge of the cane reaches the root of the nail, allowing the hot water to find a deep path to the root; let the person suffer a little from the bite of the hot water for an hour; then leave it like that, and it will remove itself entirely with all its roots. Do this one after another until you have removed all those on the body, then treat them with salves that promote healing.
Here is a remedy for the trembling:
When one trembles due to coldness of nerves,
Stinking pimples
No matter how many times pustules appear on the body that are stinking, they come from large corrupted materials. As soon as they appear, one should cauterize each head of the pustule with a subtle cautery made of myrtle wood, whose tip has been heated in fire, or long root of aristologus, or lenticular cautery. And sometimes they are cauterized at the beginning when they appear, according to this method, and they cannot grow further afterwards but the excess from which they come is removed and they are healed; however, this should be done after the evacuation of blood.
When an artery is cut Many times there are great flows of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound which comes from behind, or at the incision of an aposteme, or at the cautery of the limb, and in similar things; and it is very grievous to smell.
And nevertheless when this occurs in someone, then hasten to place your index finger on the vein wound, and press strongly until the blood is pacified beneath your finger, and no drop emerges; then put into the fire olive oil cauteries of various sizes until all are red; then take one, either large or small according to the wound, and where the artery is routed, and place the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery there until the bleeding stops.
And if it happens that when you lift your finger from the vein and the cautery is extinguished, then quickly take another one of the cauteries that are in the fire.
And do not cease doing this one after the other until the bleeding is stopped; and beware that you do not burn the nerve that is nearby, and that no other mischief comes upon the patient; and know that when blood spurts from the artery, it cannot be well stopped even if the artery is large, unless it is done by one of the four methods we have spoken about: either by cautery, or by extraction if it is not treated, or by binding with strong thread, or by applying medicines that have power to stop bleeding; and let it be bound and pressed properly.
And do not think that stopping bleeding will be brought about by binding too tightly with bandages or putting hot things on it, or other similar things, for it profits little if at all.
And if this happens to someone and there is no physician or medicine present, then he should place his index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch it out well until it is firmly stopped over the wound and the vein; and do not move your finger, but moisten it with cold water often, as cold as possible, until the blood is congealed and thickened and stopped. And afterwards do what is necessary for cauteries and medicines.
In the first chapter we have told you about all diseases in which it is necessary to use cautery by fire or burning medicine, and also about the ointments, causes, instruments, and forms of cauteries. And I have placed that chapter from head to foot, and now I will go along the same path in this chapter so that one may more easily find what they are looking for.
And before I begin this one, dear friend, you must know that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first about cauteries, and therefore it requires greater caution.
For in the practice of this chapter there are many times evacuations of blood when opening veins, making incisions on tumors, and treating wounds, and extracting splinters, and making incisions on stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many people die from it.
"And I warn you that you should not undertake folly. For many kinds of people come to treatments, such as those who harm themselves so with their illness that they die easily due to the recklessness they find in their disease and the severity of their wickedness; and one must fear these." "And there are those who give their opinion and say: 'Wait, I am cured'; but the disease is deceitful. It is not necessary that you consent to these who come to you with this manner, but rather set greater value on your honor than on your greed, and do not open foolishly but wisely about those from whom you are certain, and whose service you can receive praise for; and use prediction and indication in treating your illnesses so that they may be converted to health. This will help you acquire good reputation, glory, and memory of praise."
"Dear son, our Lord grant you good understanding and uprightness, and if you wish to aspire to the holy inspiration of His hand, amen."
"And I have arranged this chapter for you in sections, divided into chapters according to what is before the chapter on cauterization, which I previously discussed from head to foot, so that you may find more easily what you need."
"head full of water"
"It is known that this illness often occurs in children during birth, when the baby's head is constrained too tightly, and sometimes it comes from an unknown cause."
"And I have never seen this illness except in children, and all those whom I have seen had hurried death. And therefore it seems to me that I should leave the art of treating such illnesses."
"And I saw one child whose head was filled with water, and the head grew larger each day until it could no longer support itself; and so much moisture gathered that the child died, and this moisture collected beneath the bone above the syphon, between the heart and the bone. And if the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the swelling is small, then make an incision in the middle of the head about two fingers long, as deep as the moisture extends; see here the shape of the scalpel:"
"If the moisture has grown more and the swelling is larger, then make two incisions in the form of a cross, according to this shape:"
"And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and you see that the angles of the head on each side are raised, and water flows out when you press it with your hand, but it does not return: then you must make three incisions in the head according to this manner:"
"And after the incision, draw out all the moisture. Then bind the incisions with bandages and powders, and apply vinegar and oil, leaving it like this for five days. Then remove the bindings, clean the wound with compresses and ointments, and let the head be moderately bound. Give the sick person dry food until the member is strengthened and healed."
"And another method of incision is to observe where the swelling of the tumor and the gathering of water appear, for sometimes it is in front, sometimes behind, sometimes on the right, and sometimes on the left."
"Therefore cut where the tumor appears and where the water is gathered, making the incision according to what you have the strength to do; but be careful not to injure the artery. If a vein bleeds, let it flow until the sick person dies from loss of blood and evacuation of moisture."
"de reume" translates to "of urine".
"When someone has an illness called 'catarra' in the ears or in the anus, and the illness is chronic, and medicinal treatment does not help, then the last resort is cauterization with the cutting of the two arteries."
"Therefore, when you are about to cut the arteries, have the sick person lean back his head; then rub the area with a rough cloth until the arteries appear. Then tie the sick person's neck tightly with one bandage. After that, look where the vein is located, and note that the openings of both veins are behind the ears, and they are not very large. Then make marks on the locations, and cut both veins with a sharp scalpel two fingers wide until you reach the bone, cutting along the width of the head."
"And if you see that you have not cut deep enough, slide the scalpel under the artery and cut it from above, cutting horizontally about two fingers wide."
"Once the vein is cut, blood flows out continuously."
"And if the artery does not appear, you must measure a distance of three fingers wide and mark it with ink. Then cut until you reach the bone. The amount of blood that should flow is about six ounces, but sometimes a little more or less depending on what the sick person can tolerate and how full the artery is. Then examine the wound: if there remains a point on the bone above the syphon, cut it off so that no tumor remains, then bind the wound and treat it with ointments until it heals."
"de emigraine" translates to "of migraine".
"When chronic migraine comes with severe catarrh, accompanied by moisture in the tears and heat in the temples, along with long-standing frenzy and similar symptoms, and medicinal treatment does not help, then we should cut the arteries of the temples and perform cauterization as described earlier."
"And the method of extracting them is as follows: have the sick person lean back his head and locate the artery that appears in the temple, since it can be felt by its pulsation. If it is not visible, tie the sick person's neck with several bandages, then rub the area with a rough cloth and apply warm water until the artery becomes clearly visible. Then take the scalpel shaped like this:"
"Then lightly scrape the skin until you reach the artery, then lift it up with forceps and carefully separate it from the tissues below it on both sides. If the artery is small, twist it off with a pair of tweezers, then cut it at that point according to its width. For if it is not cut, blood will not flow freely."
"And draw out six to nine ounces of blood. If the artery is large, tie it in two places with a strong doubled silk thread so that decay does not come before the wound heals and excessive bleeding occurs. Then cut off any excess tissue between the two ties at once. And if you wish, cauterize with the cautery knife until the bone is reached. This is the complete operation, provided that the patient has no fever and is of warm temperament."
"For cauterization helps to finish off moisture: it is especially helpful in cases involving moisture." "When extracting arteries, one should fill the wound with clean cotton and apply well-made bandages. When removing them, use dry dressings that promote tissue growth and change the bandages until it heals. If bleeding comes from the artery while you are working on it, quickly cauterize with a hot iron or apply vinegar to your hand to stop the flow of blood. If neither is available, place your thumb on the wound to temporarily stop the bleeding, then apply cold water until the bleeding stops, and apply pressure as needed. The most gentle and easiest method for extracting an artery is to cauterize its sheath with a cutting cautery that has two parts but is well-spaced apart so that it retains heat longer." For when the tools are too thin, they retain less heat. And there should be one inch of thick space between the two knives, and then when you have heated them on both sides, and brought the hot iron onto the bone until it reaches it, cut into the joint in two places; and let the two cuts be far apart from each other because this cautery is not solid all around; and that is the shape of the cautery.
of tears
When the tears from the eyes descend into the channels that are situated above the forehead, and no remedy helps, and you see the face of the patient reddening, and they feel a sensation like trembling on their forehead; and if the skin is thin and moist so that the hairs of the eyebrows have fallen out, and the eyebrows themselves are heated and scorched by the heat of the tears, then this cure is necessary.
And the ancients called it a "treatment for contusion", and this is what you should do to the patient who has this disease: first shave their eyebrows off from their forehead, then make three incisions on the forehead equally spaced according to its length; one of them should be two fingers wide going downwards until it reaches the nose, and the other two should be about two fingers apart above the eyebrows, making sure not to cut into the arteries that are located on either side above the eyebrows; keep your hand away from the continuation of the two jawbones, and each incision should be about three fingers wide.
Insert the spatula through the first incision from the temple to the second incision; then scrape out all the flesh that is between the two incisions up to the sinew that is on the bone. Then insert it again from the middle incision to the other second one, and finally remove this spatula.
Then insert into the first incision an instrument called a "cautery knife", which is very sharp on one side and smooth on the other without being sharp; this is its shape: Then place the sharp edge of the instrument towards the flesh near the bone, and the smooth edge towards the bone; insert it until it reaches the middle incision. Then cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes as far as the incision goes down to where the brain opens, then do the same in the middle incision up to the other end. Then remove blood equally and squeeze the place for the bleeding to stop. Then put a wick of old cotton into each incision, cover with cloths moistened in wine, oil and honey, and make sure that no inflammation occurs. On the third day, remove the stitches and bring plenty of sage tea; then apply basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other cures for wounds until healed.
Of the remedy for headaches
As for anyone who frequently has catarrh and you see their eyes are thin and small, with weakened vision and burnt-looking eyebrows; the hair falls out, there is a sharp pain in the head, and the patient sneezes; know from these symptoms that this matter and catarrh comes only from many veins, and the cure for it is this:
And the treatment is to have the patient lie on their back, then make a large incision down the middle of the forehead and another about one inch wide. Start from the left temple incision to the right temple, cutting all the way down to the bone; keep your hand away from the temporal nerves that move during chewing. Once the bone is exposed, wipe away all the blood with a sponge, then open up between the two lips of the incision and insert old cotton wool and linen strips. Then cover it with cloths moistened in wine and oil, and make sure no inflammation occurs. When healed, rub the bone until flesh begins to grow again, then apply drying agents that help tissue regeneration.
In this way: take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony (resin), mix them together to make a plaster; apply it to these wounds to help tissue regeneration.
of ear wax impaction
Everything that falls into the ears is one of these four things: grain, insect, small stone or similar object such as iron; seed, such as peas, beans, lentils; or flowing substance like water, honey and similar substances.
When a stone or other object falls into the ear that does not fit in the ear nor grow there, place the ear towards the sun. If you see the stone, drip some drops of violet oil or sesame oil, then help it come out; make the person sneeze with condis oil and plug their nostrils when they sneeze. Then wrap cloths or wool around the ear and tilt it upwards. Often this cure works; if not, use tweezers to remove it, here is its shape:
If it comes out with the tweezers, that's good. If not, use a small, delicate hook to remove it. If that doesn't work, make a cane of reed and insert its tip into the earhole firmly, then seal around the cane with soft wax so wind cannot enter with the cane; twist it strongly, for often it comes out this way. If not, take birdlime (bird glue), put some on an instrument sharpened for this purpose with cotton around it, press it onto the stone or whatever object it is, and twist it out. And if it does not come out from all the things we have mentioned, hurry to make an incision in the ear before inflammation and spasm occur. The method of the incision is as follows: first bleed the patient from the cephalic vein according to their strength, then have the patient sit between your hands with their ear facing upwards, and make a small semicircular incision at the root of the ear where it joins the head; expose the stone and remove it according to your ability, then suck it out quickly into your mouth. Then treat the wound until healed. And if it is grain inside and it swells up, help it come out. If it cannot come out, use a thin, delicate probe shaped like this:
and make an incision into the grain. But do not do this if you think the grain is moist due to ear moisture, until you have made many pieces of it; then remove it with tweezers and suck it out as we have said, so that the extraction is complete.
Therefore, when water flows into the ear, it is necessary for the patient to sneeze first and fill the ear with thick cotton. Then lie on that same ear where the water is. If it comes out by itself, good. If not, take many thin and light stones according to the length of your forearm, heat them a little over the fire; then have the patient put one stone in each hole of their ear and press it on one side with another stone placed on top of the first stone inside the ear; continue this process of placing stone upon stone until all the water comes out completely. If you see that the water has not come out completely, take a reed stalk and insert one end into the ear and the other end into the fire until it catches fire. Then repeat the process with more reeds until all the water comes out as we have said using stones.
When removing an animal, if it is small-bodied like a flea or similar creature, treat it as we have said in the division. But if it is large-bodied and can be felt, then bring about extraction with pincers; for this is the easiest thing to remove from the ear.
When extracting worms from the ears, when you treat them as we have said in the division and where to treat distillations, if the treatment does not help at all, then you must examine the ear in sunlight: if there are any worms visible, remove them with fine pincers. And if none are visible, take this instrument of which the shape is shown here
And let it be narrow at the bottom and wide at the top. And insert its finest tip into the ear according to the extent of the patient’s suffering, then suck strongly with the whole instrument; do this often until all the worms come out. And if they refuse to emerge, stuff cotton around the tube as I have said in the stone [text]. And if they still do not rise up as we have said, then administer distillations that the ancients have proven effective against worm infection; you will find them in the section on distillations. And apply your oils and medicines to the ear with this instrument, of which the shape is shown here as you see
And let it be made of silver or brass, narrow below with one small hole and wider above for distillation. And use a well-made brass instrument to press down inside the distillation. If you wish, take a razor and wrap cotton around its tip neatly; then pour your oil or juice into the tube, along with whatever medicines you desire. Insert the tube into the ear, then place the razor with all the cotton inside it, pressing gently until the oil has been distilled deep into the ear. Warm the distillation on the fire before distilling it into the ear, ensuring that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be effective if so.
Chapter on the Stopping of Ears
No child is born with no hole in their ears; this same thing happens to adults due to injury of the ear, or flesh born inside it. Sometimes these blockages are deep within the ear so they cannot be seen; and sometimes there is one small opening missing, which can still be seen well.
Therefore, that which comes deeply but cannot be seen is difficult to heal in many ways. However, for that which can be seen, it is necessary to put the patient's ear to the sun and look inside: if you see an obstruction appearing, then this is how one proceeds according to what is written here:
And may it be sharp and cutting both before and behind, entirely full, so that it does not wound the ear; if the obstruction is flesh grown on the body of the ear, hold it with fine tweezers, and cut it lightly until all that flesh is removed.
And if the obstruction is deeply embedded in the ear, take one fine razor blade and heat it slightly over the fire, then place it on the body of the ear. If you feel the obstruction from which the patient feels pain when listening, cut lightly, taking care not to harm the nerves of the ear; then place a wick according to the width of the hole in the ear and apply Egyptian ointment.
Do this for several days until the wound is healed, or take a wick and moisten it in rose water, sprinkle powdered vitriol upon it, and if you see that the ear is swollen, then remove the wick and insert another one moistened in cerote made from rose oil and wax, until the swelling is removed; then cure it until it is clean.
And if there is discharge of blood, take a sponge and wrap it in cold water, then place it on the ear, and use other remedies that stop the discharge of blood which are found in treatises on distillations.
That is to say, "of the flesh of the papers"
This is the remedy for those warts that come on the skin when it is moist and becomes dry, namely: extend them with tongs and tweezers, and cut them off at their roots with a spathula; then sprinkle powdered vitriol upon the wound.
And if warts burst open, cauterize them with a lenticular cautery, and cauterize after the incision so that nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Of hail
Many times there come on the skin certain things that resemble hail in shape and hardness, and therefore this disease is called "hail," and it is an assembly of thick moisture above and below the paper; the remedy is as follows: observe whether the hail moves to one side or another, which is easy to know; then make the incision wide, then scrape each part lightly, then take it with tweezers and cut it off. If you cannot cut it without piercing the skin a little, do not worry about the patient; and if the split is large, assemble it with stitches and cure it until it is healed; but if it is small, do not exert force, for ointments will soon restore it and make new flesh grow.
And if the hail descends inside the ear towards the upper part, turn back the skin and take it with tweezers and cut it off and press on both sides; and if the skin is separated by the incision, do not worry about it; and when the hail is cut off, wash the wound with salt water, and cure it with ointment that makes new flesh grow until the patient is healed.
Of the grease of the eyes
Exinach is a grease that is produced in the threads of the skin above, and this happens more often in children than in adults, and causes great discomfort to their eyes, making them have cataracts in the mornings, so they cannot look at sunlight because tears rush into their eyes; and therefore they lie on their backs all the time and sleep on their faces, and their skin under their eyebrows is moist with the swelling and appearance covered by exinach that opens onto the eye. And when you press on the wound with your fingers, you feel the exinach between them.
And the manner of the remedy is as follows: have the patient put his head in your hand; then take one linen cloth and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that contains exinach on each side, then place it upon him; then press with your fingers on both sides so that the exinach is gathered within the circle; then make an incision through the moisture with a sharp spathula in the middle, not wider than the wound made when pricking for smallpox; and cut deep into the skin until you reach the exinach; and according to various conditions, exinach comes out of the wound in the shape of a piece of white fat.
Then take out all at once a piece of chopped meat between your fingers behind and turn your hand to right and left until it is scattered; and make sure that you do not push into the wound, so that you do not reach the whole spatula up to the eye, so as not to scratch it.
And if the exinach does not appear at the beginning of the wound, then widen the wound slightly until it appears; then remove it as we have said, then moisten some linen cloths in oil and water and place them on the wound, and press with bandages.
And there are people who grind up sage and put it on to corrupt the moisture that remains; then cure them until they are healed. And if a hot boil appears on the wound, then cure it with poultices soothing until it is healed.
Of the hairs of the skin
When hairs are born on the skin joined together other than naturally and are intertwined, they cause harm to the eyes, causing diseases such as habitual tears and softening of the skin and clouding of the eye, so that it causes blindness. And there are four ways to treat this: either by cautery with fire together, or by watery medicine according to what is said above in the chapter on cautery, and it is done either by incision and stitching or by tweezers, according to what I will say.
You must put the patient's head in your hand, then turn back the skin of the eye with your left hand; if it is turned over, that's good; if not, stick a needle all the way through one thread above; and whether it is near the edge of the skin or where the hairs are joined together, pull one thread up to the top of the skin and turn it towards the razor; then cut into the part below the skin, below the joined hairs, with the whole spatula cutting from the large tear duct to the small one; then remove one thread, and place a small tent made of cotton and linen under the skin, then press on the skin a figure-eight shape like the mirror's fan, but nonetheless the figure must be according to the quantity that you see raising the skin that is divided by all.
And if one needs to cut a large amount of skin according to how much the skin is softened; then cut with the whole spatula above the two lines that you have marked, and start from the large tear duct to the small one; and let one of the cuts be close to the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then put tweezers into one of the angles of the wound, then scrape it all; then bring together the two lips with a stitch of a needle with all one thread of fine wool, and wipe away the blood, and make the excess threads stick on the two eyebrows using any sticky substance if you see fit to do so; and if not, pay no mind to it, then leave the stitches and threads for three or four days; then cure the wound without stitching with dry and constricting things, because the skin heals at the sewing of the wound and its joining together, but stitching is mute (as the ancients said), and this is the work without pair.
and there is another way: and it is that you mark the paper with a figure which is like the leaf of myrtle, as we have described, three times unfolded according to the form which is here
then cut those which are above the small squares evenly according to the form which is here
And if you lack the power to hold the tweezers and the thing is not even, then take a needle with one thread and put it into the figure; and put another thread beside the large ear, and the second thread beside the small one, and assemble the threads evenly between your two hands; then raise your hand evenly, and lift all the skin that you have marked, as we have described, then sew up the two lips of the wound with stitches, and cure it until it is healed; and if inflammation comes to your incision, then soothe it with cerote and similar soothing ointment
and sometimes it happens that the hair of the paper is turned: then you must use what we have said about the incision; but the stitching in one and the other is more refined.
The cure for canines is according to this form: and it is that you turn the paper and make an incision inside according to what I have said, and then make two canines by art, and two subtle strings as long as the paper and the width of the spatula; and cut at the two places where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other subtly onto what is above the paper of the eye, and strain the two canines from the two parts firmly; and leave it thus for a few days, and the skin that is strained will die and harden and wrinkle until it falls off by itself
If it takes too long, then cut it with some force, and cure it until it is healed; and when the wound is closed, and the paper has been lifted off, and the hairs will no longer point upwards; and this is the form of the two canines that you should make according to this figure and this quantity of length and width:
The operation is as follows: take a subtle needle and insert one soft and subtle silk thread into it; then tie the ends of the threads together tightly, and let the length of the threads be a palm's length; then prepare another subtle silk thread briefly and tie its end to the heads of the threads; then the patient puts his head in your hand; and stands near the sun so that the operation is clearly visible, for this is a subtle and delicate operation; then insert the needle all the way into the chase at the root of the hair next to it, and pierce the paper quickly until you pull it out through the natural hair; then pull out the hair up to the chase, and insert that hair if there are one or two or three or more hairs; then pull your hand away so that the hairs come out all the way along the chase in the paper with the natural hair.
And if the chase is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, then pull the chase down along all the thread that you have prepared, until the chase comes out of the hole above and you see it through the vision of the eye; then pull the chase and the thread, and close the eye and leave it closed for two or three days, until the hair settles in its place and flesh grows over it. And if the hairs are small, accompany one long natural eyebrow hair and lift it with that one where you leave it, so that it is lengthened and then lifted up.
About the corruption of the eye
When this disease called "aleacrati" or corruption comes to the eye, there are two ways it can happen: one natural and the other unnatural. And it happens suddenly from a wound, or from an incision or cautery, and from similar things.
And the manner of operating on it is that you cut open that scab and separate the lips of it, and put linen wicks inside it, and let them remain until it is healed; and do not use in its treatment things that dry out and constrict. For if you do this, the disease will return worse than before; but rather use softening things such as fenugreek; and rosewater or alum and linseed should be cooked, and ointments of diachylon melted in one of the oils, and wrap a wick around it, and treat it with these.
And the treasure of your treatment is that you should take care that it does not heal in the same shape as before; and these operations that we have mentioned are only remedies for this disease, so that it does not return in the same form as before.
About flesh growing in the eye
This disease that is underneath is truly called "axacrati", and it is natural and accidental. The accident comes from wounds and cuts and cauteries and similar things. And the manner of operating on it is that you take a needle with one doubled thread, and insert it into the flesh, and pierce it from the left tear duct to the right, so that the threads come out at both ends of the flesh; then stretch the flesh above along the entire needle, and cut it with a broad spatula.
And if the figure of the paper returns as it should be, that is good; but if not, then take a razor and put it into the cut, and turn the paper over, and make two cuts on either side inside the paper; and let the ends of the two cuts be at the two angles of the incision that you have cut, and make one angle so that when they are assembled, the figure is like the figure of a letter that has the name "gamma"; then remove that flesh according to the quantity that its sides are away from underneath, which supports the paper; then join the two separated parts together with a thread of wool; then treat it with those softening medicines and wicks that we have mentioned, until it is healed.
And if the disease comes from a cut or stitches or cautery, it is necessary to cut a full incision underneath the hairs of the paper, and according to what has been said before; then separate between the two lips of a wick, as I have said. And one must perform the operation according to the shape of the disease, for it is very diverse in shape, and wise masters devise all kinds of ways to make the figure return to its natural form. And the patient himself, according to what is necessary for the operation and instruments in various situations.
About the sudden tearing of the paper (i.e., the eyelid)
When this sudden tear happens to many people in such a way that the paper above (i.e., the eyelid) is stuck with the white of the eye, and it cannot move nor perform its natural functions, then you must put the point of a razor underneath the paper and lift it up; and stretch it with tweezers, until you cut what is adhering with a subtle spatula that is not too sharp nor too blunt, so that the patient can bear it and the spatula does not scratch the eye. And your incision should be light, so that the paper returns according to its natural shape. Then heal all that is assembled, and sometimes apply salt water to the eye, and rinse it with fresh water and collyrium; then put a linen wick between the paper and the eye, and put moistened wool in abduction of an egg on the eye. And after the third day, use collyrium and warm things until it is healed.
Of the nail of the eye
Thus there are two types of nail: one that is nerve-like and resembles a hard surface, and another that is not nerve-like but rather resembles congealed white moisture which cannot be grasped with tongs when touched by iron; both types begin near the large lacrimal gland and gradually cover the entire vision and movement of the eye.
The manner of the incision is as follows: the patient places their head in your hand and opens their eyes. Then raise the paper with your left hand, use small forceps to grasp the nail from above, insert a needle into it near its base, attach one horsehair or cow hair or ox hair to it along with a strong thread, double the tip of the needle slightly and pierce it through the entire nail, tie the nail with one thread, and pull it upwards. Then scrape off the skin on either side of the nail that covers the pupil and sclera using tweezers until you reach the top, then carefully cut away any remaining tissue at the base of the lacrimal gland using a fine scalpel and small forceps, leaving the natural flesh of the lacrimal gland intact so that tears do not flow abnormally afterwards. Sometimes the nail is extended only with the onion and thread, as we have said before; then scrape it off gently with a soft spatula. This is its shape:
And be careful not to touch the delicate skin with the spatula or cut it, and do not pierce the pupil. After the incision, gently apply a little crushed mallow leaves and a collyrium made from litharge to the eye, leaving it overnight. Then cure it daily until it is healed.
And if the nail is not nerve-like and you cannot insert the needle or grasp it with tweezers, then this condition of nails can often be cured with medicines. As I have described in the division, if you see any growths like this, carefully scrape them away using a spoon-shaped spatula according to this shape:
Then carefully lift the nail upwards and if you see that it does not decrease in size and the reason remains pressed down, distill from your mouth into the eye a collyrium made of litharge and red collyrium and crushed mallow leaves, and cover the eye overnight. Then resume the operation according to this same procedure until all of it has been removed.
If nothing stands in your way with the eye, such as a hot abscess, then apply the cautery, first treating the hot abscess until it is clean, then resume the work as before until it is clean.
And if the appearance of the flesh from the tear duct harms the eye greatly, then suspend it with a needle and cut off part but not all of it so that no tears flow into it; then apply red hot cauterization to the eye using litharge.
of the flesh that grows over the pupil
Sometimes some men are born with red flesh that covers the pupil and restrains on the papillae and twists towards the outside, appearing like a mole. The procedure is for the patient to place his head in your hand, then open his eyes wide, and grasp all of this flesh with suitable forceps and support it. Then cut off this first layer of flesh, and keep cutting until you reach the end, being careful not to injure the eye during the operation. The incision should be like the one we have described for the cuticle, as shown in the diagram below:
And when the incision is completed and all the flesh has been removed, then apply to the eye some crushed celandine seed or distill red collyrium and similar corrosive medicines onto it, and place cotton with egg white on top so that it is securely sealed against a hot abscess; and if anything remains, and hot blood overflows, and you doubt there is a hot abscess, then leave the eye alone and treat the abscess with things that calm a hot abscess; then return to your work until it is clean, and thus do for each piece of flesh joined onto the eye in this manner.
However, you must align the treatment of each weak eye with its natural condition; and as for accidents, in cases involving iron, do not put your hand into any of these operations until you see that these members can tolerate this operation.
of the veins of the eyes
Before these veins are red and covered over the eye, they tolerate their operation and weaken the eye every day. Therefore, it is necessary that you first examine whether the eye, in which there is a sebaceous cyst, is prominent, and if there is no other external disease besides the sebaceous cyst; then treat it in this manner: Have the patient place his head on your lap, then gently squeeze these veins with all your skill, and the onion should be doubled according to this form:
And two onions per degree in a single course according to this form:
Then carefully tie those veins with force and express the blood hour after hour until you see the veins bulge out of the eye. Be sure not to cut the eye with the points of the lancets, and perform this task at midday before the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you do not copiously spill those veins. And when you have done this, distill into the eye collyrium green and red to corrupt what is remaining from the sediment.
And if you are unable to tie everything in that hour, then make a plaster for the eye from things that calm the pain of the eyes, and leave it on for several days until the pain is alleviated and an assured hot boil has formed, then resume according to this manner that is written above until it is healed; and this is the form of the treatment:
of the fistula of the eye
The surgeon calls this "fistula": When you cure it by cauterization and with hot, burning medicine according to what I have said before, and yet it is not healed, then there is a trick in it that you should cut upon the boil where it must die, and remove all the moisture that is there until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed and you see the corruption and blackness there, then take all the instruments of which this form is composed; and it is called "sharp head" and should be made of hard iron one span long, pointed like a file as it is in the present form:
And place it on the level of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two fingers and press with your hand until you know that this corruption is removed. And do this several times, then restore the level with drying medicines.
If the level is solid and flesh grows, and the body of the brow is healed, but yet it remains like this for forty days, and it does not renew itself nor form a boil, and no bad accident occurs, know that it is healed. But if not, then there is no other remedy than to bring the fistula back to the opening of the nose according to this form: And it is that you uncover the bone again with iron and hot medicines, and when it is uncovered then take one awl according to this form, and let the head of the iron be at three angles, and let the shaft be tapered to the top as you see here:
Then place it on the bone near the lachrymal sac, and move your hand away from the eye a little bit, then turn the awl completely until it pierces the bone and you feel the sick person's breath through this because the wind will enter there if he holds his hand over his nose. And then restore the level with drying medicines, as I have instructed you, and when the flesh grows and the level hardens, then the matter goes to the nose; so it is a lighter thing for the sick person.
of the issue of the eye
When the eye opens completely on every side and there is no disturbance to the nose nor any narrowing, then you must bandage the sick person. Then clean him, then put cupping glasses or leeches on him without hurting him to suck, then place on the eye one linen made of aloeswood, storax, incense, and sarcocolla, and then compress the eye, and cover it with bandages and cloths. And the manner of the cloths is that you take soft cloths and fold each one four times, and then place one on top of the other according to the quantity that the eye needs. Then compress it with a hard bandage firmly, and recommence the cupping glasses to suck without hurting. Then remove the cupping glasses and leave the eye compressed day and night, and if the linen softens, then you must change it often. Then remove the linen after the day and night, and if you see the eye improving, that's good; but if not, then recommence the compression and the cloths and the linen and the cupping glasses until it is healed.
of a burst eyeball
When a burst occurs in the eye membrane and opens, and paper-like substances come out like a grain of resin, and it is frightening to see. Therefore if you see it happen, the procedure is as follows: You insert a needle into the root of the part below up to that above, then insert another needle where there is a double thread from the lachrymal sac; And make it pierce, and leave the first needle according to its position; Then tie off the place with the double thread and bind one part of the eye membrane tightly, then remove the needle and place damp linen moistened in egg white on the eye. And let it stay until the thread sticks with the eye membrane, then cure the eye with comforting substances until the wound is healed. And sometimes the wound is bound by the eye membrane on each side with a circle of cloth until it is healed.
And if the eye has a large appearance, then pierce it with a fine spatula that comes from the bottom of the eye, and correct the white humor and let the eye descend, and enter in immediately. Then remove it until it is healed.
of the eyelid
This illness called "alcunnati" appears only in the eye where the bow is assembled, resembling descending water, yet it is not water; and its manner of appearance during surgery is as follows: Make the patient sit on one prepared and upright seat, then take their head between your hands from both sides, and move it until you see the bow rise towards your eyes. Then insert it and let it rest without lowering or shaking the light, and let the patient see things as they usually do; if it does not lower beneath, know that it is water, and if the descent of the bow is not as we have said, then make the patient sit between your hands, then take the spatule and cut through the corneal membrane one point along the continuity of the conjunctiva with the cornea and the crown until the bow emerges. And when it has emerged, distill warm water mixed with honey into the eye, or water in which fennel has been boiled and honey, then treat it with another cure until it is healed.
Aigues of the eye
We have the likeness of aigues in the division and those that it is necessary to pierce; so we work according to health. It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from the light for the sun, and let them close the healthy eye tightly. Then place the paper of the eye in your left hand if the eye is left, or in your right hand if the eye is right. Then take in your right hand, if the eye is left, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand if the eye is right. Then place the point of the instrument near the crown at the thickness of a grain in that blenchor of the eye towards the lesser lachrymal part, then gently push the instrument called "almagda" and turn your hand until it pierces into the blenchor of the eye, and feel when almagda reaches the empty space. And it is necessary that the measure of the way of almagda be at the depth of the measure of the space which is from the pupil up to the end of the blackness; and this is the crown of the eye. Then you will see the bone in that paper through the clarity of the corneal tissue, and then put the instrument until it reaches where the aigue is, then express it through one way after another. If the aigue descends now, then the patient sees before them and the instrument in their eye.
Afterward let it rest a little, and if the water rises the second way, place the wick with the instrument, and when it is well inserted and does not rise anymore, then gently withdraw almagda by turning your hand little by little. Then put again some gemmeline oil in the eye and wipe away what was inside it. Then place a plug of wool or linen soaked in rose oil and egg yolk on the outside of the eye, and tie with the healthy eye. Now, and those who are of our time, we put comminuted wormwood powder with egg yolk on top.
And if almagda cannot enter the eye because of its hardness, for there are such men who have very hard eyes, then it is necessary that you take the instrument called "alberit", of which this is the form:
"And then carefully pierce the conjunctiva alone, but do not go too deep; make one subtle incision, then insert the almagda as we have said. At the completion of this procedure prepare for the patient one comfortable bed where he can lie on his back in two dark rooms; let him be deprived of all movements and take light foods only; let him not move his head neither to the right nor to the left, and let him be bound according to his condition until the third day; then untie him in that same dark house and examine his sight; when he sees some things well, then bind him again for seven days. And know that you must not do this at the time of cautery or after incision now, but it is necessary that you alleviate this, because water rises quickly."
"If swelling occurs in the eye before the seventh day, then untie it beforehand and use remedies that soothe inflammation. And when it has subsided, then uncover the sight and place on his face one piece of lint to cover for a few days, and let him remain always in that dark house. Then gradually leave the house bit by bit, and turn towards his dwelling; know that no disciples should interfere with this case."
"And one came to us from Iray who told us that in some lands they perform cauterization with almagda, where water is sucked out, but nevertheless I never saw any of this in our land, nor did I ever read about it in the books of the ancients; perhaps it is a new thing."
"And these are the likenesses of the forms of almagda so that those who do not know them may see them; and let them be made of pure silver:"
"And their fronts should have this same subtlety, and their backs should have three sharp angles."
Of flesh upon the thighs
Among the flesh on the thighs Sometimes there appear diverse tumors of which some seem like scorptions with many legs and others have flesh colored purple or soft flesh colored white. In that soft flesh however not purple, you should make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; open their nostrils and sprinkle powder on those tumors; then scrape off what you can hold with a sharp scalpel until you know that all the flesh has been removed
And if there remains any that cannot be scraped off, open it with one of the sharp instruments lightly so that nothing remains; and if it swells or becomes inflamed, treat it as needed; and if they are malignant ulcers, hurry to cauterize them until the blood is stopped and all the flesh removed, then sprinkle on the thighs powdered resin or wine
If the tumor opens and moisture comes as far as the palate, know that it is harmless; but if moisture does not flow as needed, know that there is new flesh growing into the bone above, do not use the instrument to cut: therefore you must insert one thread of thick linen moistened with hot water and seasoned with a half or less of a doit of incense on each end; and let the patient hold the thread in their tumor with moderate force and draw it out smelling until it comes through the nose into the mouth; children at school often do this, and it is easy for whoever wishes to do it; then hold the head that comes out of the nose with one hand and the other head that comes out of the mouth with the other hand and know which end is in front by feeling it. Do this until you know that the ends have rotted all the flesh, then pull out the thread, wipe off the blood, moisten the thread in Egyptian ointment and put it back into the tumor as before; do this for three days or more until the ointment has eaten away all the remaining flesh, then put a plaster of lead on it for some days until it is healed, and if there is need of drying medicines use them; and this is the form of the instrument used to purge the head, from which oils and medicines are distilled
And it is made of silver or brass resembling an open lamp like a tube with its conduit also; and if you wish, make a closed tube and fill the instrument to purge the head, having many holes at the top for holding it when heating the oil or any liquid.
To remove flesh from the nose
Many times there arises on the nose a disease called "telul" which grows and becomes large enough to be seen plainly; for this reason you must cut it off at the beginning and remove all of its base, then put on it cautery or burning medicine. But if it is delayed until it becomes large, take care if it is hard, of foul color, of poor sense: do not touch it with iron for it is an enchanted aposteme, because when it is cut some great harm comes to the sick person; but if the aposteme is soft to the touch, not of foul color, and you see that it can all be cut off, then empty the patient and cut it without fear, and cure it afterward with drying and constraining things.
When the nose is cut and bleeding
Know that when inflammation occurs in one of these cartilages,
The manner of stitching is thus: you bring together the edges either by needles, as we have said in abdominal suturing; or by thread, as I have shown you.
lipomas
Many men develop hard tumors inside the lips, resembling grains of wheat in size and shape, some small and others large. Therefore, you should turn back the lips and cut into each one with a knife, grasping them with forceps and cutting into each part. Then fill the space after incision with powdered vitriol until the blood stops flowing, then apply a bandage and cure the area with dry substances until it is healed.
Of gum tissue
Often on the gums there grows adherent flesh called "albulus" by the ancients; one should grasp it with forceps and cut it at its root, allowing the blood vessel or vein to run freely. Then apply powdered vitriol or other restrictive and drying powders to the area. If this flesh returns after incision, which often happens, then cut it a second time and cauterize it. After cauterization, it will not return. This is how one uses instruments to cut.
of boils
Sometimes warts appear at the head of teeth inside the mouth between the gums, which are unsightly and rough. Sometimes teeth become black, greenish yellow, or wormy, such that decay reaches the gum tissue, causing a foul odor. Therefore, make the sick person sit between your hands with their chin in your lap, and scrape away all the warts until nothing remains. Do likewise for blackness, greenness, yellowness, and other stains until they are removed. If you remove what caused them at first, it is good. If not, then resume scraping on the second and third day until everything has been scraped away. Know that teeth require various tools to scrape according to what the task demands, for those used to scrape off excess tooth material have different shapes than those used to scrape between teeth. Have these shapes and others readily available.
It is necessary, when you treat a toothache, to delay pulling it as long as possible, for this should not be done; for it is a substance very high until one has no excuse for drawing [it]. Therefore, when the patient is constrained to have a tooth pulled, it is necessary that you be certain about the aching tooth. Often times the pain leaves the patient, and they think it is in a sound tooth, and have the good tooth pulled; but still the pain does not depart at all because of the evil extraction we have already seen done by these surgeons. And when you are well certain about the aching tooth, then it is necessary that you scrape around the tooth with a sharp instrument strongly to guard the gum on all sides; then move it with your two fingers or with fine forceps bit by bit until it is well loosened, then firmly hold the forceps. And let the patient's head be in your lap between your knees, and keep yours still so that he does not move.
"Next, extract the tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it does not come out easily, then use one of these instruments and place it gently on each side, and move it as you have done before. And if the tooth is perforated and rotting, then you must fill the hole with wadding where the perforation is; and grasp it subtly with pliers so that it does not break while extracting it; and there must be much bleeding around the gum to loosen the tooth."
"And make sure you do not break it, and if some part remains, the patient may experience greater pain due to the wickedness of the root. And beware that you do not act like the ignorant surgeons who, because of their haste and boldness, sometimes break the jawbone and do not accomplish what we have described; but often bring on great illnesses through the negligence of those roots that remain there, or through the jawbone that they break, as we have often seen. And when the tooth is extracted, wash the place with wine or sage and salt water. And if blood flows from it, which often happens, then fill the place with powdered vitriol; and if this does not help, cauterize it."
"The shapes of the instruments with which one first moves the teeth should be long and thick at the handles, so that they do not double over when you pull the tooth; and these are their shapes:"
"And they should be of thick members so that they do not bend during extraction, and they should be made of good iron and have teeth to hold the tooth in place."
"for the root of the teeth" "When the root remains after extraction, you should place on the wound cotton moistened in butter for one or two days until the wound is softened. Then insert into it the pliers called 'algefri', which resembles a crow's beak internally and is made like a rasp. And this is its shape:"
"And if the roots will not come out with all these pliers, you should uncover the flesh entirely around the root and insert into it the instrument called 'althali', which is like a spatula. And this is its shape:"
"And it should be strong and thick so that it does not break. And if the root comes out through this, that is good. If not, help yourself with all the instruments, of which the shapes come hereafter:"
"And also help yourself with this instrument which has two rows, of which this is the shape:"
"and other iron instruments that are placed in front of the root of the teeth, and also help yourself with this instrument which resembles large pliers. And here is its shape:"
"And this instrument should be strong so that it cannot break. And know that there are many instruments for teeth; and also others that are not counted here. And the wise and subtle master finds his own instrument according to what his works and the illness show him, because there are such illnesses where the ancients did not teach any instrument due to their diversity. But if you break something of the jawbone or other bones, then search for the instruments that are needed, as I have told you, and help yourself with gestures. And here is its shape:" "And they should be thick and hold well to grasp the bone without slipping, but so that it can hold and remove it. Then restore the place with suitable medications according to what is needed. And if there is decay in the bone, even if it is small, then remove it with all these instruments."
"When the tooth appears not according to its natural course and is misshapen, especially in young women, you should know if the tooth is next to the tooth and not in its right place, so that it cannot be set or smoothed: then scrape it off. And if it is attached to the tooth, take this instrument of which here is its shape, resembling a small beak, and made of good iron pointed at the end:"
"And work little by little with your hands over several days to remove the tooth because of its hardness and so that you do not move the others. And if it is visible enough to be smoothed, then smooth it with a rasp like this one here, of which this is its shape:"
"And it is also like the rasp used to make needles. And smooth the tooth little by little each day lightly so that it does not fall out too soon. Then polish it at the end with any sharpener. And if the tooth is too pointed and wounds the tongue, then smooth its sharpness until it is even so that it neither wounds the tongue nor disturbs speech."
"When teeth are loose:"
"When front teeth are loose, either from trauma or a fall, and the patient cannot chew their food without them falling out, even after treating them with tightening medications, if they do not work: then you must tighten them with a gold wire because silver wire turns green and decays. And the wire should be neither too thick nor too thin according to the space between the teeth. If you see that the teeth are crooked, take the wire and bend it double between two healthy teeth, then place the loop around the loose tooth or teeth until you reach a healthy tooth on the other side. Then start wrapping again from the beginning up to where you started, pulling your hand tightly but carefully so that the teeth do not move. The tie should be tight at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape. Then cut off the excess wire with pliers and attach it between the healthy tooth without hurting the tongue. Leave it as tight as possible until it can remain in place, and if it comes loose or the wire breaks, then tighten it again with another wire. And this is how they should remain throughout their lifetime. Here is the shape of the teeth and the figure of the alignment of two healthy teeth and two loose ones:"
"And when a tooth falls out, it should be replaced in its place little by little as we have said. And only wise and skilled people should intervene, and sometimes the shape of a cow's bone tooth is made and placed where the tooth is missing, then attached just like we described earlier. And this serves for a long time."
"To cut the tie of the tongue:"
"Sometimes there is this tie that comes from underneath the tongue or is born naturally; or due to an injury caused by a wound. And here's how you perform it: open the patient's mouth and have their head resting on your lap, then raise the tongue. Then cut the nerve tie as far as possible without cutting too deeply so as not to damage the artery underneath. If there is any scarring or new tissue growth due to the injury, use a forceps and cut the tie from above. After you've finished, apply rose water and sage compresses or cold water compresses, then place a linen bandage under the tongue each night to prevent healing. If bleeding occurs, apply powdered vitriol on the wound. If bleeding persists, cauterize it with a lentigo cautery, which is very good for this purpose. Then treat it further until it heals completely."
"and if you see it is of dark or black color or hard so that the patient does not feel it then do not touch it for it is cancer; and if it tends towards blenching and there is moisture there then throw on it ointment, and open it with a sharp scalpel, and deliver it on one side and the other; and if blood flows at your operation then put powdered vitriol until it stops flowing, then return to your operation until you draw out all the pus; then raise the area cleanly and carefully, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed."
"throat abscesses"
"Godath", also called the two mandibles, sometimes occur in the throat. If they are not cured as mentioned earlier and appear as hard, narrow boils with a dark color, do not touch them with iron.
When you press the tongue against this instrument and see the boil, use tweezers to pierce it and twist it upwards as much as possible. Then wipe some cloth with it before using the instrument to squeeze it out, which resembles a pair of forceps. The tips are curved towards each other and very sharp, made either from iron or steel.
"And if you do not have this instrument at hand, then take pincers, of which here is the form:"
"And let it be sharp on one side and blunt on the other; and when you have gripped one of the almonds, then grip the other in the same manner, and afterwards gargle the patient with warm water mixed with salt or rue, and if there is bleeding, gargle the patient with water or cooked pomegranate skins, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the blood is stanched; then continue treatment until it is healed. And sometimes other abscesses than these two almonds develop in the throat, so grip them in the same manner as the two almonds."
"And I treated a woman for an abscess that had grown inside her throat, namely one small abscess; and she could barely breathe at all because the passage was blocked, and could neither eat nor drink, and would have died within one or two days if left like that. The abscess had grown so large that it had filled two fingers' length. I therefore acted quickly, and inserted a needle into one of the openings, then drew out a large portion of pus; then I reinserted the needle into the other opening in her throat, opened her mouth and pressed down on her tongue; afterwards I inserted the needle into this abscess and cut off part of it, from which only a little blood came out. And thus the passage to the woman's throat was unblocked, and she began drinking water and then wine, but for a long time I kept cutting away at this abscess as it grew back again and filled in the space that I had emptied, until it became very large; therefore I cauterized it with a hot iron inside her throat: thus it ceased to grow. And I left these parts, and do not know what God did with her afterwards."
"de l’uve"
When it comes down to the eye, and it is inflamed and elongated, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is below, thick and rounded, it is called "eye". When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help at all, and you see that the hard abscess is quieted, but it is subtle, then it must be cut; and that which is rounded together and is not elongated. And it is sanguineous or brown colored or black, then you should avoid cutting into it. For there is great danger to the patient in doing so. Therefore, when you see it according to its appearance and length, make the patient sit before the sun, and press their tongue with the instrument we mentioned earlier; then insert the onion into the eye, and draw it down, and cut with one or two instruments that we mentioned in the incision of the two almonds. And do not cut more than the natural limit, for if you cut more, you will injure the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two almonds, and continue the cure until it is healthy. And if the patient fears being cut, then you should use a device for cauterizing with fear. The manner of cautery is thus: let the patient put their head on your lap, and then press their tongue with the instrument we mentioned in the chapter of cautery, and confect with boiling water, so that it is not too thick nor too clear; and this is its shape:
**And let there be at the top a vessel into which one puts the medicine, like the horsemen of a spoonful, and place the instrument with all the medicine on the eye; and the patient should lie on their side so that saliva and mucus run from their mouth to the medicine within, so that it does not descend to the throat or the bladder. Then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it upon the eye for the quantity of half an hour until you see it is blackened and the marks of the medicine have ceased; and if you wish, take cotton and wrap it around some instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and place the instrument with all the cotton in the vein above until the cotton touches the eye; and do this often until the cauterization is complete. Then let it dry and fall after four or five days. And if you need to recommence the cautery of the medicine, then recommence it, and after the cautery wipe around the eye with cotton dipped in butter, and cleanse that which is around the medicine; and be washed with cold water, and be cured with gargarisms until they are healed.**
**This cure is safer than incision or cauterization; if it is cured by fumigation in this manner, take calamint and hyssop and origanum and rue and camomile and mugwort and similar herbs, and assemble them all or some of them into one pot, and put it on the fire to boil. And let the pots be well sealed with strong clay, and inside the pot there should be an instrument shaped thus:** **And let it be of silver or brass, and one of the ends of the instrument should be placed in the mouth of the sick person so that the vapor rises to the eye through the vein until the eye is mortified. Then recommence this often until the eye dries, and guard yourself so that you do not perform this at the beginning of the coming of a hot aposteme, for many things happen there; and do not perform it before the decline of a hot aposteme. And if this instrument is not present, then take a vein and put inside its end an eggshell, so that the mouth of the sick person does not become too hot; for the eggshell does not let the vapor harm the mouth, and this is a good cure together.**
**Many times there is a bone or fish spine stuck in the throat, or some other thing; therefore you must draw out that which you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument so that you see it move. And that which does not appear to you and is hidden in the throat, it is necessary for you to make the sick person vomit before the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps by vomiting the thing will come out. Or the sick person should swallow a piece of sponge, or a piece of flannel, or a root of lettuce, or a morsel of dry bread; and tie a string to the sponge, and then swallow it; and when it comes to the place, it will catch on, and then draw it out. And if it does not come out from what we have said, then take an instrument of lead in this shape:**
**And let the instrument be bent at its end so that it can more easily enter the throat, and have the end raised high. And guard yourself so that you do not touch the epiglottis, but take care that all of it is gone, nor should you push the bone inside; and it is better for the sick person to put in the instrument themselves, so that they know where the thing is stuck; then draw it out evenly along the whole length of the instrument until it comes out.**
**de la sansue de la gorge**
No translation provided for the first line: "Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue..."
And if it does not fall as we have said, then fumigate the patient with assfetide, using the instrument that I mentioned in the fumigation of the eye. Do this many times, for it will fall without hurting. And the manner of fumigation is that you take one pot which has live coals, and let the bottom be covered with a pierced cloth in the middle, and in that hole put the end of the instrument; then throw your fumigation into it, and the patient puts the head of the pipe in his mouth and closes the mouth so that the smoke does not escape, but comes as far as the tonsil; and the tonsil will fall now, and if it does not fall, then begin the fumigation again many times. And let the patient suffer thirst, and eat salty and alkaline things, and do not drink water; and then it will be necessary for it to come out by this treatment.
"And the shape of the instrument with which one treats a vein is thus: when it can be seen, it resembles bent forceps for entering into the throat; and it has the appearance of a crow's beak, and has the sharpness of a file so that what it grasps, it cannot let go."
"Chapter on Abscesses"
There are many kinds of abscesses, according to what is written here from one and another in this book, and they are divided into perforation and incision; and there are two ways about this, one in its own likeness, and those that it holds moist. And the second way is for the places where they are on the body, because the abscesses of the head are different from those of the fundament, and the abscesses of fleshy parts are different from those that come into joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
"And there are abscesses that should not be pierced until the bowel has completed its natural course; and there are those which must be pierced when they have hardened, and do not die according to their natural course, like abscesses near joints. For when an abscess appears near a joint, if it is left alone until it becomes completely hard, then perhaps the ligaments and nerves of the joint may become damaged, causing contraction in that limb. Or the abscess may be near the main limb, and if you delay piercing it until it is too late, it will harm the main limb; or if it is near the fundament, it should be pierced before it dies. One must not pierce a hardened abscess without having completed digestion, except for one that is near the fundament which might otherwise penetrate deeply and become adherent, forming a fistula which cannot heal in a short time."
"And you must know the time for piercing an abscess that has completed its natural course, and this is when the pain is relieved, and the fever subsides, and the reduction of pain and redness, and the softening and sharpening of the head of the abscess, and other signs. And you must perform the incision where the abscess hangs down the most, and where it appears to be dead; and the incision should be long according to the length of the body, and if the abscess is on the hands or feet, or in joints near nerves and arteries, and in all smooth places where there is no fold.
"And in those that are folded, according to the shape of that member. And when an abscess is in fatty tissue, it is better to wait for the incision until it has completed its digestion and is well formed, as we have said before. Because if you pierce it beforehand, then the body of the venom will be spread out, and it will be full of much filth; and perhaps the edges and depth of it may become hardened. And there are some abscesses that should be pierced according to the width of the body, depending on what the member needs. And you must make small incisions for small abscesses, small holes; and for large abscesses, large holes, and many slits according to the likeness of the size of the abscess. And there are some abscesses where one must cut out the core and cover it, when they have become like a penny in size, and are softened, then one should do as with boils: And there are those that are slit into three angles, and there are those which are cut like a fig leaf, such as armpit abscesses; and there are those where one makes a round cut, and other cuts of similar shape."
"Those that have no head, such as soft superficial abscesses, should be pierced plainly. And when the abscess is large and has swollen greatly, and you pierce it, do not draw out all the pus at once, but draw out a part of it; then stop up the abscess until the next day, then draw out some more again; do this many times gradually until all the pus comes out, especially if the patient is weak, or pregnant woman, or small child, or elderly man. Because sometimes the spirit jumps with the exit of the pus, and perhaps the patient may die, and you would not know it. Therefore be careful in this chapter, and when you have pierced your abscess, examine the wound to see if the wound from the abscess is small; and if it is a plain incision, then apply linen or old cotton pads; and if it is a large abscess with many holes, then you must stuff each one with a pad so that they come together. And if you have cut off a piece of skin in the abscess and have removed it around, then you must fill it with dry cotton or linen cloth lint without moisture, and bind it for three days; then remove it, and apply ointment until it is healed."
"And if bleeding occurs from your operation, then bring cold water and a little salt, and moisten one cloth, and place it on the bleeding area many times. And if the bleeding persists, then apply dressing and care, and the powders that I have said in my hands in this book, in their appropriate places. And if it is in winter time, and the place where the abscess is very nervous, then you must put wet cloths and warm wool pads on it; and if it is in summer, and the place is fatty, then you must put wet cloths in water and oil, or in cold wine and oil, for three days, as we have said before; then untie the abscess and wipe it clean, and apply the appropriate treatment until it heals."
"And this is what one must know universally in the cure of abscesses: I have told you how one should proceed with the cure of abscesses, and here is the chapter."
chapter on boils
"Know this about boils on the head: small abscesses come from them, which are like those in wool, similar to a hen's nest, and there are many such cases. Some are fatty and some contain moisture like pimples; and there are also hard and stony ones at the incision, and there is no doubt that an artery opposes it. The operation for the incision is this: you squeeze with an instrument called 'entromissoire', which comes from a form given below, to see what it contains. For if it contains moisture, then cut open over its length. And when the moisture has been drained out, then scrape off all the skin that contained that moisture, for it will always return if you leave anything behind; then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment if available; if not, in water and salt, and fill the wound with it and leave it until the next day; then repeat this process of cotton on the second and third days until you know well that there is no more moisture left; then apply appropriate ointment to heal it until it is healthy. And if the boil contains a lot of fat, cut it open along its length; scrape out your threads, and scrape off all around, and focus your treatment on pulling out the coat where it lies; and if an artery opposes you, do what I have said after this."
"And cutting into the abscess that is pierced and moist is easier, for they are lacking in blood. And there are some of these abscesses at the head where there is no moisture, like those .i. abscesses that I copied at the head of an old woman; and found the abscess as hard as a stone, rough and white, and could not be broken; and if one had struck any, it would have made just as much wound as from a stone. In other abscesses coming to the head, except those which come to the heads of children and at the roots of ears, let the incision always be at the lowest dependent point, so that the bowels may exit more easily; and cure them as is proper."
"Regarding scrofula"
Many times these abscesses occur on the neck, and under the buttocks, and in angles, and sometimes they come to other parts of the body, and there are many of them, and they are interconnected. And each scrofula is properly inside its own bone, like the knot and the abscess of the head, as we have said; and there are many similar kinds of these scrofulas. Some contain moisture, and some are malignant which do not wish to obey health. Therefore, when you see one that is well-disposed to touch, and is like the color of the body, and moves from each part and is not hard against the nerves of the neck nor the artery nor the vein, and is not deep; then you should cut it from above, and scrape from each side, and press the two lips of the heart together once if you need to, as we have said for head abscesses; and cut little by little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve nor the vein, and let not the scalpel be too wide nor cutting, so that the hand does not slip, and do not cut too deep, so that you do not cut what you should not.
And if you cut the vein or the artery, and it does not allow you to work, then put powdered vitriol or some powders that stop blood in the wound, and constrain the wound; and let it stay until the abscess is appeased, and the wound begins to soften and start to rot. And when the blood is staunched, then return to your work until you finish it; then seek with your index finger if there remain any small scrofulas, cut them out and cleanse them. And if there is a large vein at the root of the scrofula, then it is not necessary for you to cut that scrofula at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread and let it fall without harm; then fill the wound with thick cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then dress it.
And if you cut out the entire scrofula, then you must bring together the two lips of the wound and sew them up immediately, so that there is no excess flesh left due to the size of the scrofula. Then you must carefully cut the root of it and draw out any pus, and sew it up as we have said. Those scrofulas that contain excess flesh should be pierced where they appear largest; pierce them in this way: first make a small opening with a scalpel, then dilate it little by little until you reach inside the scrofula. Then bring together the edges of the wound and sew them up immediately, so that there is no excess flesh left. Then apply dressings with ointment and similar things to cause what remains of the corruption to rot. And when the wound is well cleansed, then cure it with ointment on fresh flesh until it is healthy.
Here is a possible translation of "de squinance" into English:
The ancients spoke of cutting the throat;
In those who have swelling, When the disease is in the throat of the lung, it is necessary to close the epiglottis to escape the danger that comes from strangulation.
Therefore, when we wish to split the epiglottis, it should be done below three or four circles with a small cut across, between two circles or according to the amount of the slit in the soft palate, but not in the cartilage.
And those places are connected to the epiglottis cut such that there is no flesh there, and the vessels are long and thin.
And if the master is afraid, he should stretch the skin of the throat all along the incision, then cut into the heart until it reaches the channel; avoid the blood vessels if you see any, and then close the soft palate as we have said.
And this is demonstrated by the section of the larynx channel that jumps out through the spot that is broken, and by the loss of voice;
and leaves the wound open for a while
And when the hour of doubt about strangulation has passed, join together the two lips of the wound in the heart and sew it up smoothly without the cartilage; then administer medications that promote healing until it is healed.
Albucasis says that one should not do this until the throat is completely blocked, and the patient is judged to be near death, and the breath is gone. Therefore, cut off the epiglottis so that the patient cannot swallow, and he breathes through the wound, thus being saved from death;
"And for this reason, the ancients commanded that one should leave the wound open until the malice of the disease has passed, and it passes in three days or four." "And then they commanded to stitch up the wound and treat it until it was healed."
"I will tell you what I saw." "I saw that a damsel took one knife and stabbed it into her throat and cut some of the vessels of the lung."
"and I was called to heal her, and found her as dead as could be."
"I uncovered the wound and found that the blood issuing from it had not cut any vein nor carried off the throat, but the windpipe issued forth through the wound."
"I rushed to stitch up the wound and treated her until she was healed;"
"and nothing happened to the damsel except that she became hoarse of voice, and afterward returned to her former condition."
"Therefore I say that in the operation on the epiglottis there should be no fear."
"of the large throat"
"This hernia is called 'throat hernia', and it is a large bubble of purple color that occurs mostly in women;"
"and there are two kinds of it: natural and acquired; or the latter has no engine."
"And there are two kinds of accident: one is similar to fatty tissue, and the other is similar to an arterial hematoma." "And there should be fear in this case, and one should not operate except on the small ones, and the proof and search should be made throughout the introitus." "If you find it like a fatty tissue and not attached to any vein, cut it as you would cut a fatty tumor, and excise it completely if possible;" "and search carefully all around it, and treat it as necessary until it is perfectly healed."
"of fatty tumors"
"There are many kinds of fatty tumors, each with its own appearance, which I will describe;"
"And now it is necessary for me to explain the entire difference between a fatty tumor and an hernia."
"I say that an inflammation and fever accompany it until the ebullition has passed, and then corruption is completed; afterward the fever and heat subside."
"With a fatty tumor there is no heat or fever nor pain, and it contains fat, which is its own sac and is the same color as flesh, beginning like a bubble and becoming large;"
"and there are two kinds of them, either fatty or moist, and most of them are the same color as I have described in the classification."
"When you come to the treatment of fatty tumors, first examine and explore with the instrument called the 'introitus', according to its form as described in the chapter that follows."
"The manner of examining fatty tumors is to take the moistest part that you find in the tumor and twist it gently bit by bit until you know that the instrument has pierced the heart of it, according to its size;"
"then remove the introitus, taking care not to let anything leak out."
"If moist corrosive humor is flowing from it, whatever its color may be, cut it as I have described for other tumors;"
"and if no moist humor comes after the introitus, know that it is fatty and cut it in a cross shape, grasp it with forceps, and lightly scrape away the skin on each side and the coat in which it lies, so that you may draw it out whole with the tumor."
"And if you cannot draw it out whole, remove it piece by piece until nothing remains."
"For if anything remains, the fatty tumor will return many times;"
"and if a bit remains and the skin troubles you, sprinkle some caustic waters on the wound, bandage it tightly, apply soothing poultices for tumors with heat, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed."
"And if the fatty tumor is large, cut the two lips of the wound and treat it like a wound that involves flesh."
"And if a pulsating vein opposes you or another obstacle, hurry and apply powdered vitriol to the place, leaving it on for two or three days until the wound has corrupted and the ebullition of blood has subsided; then return to cut what remains of the fatty tumor."
"Here are the shapes of the introitus instruments, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small; and there are four squares called 'albaret', and one called 'breb', and there are also three kinds to encircle fistulous tumors;"
"and they are like the needles used to cut out warts, made of brass or iron or silver, with those of yellow brass being most valued, and they are best suited for encircling the curves of fistulous tumors;"
"and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the openings."
"The shapes of hooks are of many kinds, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and there are hooks with two curves that come in three kinds;"
"And there are hooks with three curves that also come in three kinds; and there are hooks with two curves and hooks with one curve only, which are also of three kinds; all of these are necessary for their respective uses."
"The tips of these hooks are cutting, and there are some that do not cut but only scrape off fatty tumors so as not to injure veins or nerves;"
"And among these introitus instruments are the almond-shaped ones that fit into hands so that the patient does not feel them at the opening of tumors;"
"and they come in three kinds: large, small, and medium, as you see;"
"And these are only used where the flesh is thick, such as in thighs, arms, breasts, and angles, and similar places;"
"And sometimes another small instrument resembling the scrapers for fistulas is made according to this form, with which blood is wiped away:"
"and it is placed sometimes at the location where veins and arteries have been cut, and sometimes they are made according to this large form:"
"Sometimes the breasts of some men swell up when they begin to be corrupted until they seem like women's breasts;"
"And they remain unsightly and swollen, and whoever wants to treat them must do so according to this form from line B to G:" "then scrape away the fat, apply a medicinal poultice for wounds involving flesh, then join together the two lips of the wound to stitch them up, and treat it until it is healed;"
"And if the breast hangs down and is enlarged like that of a woman, then it is cut in two places above along two similar slits;" "So that one is attached to the other at the end of each, so that the larger part contains the smaller according to this form from line B to G;" Then scrape off the skin between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about stitching and powders, and whatever is necessary for the cure until it is healed.
And if it is not healed, or the incision is not complete because the patient will not rest, or due to bleeding, you must fill the wound with cotton moistened in corrosive ointment. And leave it until it consumes the remainder and the fat, then heal it until it is healed.
swellings of the armpits
These hard swellings that appear under the arms are types of scrofulous tumors with hard edges, and there are some that contain moisture.
Therefore, those that contain moisture must be cut along this line from point b to point g: And when all the pus in the boil is emptied out, then fill the wound with old cotton and leave it overnight, then remove all the cotton and heal it with suitable ointment until it is healed.
And if the swelling resembles scrofula, cut it as we have said in the section on scrofulous sores, and if the wound secretes pus, apply a cautery as we have said earlier.
of the bursting of an artery
When an artery bursts and the skin above it is adherent, many swellings often result, and the same happens with a varicose vein and swelling.
And if one knows that it is due to an artery, then the swelling will be long and deep; "When you feel it with your two hands, then sense one pulling; and when it's due to the vein, then there is an evident deficiency."
"It is foolish to attempt to conceal this tumor, especially when it occurs under the armpits and around the ankles or neck, and many other places; and it can become quite large." "Therefore, the treatment with iron should be avoided, and also for the one at the head, and in the case of swelling from an artery cut through the skin."
"Therefore, the treatment with iron should be avoided, and also for the one at the head, and in the case of swelling from an artery cut through the skin." "Then tie around the wound like a tourniquet and neatly separate the artery from the tissues until it is exposed."
"Then place a needle underneath one side and pierce it through to the other side, tying the artery with a double thread in two places, as I have shown you before regarding the extraction of the two arteries in the temples."
"Then insert a probe between the two ties at one spot until blood comes out and the tumor is released."
"Then apply the treatment with all due care until the bandages fall away." "Then treat it with an appropriate ointment until it heals without complications."
"And if the tumor is due to the tension of the vein, then you should cut around it with your hand from the tumor throughout the skin," "Then place the needle underneath the spot you are holding with your hand and pierce it through, leaving one doubled thread on that side so you can pull it out from the other side." "Then tie off the tumor as I have told you, using one of two ties made with thread at both ends."
"And if you doubt that the thread will not slip out, then insert another needle through both threads underneath the entire tumor along the incision of the first needle and tie the threads at four places."
"Then cut off the tumor until excess fluid comes out, then cut off the excess skin and leave what is tied."
"Then place a damp cloth soaked in wine and oil on it, then apply compresses and dressings until it heals."
"Apostumes of the nerves"
Also, boils come to the artery and vein,
"Dislocation happens more frequently in the shoulder and hip joints, and in all places where there are joints; this is one serious abscess, with a color resembling that of the body, but often without pain."
When it [the dislocation] is pressed strongly, the patient feels pain; however, this pain is not deep within the body, but rather below the heart.
"And moves well on all sides,
"And one who is on the head or forehead, makes the skin tender at the temple." "If the abscess is small, you should grasp it with tweezers and cut it at its root;
"And if it is large, suspend it with a towel and scrape it off, then clean the wound and sew it shut, treating it until it heals."
"from hanging bags of fat" "Sometimes happens in bellies and nowhere else but there, and it is called 'fungus' by its appearance, with roots being fine and excrements large, some small and others very big."
"I saw one man who had two on his belly that resembled mushrooms more than anything else, with no difference, being white and having small roots and cracked open with moisture constantly flowing."
"I weighed them and found one weighing eighteen ounces and the other six pounds; the wound opened by cutting into it shows whether the patient is moist, with the flesh being pale, moist, and having fine roots."
"If the cut is large, have cautery irons ready nearby, because there often comes too much bleeding at once, and if blood flows too quickly, hasten to apply the cautery."
"And if you see the patient frightened and fearful of the incision from iron, then take one well-made thread of linen, tie the flesh as we have described, and leave it for two days."
"And then tighten it, and do not cease pulling the linen thread until it cuts through the flesh, and let excrement pass through without effort. And if the roots are large, fear cutting them altogether because of the belly, but you can still cut half of them."
"Then cauterize to prevent it from coming back; then dress the wound, and make sure not to cut the teat which is fox-colored, has poor sensation, and produces milk."
"For this is an enchanted aposteme, and I will speak of the cure of chancre later on."
"When the belly is full"
If the appearance of the boil comes from a cautery burn or a slit in the skin's surface, and is located on the belly or in one of its folds, as happens in other wounds, or from blood flowing from veins or arteries, according to what is stated above, or from windiness;
And if it is due to an injury of the skin and the eruption of a boil, then the color of the aposteme resembles the color of the body, and there is little pain or discomfort, with various discharges. And if it is due to an intestinal issue, then it becomes more diverse, and when pressed with two fingers it sinks in and then returns, and sometimes it becomes hard, and increases greatly at the entrance of the bath and with heavy labor.
And if it is due to moisture, then it is light and opens well when pressed with the hand, causing no constriction. But if it is due to blood, then the boil appears large and hard, with these signs: it feels fixed according to its size;
And if it is due to windiness, then it feels soft to the touch. The opening will show whether the appearance is due to blood from an artery or vein, or simply windiness. Therefore you should leave it alone. For there is doubt and fear concerning it, as I have told you in the chapter on boils, regarding the artery and the vein.
And if the appearance is due to the intestines or the bowel, then you should command the patient to tie their bellyband and lie down straight, then press all around the boil; Then have them lie on their side between your hands then go around the place you have marked with the whole spatula then stretch half of the boil upwards with the entire large forceps;
then open half of the boil stretched out above the tie, and insert your index finger inside to find the intestine. If you find it caught in the tie, then untie it, and bring the intestine out through the opening in the belly
And if you find the bowel, take it with the forceps and cut off any excess
And if the artery or vein becomes visible to you, then carefully go around it, and then return to your work and take two needles, and attach two strong threads to them, and insert the two needles in a cross pattern where you have pierced;
then press the boil in four places above the needles, and if you see blood, remove the needles, leave the opening until it stops bleeding, and cut away any dead flesh. Or you can cut it when it is subtle and porous, then treat it as needed, and cut the boil as we have said.
Or you can cut it when it is subtle and porous, then treat it as needed, and cut the boil as we have said. And remove the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the opening as necessary, and stitch it up.
chancre
We have said in the division of cancer the similarities of cancer, and how one should operate with medicines, and how to avoid surgical treatment. And we say that cancer that affects the marrow is dangerous, and requires great caution in treating it. The ancients said that when cancers are located in places where they can be scraped away like cancers on the breast or hip, and similar locations, they must be removed entirely at the beginning; but when they are large and old, one should not approach them, for I have never seen anyone cured of them, nor has anyone been cured before me.
And the operation when it is in a place where it can be removed, as we have said, is that you purge the patient of black bile once, then make them vomit if they show signs ofpletion, then prepare the patient well for the operation; then cut off your forceps and cut around the cancer completely and remove it completely without leaving anything behind; let the blood flow freely and press the wound tightly with your hand or something else, and if bleeding from the incision of the artery or vein becomes troublesome to you, cauterize it until the bleeding stops; then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
of dropsy We have already said in the division the similarities of dropsy, and how the collection of water is made, and the signs of each similarity, and the treatment that is done with medicines, and that which is done with iron: only "eclites" is mentioned here; and one should not touch it with iron in these two similarities: namely tympanites and yposarche, for they are deadly things. Therefore, when you treat this dropsy similarity called "eclites" with medicines and the treatment does not help, look to see if the patient is weak or if they have another illness besides dropsy, such as inflammation of the bowels and similar things; do not touch it with iron for there is doubt about it. But if you see that the patient has strong vitality, and they have no other illness but dropsy alone, and they are not too young nor too old, then you should operate thus: Lift the patient onto your hands, and have the assistant press the belly while pushing the water towards the lowest part of the back, then take a spatula-shaped trocar like this: It should be cutting on both sides, pointed at the end, but not so sharp that it can reach the intestines when inserted, nor cut them.
Then look to see if the dropsy is invading towards the intestines: you should make your incision about three fingers' width directly below the spine; and if the dropsy is due to liver disease, make your incision to the left of this mark; if it's due to mucus, make it on the right side. Make sure that the patient does not lie on the incision so that the superfluities do not flow into that weak area
Then pierce the skin with the trocar and insert it, then move your hand along the trocar between the skin and the fascia as when cutting open a boil to the depth of one finger or less all around. Then pierce the fascia until the trocar reaches the empty space, which is where the water collects. Then remove the trocar and insert this instrument: It resembles a thin silver tube and is made of bronze or light iron, with a small hole at the bottom end and three holes on one side and two on the other. The cutting edge is shaped like a feather, and this is the shape of the incision that writers use to cut a feather.
At the top end of this is the funnel-shaped opening, so that when the instrument reaches the water, you can now tip it up. Remove about half or a third of the water, but not too much at once because if you remove too much too soon, the patient might die from sudden loss of spirit, faint, or approach death
but remove according to the patient's strength and disposition of their spirit, and pulse. Then remove the instrument and retain the water, which is now held back by the heart that stops up the hole above the fascia that you pierced earlier. Then begin again with the instrument on another day if the patient can tolerate it, and remove a small amount of water.
**fai ce aucun jor:**
Of the swelling of the penis Never are children born who do not have an opening in the penis, or the opening is small, or it is not in its proper place. If this happens, it must be pierced at once with one spatumile made very thin according to this shape: then put one thin lead plug into the hole and tie it and hold it for three or four days, and when he wants to urinate, remove the plug and let him urinate, and then replace it. And perhaps there is no need for this at all, because the urine that comes out will not leave the opening closed. Those whose opening is small are treated with a lead plug, as we have said, and it will widen. Those who do not have the opening in its proper place are blinded, for some are born with the opening at the head of the penis, which prevents them from urinating unless they lift their penis upwards; and they cannot ejaculate because the matter cannot reach the marrow, and this is a serious condition.
The method of treatment is for the patient to lie on his back, then extend the head of the penis and the glans as well, so that the opening falls in the middle, as it should; and guard against loss of blood which often occurs there, and if any occurs, stop the bleeding with whatever stops bleeding, and dress the wound until it is healed.
sores on the penis Many times these sores appear on the penis, which are an ugly appearance of flesh; and there are malignant ones and non-malignant ones. It is necessary to grasp them with a fine pair of forceps, cut and clean them all, then place moistened cotton in Egyptian ointment; then treat with diaphoretic ointment until they are healed. And if the sore is malignant, of foul color and putrid, it is necessary to bring cautery. When you have cut it, and if the sore is at the end of the penis, and part of it is inside the skin and part outside, it is necessary to remove the sore that is inside first; and when it is healed, then treat what remains outside. For when you treat them together, it is not certain that the tip of the penis will not be pierced, and blackness and corruption come into its root and in coition; therefore, cut away everything that is black and corrupt, then apply to the wound a plaster made of honey and flour mixed with the rind of pomegranates and figs, then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs, bring the lunar cautery in this manner: This cautery helps with two conditions at once, namely bleeding and corruption; and if the tip of the penis is corrupted and retracted, it is necessary to insert a tin tube into the urethra of the penis and for the patient to urinate through it; and when the skin around the head of the penis that needs to be removed has been hardened, which occurs in those who have not been circumcised or where there is a wound or an abscess, then cut with a sharp instrument until the ligaments are loosened and the tip of the penis is released from all sides;
And if it is difficult to separate them, then cut with a spatula some of the flesh from the tip of the penis and skin; then carefully open between two and place a fine linen cloth moistened in cold water so that it does not harden again.
de la circoncision
Circumcision is not the same kind of wound that keeps growing like others; nevertheless, when we perform this operation willingly and especially on children, it is necessary to do our best work and make it as easy and safe as possible.
I say that the ancients did not practice the circumcision of their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired by experience.
For I have seen most of the masters and surgeons who perform circumcision around the age of one day, and even adults, and there is often confusion because there are two layers of skin, and sometimes one is cut instead of the other.
Now the bone comes into contact, and there is double pain; during cleansing, it is not certain that the point of the limb will be secure; and during cleansing of the nail, sometimes the iron escapes, wounds the work, and often times they are born in such a way that they do not require cleansing, as I have seen.
As for the cleansing that is done with force on all the length of the thread, I have found its goodness through experimentation, for it cuts evenly both above and below.
For when you press your hand, it cuts evenly in one single stretch of time; but ensure that the thread is well wrapped around the leather; and the manner of the first operation should be such that you make the child understand, if he hears, that you are only tying the thread around the stick, and then you can let him try all the other ways. Then make him stand upright between your hands and hide the forceps under your feet so that the child does not see them or any of the tools; then put your hand on the stick and blow into it, and draw it up until the skin of the stick is inside; then cleanse it well from the dirt that has gathered there, then tie a double thread knot around it, then tie another knot further down with one or two knots; hold it with both hands by the second knot between the thumb and index finger, and cut between the two knots, then quickly raise your hand and pull the top of the stick.
Then make him stand upright between your hands and hide the forceps under your feet so that the child does not see them or any of the tools; then put your hand on the stick and blow into it, and draw it up until the skin of the stick is inside; then cleanse it well from the dirt that has gathered there, then tie a double thread knot around it, then tie another knot further down with one or two knots; hold it with both hands by the second knot between the thumb and index finger, and cut between the two knots, then quickly raise your hand and pull the top of the stick. Then let the blood flow little by little, for it is nourishing; then apply powder and over the powder a cloth glued with half of a cooked egg yolk tempered with rose water, melted with good fresh rose oil, and leave it overnight until the next day, and cure it again until it is healed.
The shape of the forceps used for cleansing is as follows: The two tips should be thin and sharp, and the tips should be as large as the middle finger equally.
The error of cleansing is when the heart is inside the incision; therefore it is necessary to extend it with your fingernail before the wound becomes inflamed; and cut it evenly, and if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then use forceps to hold it and then cut it.
And if it is more than three days and the part below the stick is swollen, then leave it until the inflammation has subsided, and gently scrape it off; cut it as much as you can move it, and be careful not to damage the skin of the stick, it will not harm it at all.
Therefore treat the wound of sudden injury with powders, as we have said when discussing powders; and if you cut too much from the heart and it goes upwards, it will not harm at all; therefore treat it as we have said until it is healed.
On the retention of urine
The retention of urine is due to obstruction by stone, or congealed blood, or bowel, or dead flesh, or similar things, which we have mentioned in the section on divisions;
And if the urine is not released, and you see that it is retained due to a stone lodged in the neck of the bladder, then the patient must bend over on their knees; place their feet on their back, extend their belly from the part above their back, and have the patient push down as much as they can; thus, the neck of the bladder will be forced open from above, causing the urine to flow out.
And if it does not come out, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer an extraction using the instrument called "syringe", of which this is the form: it should be made of thin, light silver, like a bird's feather; it should be about one-and-a-half palms long, and thin at the tip.
And the manner of administering the urine is thus: take one doubled thread, and tie a wad of wool or cotton at its end, and insert the end of the thread into the syringe. Remove any excess wool, then lubricate the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, have the patient sit on a chair, raise their bladder and penis, and lubricate them with warm water, olive oil, and egg white.
Then gently insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches the root of the penis, then fold the penis upwards towards the belly. Insert the syringe further until it reaches the bladder, and have the patient feel when the syringe is empty. If this is not done correctly, it may be because the tube is twisted. Then pull out the thread along with the wad of wool, and the urine will follow the wool. Finally, remove the syringe and allow the urine to flow freely.
and continue using the syringe until the bladder is completely emptied, and then relieve the patient.
bladder diseases
When urine or blood enters the bladder and decay accumulates there, and you see water and medicine being distilled out of it, do this with all the instrument called "clepsydra," and its shape is:
She is closed and has three openings: two on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and the raised places are such that the medicine cup fits well and plugs the tube without addition, so that moisture can be drawn out, and introduced when necessary.
And when you see your medicines flowing into the bladder, put the head of the funnel into the moisture and draw out what is inside it. You will then draw the moisture into the catheter, and then push it back in firmly. The moisture will then enter and reach the bladder so that the patient feels it.
"And this is the form of the thin enema used to administer an enema for the bladder."
"And it is made of silver or bronze, and the tube is higher up; and below there is one or two small openings where the liquid falls out. Then take a lamb's bladder and put in it the moisture with which you wish to administer an enema to the bladder. Then tie it between the two breasts formed from a doubled thread, and heat one pot of that moisture over the fire. Then insert the tip of the enema into the urethra, then squeeze your hand on the bladder until all the moisture has flowed in."
"And if you do not have a bladder, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle from it, and pierce it evenly around. Then insert a strong thread into these holes, then assemble the circle like one would assemble a funnel, and put inside what you wish of oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument. And do as you have done with the bladder, by squeezing your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder."
"from the stone"
"We have already spoken in the division about the ways of treating stones and removing them with medicines. And we have explained the difference between stones that enter the kidneys and all their signs, and in which stones one should operate by cutting. And in the bladder and in the urethra, and I will tell you clearly and briefly."
"I say that stones which enter the bladder occur more often in children. This is a sign that urine leaves the bladder like water in its subtlety. And it appears harsh, and the patient grates his urethra, and he pants many times, and then becomes rigid. And the foundation of this comes from many causes. And the cure for children is easy until they are four years old, but it is very difficult in older people, and it is moderate in young adults, those who are between youth and old age. And the cure is easier for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones."
"And when we come to the treatment, it is first necessary to cleanse the patient with an enema in order to remove all the feces that are in the intestines. For sometimes it hinders seeking out the stone."
"Then take the patient by the feet and lift them up and move him downwards so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes it comes out from above. Then have him sit between your hands prepared in such a way that his hands are below his thighs, so that the bladder is entirely inclined downward; then search for it and touch it inside."
"If you feel the stone in space, then hurry now to cut on the stone. And if it does not fall out when touched, then moisten your index finger with oil from your left hand if the patient is a child, or your middle finger if the patient is an adult; and insert it into the stone's foundation and search for the stone, and when you feel it under your finger, guide it to the neck of the bladder. Then press on your finger and push the stone out where you wish to cut it."
"And command the assistant to press the bladder with his hand. And tell him to stretch out the thighs upwards with his right hand and remove the skin that is under the thighs in the part where you are cutting with his left hand. Then insert the spatula thus shaped:
"And cut between what is between the thighs and the anus, not in the middle but on the left side of the anus. And let it be straight over the stone, with your two fingers always at the bottom, and make the cut across so that it is wide on the outside and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large;"
By chance the pressure is so great on the stone that is at its foundation that it bursts forth without effort; and know that there are such stones where there are angles and edges: they are difficult to pass; and there are those that are round underneath, like a globe, from which the exit is easy.
Therefore, at those where there are angles and edges, make the cut larger; and if it does not work, then you must use pincers that are also like a chisel at the head to extract the stone so that it does not escape; or put underneath one subtle tool curved at the head; and if you cannot manage it thus, then widen a little bit around the hole, and if the skin is cut, then coat it with vitriol.
And if there are multiple stones, first put the largest one at the neck of the bladder, then cut above it, then draw it forth, and then remove the smaller ones afterwards if there are more. And if they are very large, then it is necessary to make a larger incision. For two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or the urine comes out immediately where the wound cannot be closed; but in any case, try to draw it out piece by piece with pincers until you have removed them all.
And once you have completed your work, fill the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, then bind it up, and put on top a cloth dampened in oil and wine, or in oil and rosewater and cold water to cool the inflamed abscess; then cover the patient's neck and do not untie the bandage until the third day.
And when you do untie it, wash the wound very well with oil and water, then dress it with balsam of Joppa and balsam of Basilicon until it is healed.
And if hot abscesses come in the wound and corrosions, and congealed blood in the bladder causes retention of urine that is known by this way: put your finger into the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains there, it will corrupt the bladder and harm it
Then wash the wound with water and pitch and salt, and assist the patient in every way that you know until he is healed. And it is necessary that at every dressing of the wound, you bind his two thighs together and gather the dressings onto the wound.
And if the stone is small and it is in the urethra and stuck there so that urine cannot pass, then treat it as I said earlier: cut it many times until you are relieved of this condition, or else excise it from the urethra with this treatment. I have already proven this method.
Take one iron rod according to this shape and having three prongs forged into one piece of charcoal:
Then take one thread and bind it around the stalk beneath the stone so that it cannot move backwards into the bladder; then insert the probe lightly into the stalk until it reaches the stone; and twist the probe in your hand against the stone gently, until you can pierce the stone from the other side; then urine will soon flow, then press your hand upon what remains of the stone within the stalk. Thus is it soon broken, and spills out with the urine, and the patient is healed
And if you are unable to do this for any reason, then tie one thread beneath the stone and another above it; then make an incision in the stalk at the point of the stone between the two threads; then extract the stone, untie the threads, and cleanse the blood that has congealed in the wound; and care for the patient until he is healed.
Of the stone of women
It sometimes happens that a stone becomes lodged in women, and if it does happen, its treatment is difficult, and it is forbidden for three reasons: the first is that by chance the woman may be a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman well-skilled who exposes herself to physicians, especially when she is chaste.
And the third reason is that one might not find a skilled woman in this art of hands; and the fourth reason is that the stone of the woman is more deeply lodged than the stone of man, for which reason it requires a deeper incision, and there is greater fear involved.
And if you must perform this operation, then it is necessary for you to find a skilled midwife, and they are rarely found, and if you cannot find one, then seek out a chaste, subtle physician; and present her with a wise maiden who knows the lives of women, or a woman who knows some part of the art, and command her to perform whatever you command regarding the examination of the stone;
and examine very carefully if the woman is virgin: then she should place her thumb on the fundament and seek the stone; and if she finds it, she should press it down with her thumb, and instruct her to insert her thumb into the patient's anus, and press her left hand firmly upon the bladder.
If she finds it, she must move it gradually from the entrance of the bladder to below until it reaches the root of the thigh; then cut upon the stone at the root of the thigh opposite the middle of the anus where it is usually located and felt by the stone in that part. And do not move your thumb above or below the stone, making the first cut small
then insert the knife into the cut if you feel that the stone is close enough to the wound so that it can exit safely; and know that there are many kinds of stones: some small and large, sharp and smooth, long and round, and those with roots. Know their appearances to recognize the exit point
And if the blood is too profuse, then apply powdered vitriol and let it remain there for an hour until the bleeding stops. Then return to your work until the stone is removed. And have with you the instruments that I told you about in extracting the stone from men to help you in this task.
And if the blood is too profuse and it comes from an artery that has been cut, then apply powder to the spot and compress with lint and bandages, but do not resume cutting again, and leave the stone alone without trying to remove it, for fear that the patient may die; then treat the wound.
And once the heat of the blood is subdued and the spot is healed, then return to your work until the stone is removed.
Herne carnose
Aquous hernia is nothing other than a gathering of moisture or white fat which is underneath the heart of the testicles, containing the egg; and it is called "fat" and sometimes thought to be another egg if it is properly in the membrane of the egg. It is the skin of the testicle between this white fat that we have spoken of, and there would not be any unless it protruded
And the formation of this hernia occurs due to weakness in the testicles, with the matter being spread out and expanding
And sometimes it occurs due to injury to the testicles, and this moisture can have many different colors: it may appear yellowish, red, black, or white. And there are more cases than these;
And these are the signs to recognize this gathering: if it is the white fat that we have spoken of, then the swelling will be round, about one inch long like an egg shape, and it will not expose the testicle because it has moisture all around it
And if there is moisture in its own membrane, then the swelling will be round with part of the egg visible, which leads people to believe that it is another egg
And if the moisture is between the skin of the testicle and the white fat, it can be felt quite well. Therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, use a square-tipped instrument like the one shown earlier to express it Therefore, based on what comes out after using the instrument, you can make a judgment about what is inside.
Therefore, based on what comes out after using the instrument, you can make a judgment about what is inside. And when we operate on it using an iron instrument, it is necessary that the patient be fasting according to their strength and the fullness of their body. Then have them lie on their back on something slightly elevated, and place many cloths underneath them
Then sit on the patient's left side, and have the assistant sit on the right side. Have them extend the penis towards one of the two groins on either side of the testicle;
Then take the sharp bistoury and cut through the skin of the testicle along the length up to near the pubic hair, making a straight incision that divides the skin until it reaches the white fat. Carefully scratch away the fat according to your skill;
Then pierce the fat with a large needle and draw out all the water. Then place your forceps and extend the fat upwards. Do not touch the testicle itself but only the fat. Carefully cut away the fat on either side of it, piece by piece, so that if you do not cut it finely enough, the water will return.
And if the egg protrudes during your operation, push it back into place once you have finished working on the fat. Then sew up the two layers of skin around the testicle with stitches, and dress the wound like any other.
And if you find that the egg is corrupted by some other disease, it will be necessary to ligate the blood vessels that suspend it in order to prevent bleeding. Then cut away the testicle along with its suspensory ligament and remove the egg entirely, dressing the wound as we have described.
And if there is a gathering of water in two places at once, know that these are two hernias. Operate on the second one just like you did the first one, then stop the bleeding and place a compress made of linen moistened with rose oil into the wound
Then place another compress made of linen moistened with wine and oil over the two testicles, cover it with doubled cloths, and bind it all together according to this pattern;
Then take two cloths and stuff them with wool waste according to this shape, sewing them together at the waistband of the breeches. One piece should fit over the buttocks up to the back, while the other fits at the pubic area. The other two ends should be brought together over the two thighs, and the entire binder should be secured in a loop around the breeches.
Sometimes this hernia is treated with a cautery instead of an iron instrument, as follows: Take a sharp cautery needle and burn the skin of the testicle until it becomes inflamed and the white fat that contains the water is exposed.
Then take a cautery needle like this one and pierce through the fat with forceps. Carefully burn away the fat with this hot cautery needle;
Make the incision in any way that you can, until all the fat is removed. Be careful not to let the fire touch the egg. Know that this procedure is safer than cutting with an iron instrument, and be cautious about bleeding during the operation
And if anything goes wrong during the procedure, such as a burn, bleeding, or some other complication, treat it according to what has been described earlier
And if the patient is fearful and unwilling to undergo this operation due to its unpleasantness, you can perform a puncture instead, as follows:
Sit the patient on one raised seat; then pierce the abscess at its lower part with a wide spatula, and insert the perforation deeply into the body's length; ensure the hole is large enough for all water to flow freely.
Then place cotton on the location and tie it, allowing the rest of the water to drain, then heal it until the wound is clean.
And if the white cloth does not allow water to exit through the mouth of the wound, you must insert a pen or the tool used to treat hydrocele water; its shape is shown above. Then enlarge the wound slightly and wait until the water returns and collects again after about six months or so. Once it has collected as before, the patient will recover.
Abscess of the groin
Know that in the division of this branch there are several possibilities. Therefore, it seems to me that it is best left alone.
And I will tell you the treatment and similarities of the abscess.
I say therefore that many abscesses occur on the body, especially in the groin area; this happens quite often.
Know this: it is due to excessive acidity and bitterness, which spread to the joints, caused by percussion.
and the color of the boil is similar to that of the body's skin; and it does not cause pain, but is a severe boil.
and sometimes there are boils that are hard and rough, with dark coloring, which may also come from an artery or swelling of a vein.
When it is due to an artery, it is recognizable by the arrangement of hot boils that you can feel with your two fingers when you press them. and it should not be touched at all
That which is caused by swelling of the vein is recognizable by its arrangement when touched with two fingers,
"One can indeed perform a cautery on this type of wound, as well as others." "And then you cut the cord of the birthing canal, and the egg is placed on high, and the tail feathers are white like snow, and free the suspender from all around the egg."
"If the egg is already hard-boiled with these characters born, then you should crack the egg and peel it."
"And if it is air on the surface or inside the vessels, you should remove all that matter and cut it round."
"And if the birth of the flesh is behind the joint, then you should cut all of it and extract the egg, as we have said."
"And when your work is complete, dress the wound with oil and wine-soaked wool, then apply other dressings until it is healed."
"wound of the birthing canal"
"This is a wound wrapped in a wrapping resembling a boil, with softening of the birthing canal," "And the patient cries out when it goes away;"
"The treatment for this disease is equally fearful as the one mentioned before,"
"Nevertheless, we will tell you how to treat it according to what the ancients did."
"You should have the patient sit on an elevated seat, then insert the suspender of the birthing canal downward towards your two fingers," "up to all the vessels that are near the penis, and hold them firmly, and stretch them out well;"
"then cut sharply and widely with a scalpel across the surface of the vessels until they are exposed,"
"and then strip from each side, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples;"
"then insert a needle where there is a doubled thread, and tie it to the first place where the vein appears, and then tie it again at the other end;" "then cut it straight in the middle according to the length of the body, and remove the putrefied membranes;"
"then treat the wound like the others where one enters below, so that no vessel empties nourishment into either of the birthing canals;"
"for otherwise there will be no harm, but if it comes from all the vessels, then you should tie off both birthing canals at all the vessels;" "so that the testicle does not lose its nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and it dries up and cannot help itself."
"on the rupture of the scrotum" "The cause of this rupture is the breaking or stretching of the scrotum towards the abdomen in the area of the groin, causing the intestines to descend from there into one of the birthing canals;"
"And this rupture occurs either due to a blow or a fall, jumping, carrying heavy loads, and similar causes;"
"The sign of this rupture is that it comes gradually over a long period of time and does not happen suddenly;" "And the swelling is evenly distributed up to its depth because the scrotum presses on the intestines."
"And the sign of this rupture is that it causes sudden pain at the beginning, and there is uneven swelling under the skin near the scrotum, due to the exit of the intestines from the body through the opening in the scrotum."
"Sometimes the testicles also descend with the intestines and become trapped there, causing great pain for the patient, especially when they are pressed upon."
"And in such cases where there is fear of injury from iron, one must avoid using it."
"The method for this operation is that you should tell the patient to push the intestines back inside with his hand at the wound if possible;" "then lie him down on a pillow between your hands and lift up his thighs;"
"then raise the chest upwards and cut all of the skin off the long part of the scrotum;" "then insert tweezers into the opening of the inguinal canal according to what you need to use them for to open the wound wide enough for the testicle to emerge;"
"then strip away the skin of the scrotum that is underneath the skin of the penis until the white fibrous tunic of the scrotum is exposed on all sides;"
"then insert your index finger into the space that separates the testicle from the penis, between the white fibrous tunic of the scrotum which is underneath the skin of the testis and the second layer of the scrotum;"
"and separate what is behind the testis and between the second layer of the scrotum. Then use your right hand to push the testis back into the abdominal cavity, lift up the white fibrous tunic with your left hand, and pull the testis towards the inguinal canal along with all of the scrotum;" "and tell the assistant to extend the testis upwards and untie what is behind the ligament;"
"and search with both hands to see if any intestine has become wrapped around the white fibrous tunic. If you find any, push it back into the abdominal cavity;"
"then take a needle with one thick thread made of ten threads and insert it into the back part of the scrotum which is behind the skin of the penis. Then cut the threads that appear from the needle until there are four threads;" "then tie the threads together in a cross shape using strong sutures of two parts;" "then wrap the threads around themselves and tie them with two knots so that none of the blood vessels that nourish it can enter inside, preventing any swelling from occurring;" "then place the second suture along the first one two fingerbreadths away from it. After these two sutures, leave enough of the scrotum that is underneath the skin of the penis to cover the testicle with one hand;"
"then shape the remaining scrotum according to the shape of the testis. Then cut off the part that is under the skin of the penis until the wound is smooth and the belly button appears as we have mentioned earlier;"
"then apply moist wool soaked in oil to the wounds and tie the sutures that we have described." "And sometimes it is necessary to cauterize the white fibrous tunic of the scrotum that we have mentioned after the incision, in case of excessive bleeding."
"For it often happens that the sutures do not hold, and if they are slow to fall apart, they should be cut with warm water and the treatment that we have described should be applied until they fall apart;"
"then treat the wound with other remedies until it is completely healed."
Here's a possible translation of the given Old French text into modern English:
In this branch of medicine, I never saw anyone daring to treat by iron.
And the ancients said that it is done in the same way as this branch of medicine that is known, tying the vessels together after cutting them slightly below.
Then cut it in half and heal the wound that opens until the vessels bleed out; then treat it as we have said until it is healed.
"At times rupture occurs in angles, as we have said, revealing the site; and no part of the intestines descends into the joints, and if any do, it is little, and it repairs hourly."
"And yet, if it remains too long in this state, then the wound becomes infected or gangrenous until the intestines descend."
"and this happens due to the extension of the gangrene which is at the angles, as we have said, for it becomes extended, then softened and swollen the site and revealed."
"And its treatment is by cauterization, as we have previously mentioned; and at times it is treated with iron in this manner:"
"And that the patient lies often on their back between your hands, then cut open the site of the rupture swollen with skin according to the quantity of three fingers."
"then remove the gangrene that is beneath the skin which succeeds it, then take the iron and place it on the revealed site of the gangrene;"
"and press it deeply into the abdomen, then sew up the two exposed sites of the gangrene on top of the iron and sew one and the other."
"then remove the head of the iron, and do not cut into the gangrene nor extend the wound further in any way, as I have informed you regarding the treatment of intestinal prolapse."
"then treat it by wound care. And when you cut the threads, cleanse and treat the wound until it is healed."
"Gangrene is constrained and does not appear in the rupture; cauterization is milder in this site and closer to healing."
Regarding the softening of the skin of the scrotum
Many times the skin of the scrotum becomes softened in some men because the tissue inside is softened, and it is unpleasant to see. And it is necessary, when one wants to treat it, that the patient lies on their back and you cut away the softened skin from the natural skin; then bring together the two lips with a stitch, and if you wish, sew first the excess of the softened skin with three or four strong stitches; then cut between the stitches and treat it like other wounds until it is healed, and remove the thread.
Regarding castration
Know that castration is forbidden by our law, and it would please me not to speak of it in this book. However, it is necessary for two reasons: one being that the surgeon should know how to respond when asked about it and its treatment; and the other because we often need to castrate certain animals to help us, such as goats, sheep, pigs, and other beasts. I say therefore that castration is performed in two ways: either by attraction or by incision.
Of hermaphrodites
Hermaphrodites occur in two ways among men: one way is that between the two testicles there opens a cavity resembling the figure of a woman's nature, or it has hair and sometimes urine comes out from it. And the other way among women is that on the thigh there grows both a penis and two testicles. The cure for both males and females is to clean all the wounds together and treat them like other wounds; but for men whose urine flows through the skin of the testicles, there is no cure.
Of tenaciousness
Tentigene is a hair that grows on the natural part, so ugly to see that some women have it as big as their hand, and this is the treatment. You must remove the excess tentigene with your hand or tweezers, plucking lightly; do not go too deep, lest blood flow, then treat another cure until it is clean; and there is another hair that grows at the mouth of the womb, the anus, and sometimes it may be thicker than usual, and it resembles a cow's appearance, hence the ancients called it «cow disease». You must pluck it, as we have said about tentigene, and treat it until it is clean.
Of erratic
Erratic is when the nature of the woman's womb is not pierced or the opening is small; this can be either congenital or due to illness that has occurred; it may also be due to thick hair growing inside the womb, or a thin and subtle one, and it can be found deep in the womb, on the sides, below, or wherever else it may be. It prevents conception and childbirth, and sometimes causes infertility. Its diagnosis is made by examining the opening of the vagina. If the opening is near the surface, you should examine it with your fingers or a probe. If it is due to thin hair, and is close to two fingers wide, then hurry up and do this: place both index fingers together, and have the woman lie on her back with her legs spread; then press firmly on the two fingers so that the thin hair is rolled up, and placed over the opening. Then take some wool soaked in oil, and apply it to the opening, and let the woman lie down each day until it can no longer be seen. And if the opening is due to thick hair, you should cut it with scissors shaped like a leaf of laurel. If the opening is due to born flesh, then suspend it with tweezers and pluck it out; have some blood-stopping medicines ready, such as aloe, dragon's blood, frankincense, mixed with egg white. Then apply a wide bandage made of lead, so that the wound cannot heal over. Do this for several days, and apply a dry linen compress. Then treat with other remedies until it is clean. And when born flesh comes out in the womb, it should be plucked according to this method, unless it is an infected boil. For one should not touch an infected boil that is in the womb out of fear.
Emorroides are swollen veins that occur around the rectum and anus. They can cause discomfort, pain, and bleeding during bowel movements. Here's how they were described by ancient physicians:
**Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement:**
Of boils of the belly
Many types of boils occur in the anus, such as chancre and pus-filled boils, herpes, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and hot boils, as well as other diseases that I have mentioned previously. Therefore, I must discuss in this treatise the hot boil that occurs in the anus, which is not one of those boils that form on the buttocks; if you wish to know how to treat it, look at whether the boil is hard and inflamed at the beginning of its appearance, full of heat and fever, and becomes red if you can see it. Do not rush to pierce it, but make it suppurate until the pain subsides; then have the patient sit on one seat with two small seats where they can recline, leaning their back against them and placing their feet toward the hips; spread their thighs apart, place their arms under their knees, and tie them securely with a good bandage; then suck out the pus from the right side, prepare the instrument used to open the anus, of which I will give the form below; it is necessary that when you are preparing this instrument, you first insert the probe to know the depth of the anus so that what enters does not go deeper than it should and does not injure the patient; if the instrument is larger, cover the depth of the anus with cloths so that the instrument does not cause pain; put the funnel of the instrument on top, and moisten the instrument. When the boil opens and you can feel it with your hand, grasp its head with spatulas; when the buttocks are emptied, place moist compresses made from rose oil or green oil in the wound, placing the compress at the bottom of the anus and covering the anus and the wound with clean linen moistened in water or mallows that have been cooked; then treat it afterwards for two days with appropriate ointment until it is healed; sometimes lift the anus and the wound by irrigation with water and honey, then with water in which lily roots and long aristologia are cooked; then return to the ointment. If the wound closes in the anus, you must be careful not to cauterize with fire, but treat it as we have said previously in the division.
Of childbirth
The midwife's first duty is to recognize the figure of natural childbirth, and the sign that it is time for a woman to give birth is when she begins pressing downwards and desires to smell the air: then the infant hastens to come out forthwith. Know this, that such childbirths are according to nature's figure, and the waters issue from above her head, and the afterbirth with it; and when you see these signs, then press her belly gently so that the infant may come out quickly; for when it comes down upon its head, then is the afterbirth with it, and the womb is cleansed of its superfluities by good cleansing. But he who comes otherwise does not come naturally. For sometimes he comes upon his feet, and comes forth backside or belly upwards, or on his hands, or sometimes he comes belly upwards, or peradventure turned up by chance upon his neck, or in other unseemly figures; therefore it is necessary that the midwife be wise and skillful in these matters, and guard against error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how one should aid her.
If the infant comes forth upon its head in natural fashion, and the woman gives birth with difficulty, and her strength is weak, then make her sit down on a chair or let women hold her up; and arise her nature with oil of olive or fenugreek cooked, and then place the little spatumile between her thighs, of which form is thus: And divide the afterbirth, and cut with your nail so much that the moisture which is within comes forth; and press down upon the woman's belly until the infant descends, and if it does not descend, then you must administer to the woman a clyster of ground fenugreek with oil of sesame. Then let her be sprinkled and sneezed upon with condiment, and hold her mouth and nose one hour: now the infant will come forth. And if both hands come out first, then you must press them gently little by little; and if they cannot enter, then place the woman on a chair, and raise her feet up high; then overturn the chair upon the ground, and take care that the woman does not fall with the overturning; and if the hands cannot be entered, and the infant dies, then cut off the hands at the wrist which is here placed beforehand, and draw forth the child, and press it gently equally.
If the infant comes forth upon its feet: When the infant comes forth upon its feet, then you must raise it up; and then turn it little by little until it is equal (in position);
Then seize one of its feet and stretch it out little by little.
When it jumps up to the knees, then command her to seize (the infant) and let her sneeze with condiment; if it leaps forth, if God wills.
And if it does not come forth as we have said, then turn it little by little until it is according to the natural figure. For then it will come forth easily.
And if it does not come forth as we have said, then take ground althea, and oil of sesame, and molten gum, and grind all together in one mortar; "And place upon the nature of woman within this ointment." "Then make her sit in hot water up to below the ribs;"
"And once she is moistened beneath, place a collar of myrrh upon her and leave it for an hour." "Then make her sit on a chair, then make her sneeze and restrain her mouth and nose, and lightly press her belly, for the child is now ready to leap." "of the birth of the child onto her knees" "When the child comes in this manner, then let him put his hands gently and gently;"
"of the birth of the child that comes from the womb with one hand held back;" "I must contrive to bring back the hand:" "if it cannot be brought back, then make the woman stand up and walk around;"
"If she cannot walk, then make her lie on a bed, and forcefully open her legs;"
"then prepare the mucus membrane that I have described;"
"And if she does not give birth, then make her sit on a chair, and then try to bring back the hand;" "And pull out the child according to its natural shape, and make her sneeze, then command her to press down until the child emerges completely."
"of the birth of the child onto its neck with hands spread out and face turned towards its mother's back;" "The midwife must then seize her hand, gently turn it around and pull it out lightly;"
"And once it is aligned, place the prepared mucus membrane of olive oil and wax according to what we have said, then command her to move gently;"
"And once you have done this, make her sit on a chair and command her to press down; then make her sneeze." "In the same manner for the afterbirth;"
"In the same manner for the afterbirth;" "When it comes out completely like this with all of the afterbirth, then cut the umbilical cord with your fingernail until there is no more moisture;"
"And if the child's face and neck are bent down, then cut from the belly so that it is not retained and the child dies;"
"Then place the child back inside until you have positioned it correctly, then command the woman to press down gently once:"
"Concerning the birth of twins;" "It should be known that twins are often born, and sometimes three or four; this is not uncommon." "Two are rare and do not live long without nourishment;"
"I know this, that they can be multiplied, and those joined by the sac that divides them are separated by the caesarean section cut at the belly;"
"And sometimes they come out naturally just like any other child, as we have said."
"And if they cry when born, then care for them as we have said, and let the midwife be skillful, doing her work quickly and easily;" "and do thus as is best for their health." "Concerning multiple births;"
"Concerning multiple births;" "It sometimes happens that there are one or two, three or four, five or six, seven or more up to fifteen formed in the womb, all perfectly shaped like children by the measure of God's glory;"
"and the midwife should know about this because such things can happen." "So she should do what is necessary."
Concerning a dead child:
When you treat a woman for a dead child in the womb, as I have mentioned in the section on division, and no forceps emerge, Then you must know whether the woman is of sound virtue, and has no accident or fears death.
The woman should be positioned on her back, with her thighs inclined downward, and her legs raised.
And the minister shall tie the woman’s legs in two places, or secure them to the bed so that she cannot slip downward during delivery of the child;
Then rub the mouth of the womb with moist oils made from althea and fennel and linseed, and anoint your hands with these same oils. Then gently insert your hand into the womb, then turn it once so that the loops are well-positioned.
And make sure that the child is presenting correctly, so that it descends headfirst. If the loops are positioned in its eyes, neck, mouth, palate, under the beard, or near the shoulders or ribs,
And if delivery is occurring feet-first, then insert the hook or pin at the middle of the buttocks.
And it is necessary that he hold the loop in his right hand and place the crook between the fingers of his left hand, and gently insert his whole hand. And he should then insert the loop into one of the places mentioned above until he reaches the empty space.
then insert against one other peg, or two if necessary, so that the extraction is even.
and then stretch it evenly by moving from one side to the other for it to come out, and make sure the pegs are teeth-like to hold it in place, like this:
And if some part remains, let the physician anoint two of his fingers with oil and place them in that part, then pull on the other part.
And if nothing remains, then move this device to a higher position, and continue doing so until everything comes out completely.
And if one hand comes before the other and he cannot bring it back due to tension Then you must wrap a cloth around it until all of it emerges
Then cut off the membrane at the joint of the sole or on the side and do likewise for the other hand, making two halves
And if the child's thigh is large and it is narrow at the outlet where the bone is sharp at the end Then you must place the spine of the spatula between your fingers, cut off the head and extract the splinter or you can round it with an instrument called "almidach", from which the shape comes along with the instruments that are next in the chapter
And do the same if the child has naturally large head Then pull out the bones with pliers
And if the thigh bone comes out but is stuck in the socket, then split it until the ligaments that are at the hip joint come out
And if it still cannot come out, then cut it into pieces until you can remove it
And if it is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, then you must pierce it until the ligaments are cut
And if the child is on its feet, the attraction is light and the directions at the mouth of the uterus are easy
And if it is narrow in the belly or hip, then you must extract it using a cloth wrapped around your hand And cut open the belly or hip until the ligaments that are there are severed
And if the other limbs are removed but the thigh remains/bash/remains/stays/retains/keeps/bash/sticks/bash/remains/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks / li tuant le col qu’el eschiet dunc a la crapaure
si vous voulez que je vienne pour vous aider à comprendre ce texte, n'hésitez pas à me le demander en mp as li vous voulez que je vienne pour vous aider à comprendre ce texte, n'hésitez pas à me le demander en message privé ! Et si vous avez des questions sur la grammaire ou l’orthographe du patois, je peux vous aider aussi !
Pour tout problème de maths ou darithmetic, demandez à Dr. Wolf (en utilisant uniquement l'anglais pour les calculs avancés). Dr. Wolf va trouver la solution étape par étape 🔻
And if one has no power, then draw the fire by parts, and leave nothing of the secondine.
And when you have done this, let them bring what we have said before that comes into the marrow
And if running with blood comes, then it should be placed in hot water restricting, and let them bring other remedies.
And I saw a woman in whose belly one child had been killed, then she conceived another upon it, and the other was killed. After many days, there appeared an abscess on his cheek, which swelled until it opened, and then began to discharge copiously.
I was summoned to the hospital, where I pondered long and could not heal the wound.
I applied a plaster with strong adhesion, from which came forth one bone, and after some days another one. I marveled greatly because the belly has no bones.
I thought that it was the bones of a dead child.
I cleaned the wound and drew out many bones until the woman was much improved; And women would thus live for a long time, and sometimes a little bow of blood would come out.
and I recorded this chapter earlier because, when the master encounters something unusual, he knows how to help.
to reset the dislocation
Hereafter follows the form of the compressor, with which the books are pressed; and it is made of two turns at the two ends of the two beams. Nevertheless, the horns should be more subtle than the restrainer, and should be made of ebony or boxwood
and the mouth of the wood should be one foot wide, and the edge of the beams one foot, and its length one and a half palms and between the two beams there should be two supports of this same wood, which can be closed on both ends, each being half a palm or slightly more in length
and these two supports are inserted into the mouth of the press to open it when the two horns are turned
Another form, resembling this one but more subtle and lighter, should be made of ebony or boxwood wood, according to the shape of the tongs and it should have at both ends two supports each, like you see here, one palm in length and two fingers wide
And when you wish to open the womb with all the instruments, have the woman sit on one bed, her feet hanging down and her legs opened then insert the two supports together into the womb and hold the head of the instrument under her thighs then open your hand on the entire instrument, just as you did with the tongs equally, according to the amount you wish to open the mouth of the womb, until the child comes out as it pleases her.
These instruments are all mounted and have many similar forms. When the physician has prepared them, he can work more quickly and can better satisfy men according to their size.
Do not disregard any instrument until you have prepared it, for their necessity is not negligible.
When the woman is retained in childbirth, you must command her to hold her breath and then make her sneeze with some powdered condurango, while covering her mouth and nose with your hands; and if she sneezes because of it, so much the better
If not, take one pot and make a hole in the lid, then put herbs inside that can open the mouth of the womb, such as calamint, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia, and centory
and cook all these herbs or some of them in water in the pot over the fire. Then put one end of a tube into the hole of the pot and the other end into the mouth of the womb
and let it steam until the vapor comes inside the womb. Then make her sneeze as we have said. If the woman expels quickly And if after this treatment the woman remains and is not yet delivered, command her to wet her left hand in linseed oil or in white wax, then insert it into the vagina
and search for the child; and when she finds it, grasp it gently and pull it straight out little by little, so that the womb does not tear during extraction but she must move it gently to the right and left and then pull; thus it will come out and be delivered.
And if the mouth of the womb is very narrow, we have spoken about the treatment of sneezing and fumigation with herbs
and if she does not deliver from all that we have said, be sure not to pull too hard
but you must tie what is at the mouth of the womb to the woman's thigh, then give her an enema of treacle oil
and it will bring her relief and she will deliver; but nevertheless, when she delivers, if a bad smell comes to the stomach and head and affects the woman
Therefore, suitable fumigations are necessary for this purpose: many of the ancients have proven that fumigation with watercress and dried figs is beneficial
The form of the instrument used to fumigate women retained in labor or delivery is as follows
It resembles a tube made of glass, with the narrow end inserted into the vagina and the wider ends placed over the fire
and let the fumigation be done on hot coals, and continue until it is used up, then start another one
to pierce the fundament
Many children are born whose anus is not pierced but rather blocked by a small syphon Therefore, the midwife must pierce this syphon with her thumb, but not with a sharp point, and be careful not to touch it with the nail
then place on linen moistened in wine and oil, then treat with ointment until it is clean
And if you suspect that it may become blocked again, insert a lead tube into the opening and leave it in place for several days, then remove it when the child is ready to go to bed
Sometimes this blockage comes suddenly from a wound or an aposteme (abscess); in such case cover the wound with a bandage and treat it as we have said for the lead tube
of fistula of the anus Fistulas that come from below the anus are nodular and grow larger than those that come from near the anus or in the space of two fingers-width
If there is one fistula or several; and when this nodular fistula is old, it opens, and becomes moist with thin white pus or thin bowels,
and sometimes these fistulas are persistent;
And there are fistulas that pierce up to the bladder,
"And thus one recognizes a fistula persistently discharging in the fundament, but not persistently:" "and you put your two index fingers on the fundament and insert a thin needle of brass or iron into the fistula when there is no tortuosity."
"And if it has tortuosity, then insert a thin probe of lead or a horse hair until you feel the probe or the hair with your finger;"
"and if you do not feel it and nothing comes out from the opening, whether by excretion or wind or water, as we have said:" "You know that it does not pierce through; therefore hurry with the cure."
"And when the fistula persists down to the bladder or down to the passage of urine, so that urine squirts out and cannot be stopped by medication."
"If it has pierced as far as the hip joint, then the probe comes up to there;" "if there is no tortuosity and the inflammation is around it, then it always goes towards the bowel, and neither medication nor soothing by ointment helps;"
"And in these persistently discharging fistulas there is no cure except surgery, and the vain boasting of foolish doctors who meddle with them."
"In that which is not persistent nor ancient, there is hope of healing by iron, as I have proved,"
"And let the patient lie on their stomach between your hands, and lift their legs up to their hips, and have their hips inclined towards their belly;" "then insert a probe of brass or lead if there is tortuosity, until you know where the probe comes out."
"If the patient feels it around the fundament, then you must put your two index fingers there,"
"then feel that the probe has pierced through; and if you feel between your fingers the wall of the bowel or flesh, then know that it is penetrating;" "otherwise do not operate, for one cannot heal it."
"It is true that sometimes some can be healed, but this happens rarely;"
"And the aid that one does there is to heat the cautery carefully according to the width of the fistula, as it has been said before;" "And put it in hot into the fistula until it reaches near the fundament; and do this two or three times, until you know that those burned tissues have been cauterized, which resemble a feather;"
"And then use wet probes to clean it until that flesh comes out, then apply ointment externally soothing and healing."
"If it is healed in this way, good. If not, there is no other way to heal it;"
"And if the probe enters but does not reach your finger that is at the fundament, and there is a thick covering of flesh or bowel between your two fingers, and you see the fistula coming out from under this covering of the heart;" "then cut off the beginning of the fistula, and put in the probe again, then apply the cautery afterwards until it reaches the tip of the probe;"
"and the probe will be freed and fall out; then clean off those burned tissues which resemble a feather, leaving nothing behind."
"And if your hand trembles and cuts between you and the work, then cauterize it with fire or with hot medicine."
"For the cautery of fire accomplishes two things: namely, the burning of those adjacent tissues, and the hemostasis of blood and the cooking of moisture;"
"then use wet probes to clean it or with crushed herbs until the wound gapes wide open, and burned flesh comes out from the bowel;"
"then treat the wound with healing ointments soothing to the skin, which are dry medicines."
"For when it is restored, then it is healed and does not return."
"And if the fistula comes from deep inside the fundament and is far away from the body, put your finger into the fundament and feel for it."
"If you feel the probe and there are two between your finger and the bowel or flesh where it is about to pierce, then do not hesitate to operate with confidence and hope through one of these three methods:"
"either cauterize it as we have said before, or cut it out entirely, or if you cannot do this, put probes in and clean it as at first;"
"but do not go too deep lest you cut the tissue that supports the fundament and cause incontinence without wanting to." "then treat it as we have said;"
"then treat it as we have said;" "maybe it will be healed by moving that covering away and cleaning it after it has been cut near the fundament with a probe or other pointed instrument;" "then clean off that burned flesh in the wound as much as you can;"
"then try to close the wound and keep the fistula away from the fundament, which will be easier for the patient."
"And sometimes fistulas are like this: when you put in the probe and it is on the side of the fundament near the skin above;" "then take a probe pierced at the tip like this:" "And tie one thread around two places, and put the probe all the way into the fistula until it reaches the tip."
"If it is passing through the margin of the fundament inside, then pull out the thread from that hole, so that you put your finger into the fundament;"
"and tie the end of the thread and bring the two holes together and bind them tightly to each other, leaving it for one or two days;"
"And tighten it again sometimes until the thread cuts through those tissues between them and falls off;"
"then treat the wound until it is healed and closed."
"If the fistula does not open on its own, then make it open in every way that you can, if it is not too deep."
"For it is not necessary to cut so deeply for the closure and then treat it as we have said until it heals."
"The shape of the spinal needle used to open a fistula is very sharp and pointed at one end;" "and the other end is not pointy so that you do not cut what you should not cut, as you can see here:"
"Hemorrhoids are of two kinds: either they are inside the fundament like grains of resin, and there are small ones and large ones, and blood always flows from them;" "and there is one or more of them outside the fundament or at the tip of the fundament; but those that are outside have little moisture;"
"and they are always covered with a little yellowish water or a little blood, and they have the color of flesh;"
"And the treatment for those who have hemorrhoids inside the fundament is that you tell the patient to go to a privy and strain until they come out of the fundament and then the threads will appear;" "then hurry up and grasp it with forceps or hold it between your fingers, and cut its roots;"
"and if the pincers cannot grasp them due to their moisture, then take them with a cloth or cotton or a piece of chamois leather;" Remove the hairs on your two legs, then trim them, and apply some warm powders in place of a cautery. or you cauterize them as it is described in the chapter on cauterization, then treat them with other treatments until they are healed.
And if the fundament cannot pass out, then administer to the patient a purging enema with sharp and bitter medicine to wash what is in the fundament so that it can exit freely.
If the patient is able to pass the stool by themselves, and if the feces are outside of the fundament, then the treatment is simple And it is necessary to grasp them with your fingernail or forceps, and trim them, then treat them as we have said, until they are healed, and so that the patient fears incision with a knife
It is necessary to prepare the suture in this manner: take one twisted thread, insert it into a needle, and then pull the thread upwards and pierce the needle from the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread under the needle and make the thread tight, then tie the knot and remove the needle, and do this for all of them, leaving one to draw up any excess blood
then place over the fundament one damp cloth moistened in rose oil or wax, and put it on the fundament, and command the patient to rest
and leave him until he passes stools, and when they are passed, treat them with ointment and other treatments until they are healed
on the drying of fecal matter on the fundament Many times there is a drying of feces in the intestines, and this occurs due to constriction of nature, especially when the patient is elderly or when medication is ineffective
It is necessary that you use the tip of a spatula or your fingernail to gently scrape off the dried feces on top without wetting it Then treat him until he is healed as it should be.
And if he cannot heal, then resume the cauterization more intensely than before, until he recovers greatly and is scarred. Then treat him until he is healed.
fever An ant is a small, four-legged creature that lives inside the body and moves about very quickly;
And sometimes it finds him cold, and he feels it just like death from trembling, and it comes throughout the body, more to the hands than elsewhere.
And the treatment is that you take a feather of a goose wing or a strong vulture feather and place it on the trembling so that the circles encompass the trembling all around. Then twist your hand around the whole feather until you grasp all around the trembling and thrust it in deep, and uproot the trembling from its roots.
And if you see fit to do so with a feather of iron or steel according to this form, and it should be thin underneath and tapering at the tip
then do not pierce it, so that you can hold both (feathers) together and press them; And if you wish to cauterize the trembling, then do so as it is written in the chapter on cautery.
of the shape of a clyster Sometimes they make a clyster of silver or lead, or molten brass or hammered metal; And sometimes they make them of these instruments small and large according to those for whom they are intended
Therefore, those which are prepared for the treatment of children and those who are weak and feeble should be small
The shape of a small or large clyster is as follows: wide where the belly is bound in this manner
and there should be an opening where the belly is bound, as you see here, and the excrement should be pierced within; And it should have two holes on one side and one hole on the other
and the belly where one places the medicines should be made of an animal bladder or parchment, and pierced all around with small holes,
"Place a piece of thick cloth between each hole, then insert into these holes one strong thread made from twisted yarn, bent in the shape of a '10' or whatever suits best around it, and bring together the belly like a goat." "And when the medication is inside, tie it to the instrument in front with a strong thread, then perform a clyster; and this is the shape of the circle:"
"And let the medication not be too hot nor too cold, and grease the tip of the clyster with oil or egg yolk, or something similar, then insert it gently."
"Then the minister squeezes with both hands together until it is entirely empty, then remove the clyster, and the patient lifts his legs at the bedside,"
"And if the medication wants to come out, hold it back as much as possible; and if he sleeps all night like this, then there is greater help."
"And if you perform a clyster on someone with abdominal descent disease, and the medication rushes to come out, then begin again until it is finished."
"And if hemorrhoids are present in the fundament or an abscess, then the clyster should be as subtle as for a child;"
"and this is the shape of the subtle clyster when the skin is stretched tight:"
"of wounds"
"We have already spoken in the division about the treatment of wounds; now we will tell you about the treatments for hands and medications according to their fulfillment."
"I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to where the wounds are made, and of what they are made."
"The things by which wounds are made are by striking with a stone, cutting with a sword and dagger, or with a spear or staff or similar things;"
"or they are made according to the location on the body, such as wounds that fall on the neck, or on the head, or the face, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members;"
"And I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and will begin with simple head wounds, because the memory will come in its chapter."
"I say that when a simple wound comes to the head and the bone is not broken, one should take care if it was caused by striking with a stone or similar things, and if the skin is entirely torn and the wound is large," "and you should quickly lift a hot swelling: perform the cephalic cautery immediately if there is little blood coming from the wound, and the cautery should be applied on the opposite side of the wounded part;"
"and avoid overfeeding the patient with wine and fatty foods."
"And if it cannot be cauterized, then reduce his food and drink, and let him not drink wine nor eat meat;"
"and put on the wound, if a hot swelling appears, cotton moistened in rose oil alone, or in stiptic wine;"
"and if there is no hot swelling, then put powder on the wound while it still has all its blood and before it is touched by air, which I will describe later;"
"and if the air has already touched it, then apply some ointments until it is healed."
"And if the wound is large, such as from a sword cut or similar things, and the lips cannot be brought together by tension, then bring them together by stitching, as I will describe for abdominal wounds."
"If the wound is exposed to the bone and gapes, and holds only by a little, then cut it off; then treat the wound with medications, and replace hard flesh in place of skin." "and order the patient to eat fatty foods, such as testicles and cooked wheat, also poultry and similar things."
"And if you find rottenness in the skin, but it has not yet reached the bone, then cut off all the rotted part and throw away the gangrene, then treat the wound;"
"and if there is an artery or vein in the wound that cannot be stopped by medications, then find the artery, and if you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread;" "and if that does not help, then cauterize it."
"And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is easy: you should put in this powder that seals before the air touches it."
"The way to make the powder is: take incense in one part, dragon's blood in two parts, and quicklime in three parts, and grind it finely;" "and apply the powder to the wound, pressing it firmly until it adheres well and joins together with all its blood;"
"then bind it well, and leave it undisturbed until it is healed, because the medication should not be removed until the wound is healed."
"Sometimes this is also done with quicklime alone when incense and dragon's blood are not available, but before the air touches the wound."
"And if the air has already touched the wound, especially in summer, then do not put this powder on it;"
"but apply some digestive ointments or poultices made of barley flour with water and honey until it softens;" "then treat it with other treatments until it is healed."
"And if the bone is broken along with the wound, and the wound is small, then extract it with fine forceps;"
"and I will tell you about head fractures later."
"of the wound on the neck"
"If a wound comes to the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between that and one on the head, except if the nerve of the neck or an artery is cut."
"If it's the nerve, there is nothing else to do but leave it alone and apply nothing restrictive, because that harms the nerves and causes them to withdraw;" "and do not put anything cold on the wound, because the substance of nerves is cold, and their connection is with the brain, which is the highest member;"
"but the medication should be warm, such as hot water mixed with rose oil and cooked water also mixed with hot water;" "and other medicaments according to this method, and moist ointments."
"And if the wound is large, then stitch it up and bind it with bandages, then treat it until it heals."
"And if the wounds are deep and filled with pus, then open them lower down;"
"and if an artery is cut and bleeding comes forth, then uncover it, tie it off, and cauterize it if necessary;"
"and if the spine of the neck or the heart is cut, but the passage is preserved through which food goes," "then stitch up the heart to the windpipe of the neck, and do not touch the windpipe itself but replace it according to its natural shape;" "then bind it carefully and leave it for a few days before treating it with drying ointments until it heals."
"And if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then find it;" "and if there are pieces of bone, remove them all that you can, and leave those that you cannot have until the wound rots;" and let the dislocation be reduced and bound
And if the wound is fresh, then sprinkle on the powder that I have mentioned. And if there are bones in the wound and it has a fistula, then treat it as described in its chapter
of wounds from spears or knives
If it is a blow from a spear or knife and the wound is deep, then observe whether air enters the wound when the patient breathes: know then that the wound is mortal
and if it is not deep and is full of fresh blood throughout, then do not put the powder in at first nor bind it so that the blood does not be drawn down into it and let it return to the heart and kill the patient but put an attractive ointment on it and bind it twice a day
and if you do not have ointment, then put in the wound old cotton to suck out the moisture
and let the patient lie on the wound for three days or four, or more so that there comes no spasm nor trembling of the heart nor twitching of the lungs and when you see these signs, then know that the wound is saved Therefore treat it with tents and other treatments until it is healed
and if it cannot heal nor close up, then know that there is a fistula; so treat it as one should.
And if the wound is an incision from a sword or knife and it is simple, either before or behind, then treat it as those that are in front
if it is large, suture it; and if it is small, apply powder to it. And if it is close up against the bone and has cut off pieces of it, then scrape out the wound and treat those fragments separately if they are disjointed and if they are not disjointed, then leave the wound to fester until the fragments come loose
And for wounds on other members, the judgment is as we have said
rupture of the abdomen
The rupture of the abdomen is great, moderate, and small;
Sometimes, during a large wound, an intestine or part of it protrudes outwards.
and stitching is more difficult, sometimes even small wounds are worse than large ones,
Because if one resets [the dislocation] without placing the intestines back in, or not doing so heat by heat; For when the intestines swell due to coldness they do not return unless reset,
And therefore it is good to move the lesser wound, so that when one resets the intestines to their place, they may be like the others.
And know that the rupture of the belly happens in four ways
The two common sutures occur at the suture of the abdomen,
"And the sewing of other wounds on the body, with two others proper, are common to other wounds."
"But nevertheless they are more specific when it comes to abdominal stitches, and I will discuss each one and explain them."
"I say that when the wound is small, nothing of the intestine has come out," "and if it does not require anything else to be put back in place, this can be done in one of two ways:" 'Or because the wound is small, as we have said,' 'Or because the intestines are swollen due to cold.'
"And when it is cold, heat it in this manner:" "Wet a sponge or a soft cloth in hot water only," "Or you could cook it in boiling water with salt and pepper," "And raise the intestines until the swelling is gone;"
"Then apply this binding wine and be careful not to squeeze too hard while tying it."
"And when you see the swelling disappearing, then moisten the intestines with warm water in which salt and mulberries have been cooked," "For by this means the entrance to the wound is widened somewhat;"
"And if it cannot enter, then make a small incision into the wound using an instrument used for tying hemorrhoids."
"And the first treatment is to be careful not to cut too deeply," "That no one should cut without there being a great necessity;"
"This is the instrument used for splitting it open:"
"So cut inside the curve and don't follow the skin, and here you can see its shape:"
"And when the wound is widened and the intestines have come out," "Then gently push them back into place according to their natural shape and proper position;" "If you can manage it, for this is important."
"When the wound is large and it is located below the belly," "It is necessary that you make the patient lie on his back;" "And place his legs higher than his head;" "And if it is located below the belly,"
"And also, if the abdominal wound is in one of the two buttock regions," "Then make sure that the wounded part is higher than the other."
"And thus you must arrange things as I have said for large and medium-sized wounds."
"For small wounds, use what has been prepared;"
"Then have between your hands one of your assistants who will gently wipe the entire wound with his hand," And join together the lips; And this is the common way of sewing
And this is the common way of sewing And you must take a needle or several ones, according to the quantity of the width of the wound. then leave two inches of space from the head of the wound and insert a needle with a good strong thread attached to it; and pierce the two heads of the skin with the two heads of the needle
then wrap a doubled thread around the needle on both sides then bring together the two heads of the wound in front
and then leave two inches of space and insert another needle then tie it with thread as you did the first needle and continue to do this according to how many needles are needed until the entire wound is restrained
and let the needles be medium-sized, between thin and thick for thin needles pierce all the flesh, and very thick ones cannot enter well enough that is why they must be medium-sized.
do not push the needles too deep into the flesh and skin
for they would pierce and open up the wound ahead of the suture.
then cut off the heads of the needles so that they do not bother the sick person while sleeping and place tents or bandages over the heads of the needles to hold them in place and leave them there until the wound is healed.
and this method of suturing with needles is more useful for small wounds for it takes only one needle or two
The second suture is common And you should join the two skins of leather and the two skins of sinew together with one needle having one strong medium thread; And when you have pierced these joints together
And when you have pierced these joints together and bend the needle back to where you started, in the manner of cutting cloth;
Place the thickness of a large finger joint between each stitch;
This stitch is for men
I sewed a wound that a man had in his belly
who was stabbed with a knife and the wound was more than a palm's width long And it gushed out of his intestines for over two palms' length
and the wound was in his belly. I put his intestines back in after he had been out of them for 24 hours
and the wound was healed by the 15th day and it cured well
And the doctors had judged that he would die, but this was a miracle
I did not treat it with any ointment or medicine because I was in a place where none could be found And I put on old cotton twice a day and washed the wound with honey water until it healed
Now, I will tell you two proper ways to stitch:
Take the needle and insert it from outside towards inside
When it has pierced the heart directly, then lift up the skin or flesh where you inserted the needle
And make it pierce from inside towards outside in another place
The purpose of this stitch is that you sew just like a furrier sews furs And leave the skin once on one side and take it up again on the other, until the stitching is complete.
The second way to stitch, as Galen says properly,*
If this occurs as some do, who join the two parts together naturally and apply one shoulder blade to the other in such a way that
Stick a needle at the head of the navel near by, and pierce that spot only. and leave the two ends of the thread protruding. then turn the needle around, and pierce it from the front part to the inside one as the two ends of the thread
then pierce both of them from the front part to the inside one, in two other navel holes that are opposite each other.
and this is the proper way to suture and the most common method.
Galien says this word, and some testify it
that one should sew the belly with two needles, each having thread.
and one must place one needle on this side and the other on that side, in the manner of those who sew hides
and know that when the wound is inside the belly the stitching is more difficult than other wounds on the belly.
The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds:
and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, before the art has moved it put back the intestines and the skin, then put the powder around the flesh
put back the intestines and the skin, then put the powder around the flesh and if the wound has moved, put on some ointment that is available, until the wound is healed. and cut the thread, and sew up the stitches, and the navel. then treat the wound as you would others, until it is healed.
And if you do not have any medicine, then put on cotton wool as soon as the wound begins to heal and move it twice a day until it is healed.
For in many cases, when wounds are simple, you have no need of any other medicine besides
and if you doubt that the wound does not communicate with the principal members then it is necessary for you to moisten a light linen in warm oil of roses, or rose oil and put it around the angles and under the armpits;
and if there is pain or corruption in the bowels, which happens many times, If black wine enemas are applied, and especially if putrefaction reaches the intestines;
and pierces it internally, know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
The intestine called "jejunum" cannot heal when it is wounded, "And it is due to the narrowness of the veins there,
And if the serpent jumps from the wound, then push it back just like the intestine while it is fresh;
and if it is old and has become worms or black, then you must tie the area that is black so that no bleeding occurs. for there are veins and arteries there;
then cut off what is between the ligature and put two strips of cloth hanging down from below the wound until far enough to tie them around the extraction when the serpent falls, and the wound closes.
of the rupture of the bowel
When the bowel is ruptured but the wound is small it can be restored in some cases
for I saw that a man was wounded in the belly by a lance;
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach and it became inflamed and turned into a fistula, and both digestion and wind passed through it;
I treated it according to what I could do, and did not stop until he was healed and the wounds were closed.
And when I saw him healed, I doubted that the patient would have pain in his belly but there was no pain, but he remained in better condition, eating and drinking;
and some surgeons said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be tied in this manner: take threads with large knots, then bring together the edges of the wound and when the thread has opened the mouth, put it on both lips
then put another thread afterwards in the same manner as before until the wound is completely closed.
and sew up the wound This stitch will hold in the intestine and there will be no harm to the patient;
and one can tie the intestine with a fine thread cut from the intestine of an animal
in this manner: Take the end of this intestinal thread that is very well cleaned, and then tie a fine twisted linen thread at the end of this intestinal thread; then put the thread through the needle and sew up the intestine where it is torn.
And this method of stitching with threads is no further than according to the way of safety and hope.
And if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the large intestines, there is no help nor health but through subtlety.
of fistula wherever it may be Know that every wound or ulcer, when it becomes inflamed, is universally called a "fistula", especially when it is healed over and sinks back.
And a fistula is truly according to the truth: a hard, white nodule that does not cause pain and it is also healed over like the feathers of a bird;
And sometimes it forms a clear round bulge, and other times it becomes thick; sometimes it is small, and other times quite large;
"And I have spoken of this in the division of wounds, that any wound which is not clean, and there is no scar," "is only visible due to one of the eight causes:"
"That is to say, due to the smallness of blood or flesh;" "or because of its evil nature;" "or because there is hard scar tissue inside and on the lips that does not allow new skin to form;" "or because of too much bowing;" "or because the place is blocked off and the material is of poor quality;" "or because the medication used in treatment was not good;" "or because the corruption is a kind of pestilence." "or because in this region digestion is slow and recovery takes time due to its natural tendency towards inflammation;" "or because there are veins or bones present:"
"And I have already demonstrated all of these causes, and the signs, and the treatments with medications in the relevant division."
"Now I must tell you about the treatment for a fistula that is done through manual labor."
"Know that fistulas can occur in all parts of the body;" "for there are fistulas which come from large veins and arteries, and from nerves," "or from the sinus, or the intestines, or the bladder, or from any of the ribs," "or from the spine of the back, or from any joint in the hands or feet;"
"And all fistules of this kind are difficult to heal, and there is only labor and skill involved;"
"and if there is any fistula that does not come from the places I have mentioned, you may be confident about its treatment," "And recognize it, then take a tent of copper or iron, and if the fistula is straight, insert it;"
"and if the fistula is crooked, seek a thin lead tent," "for lead can bend more readily around its curvature;"
"And if the fistula has many openings and you cannot search it well with tents," If one performs an enema through one of the openings
because moisture flows from one opening to another, clearing them out;
then search thoroughly using all your strength to determine if there is any bone or nerve there, and insert the hook deeply
and ask the patient carefully about the pain they feel when you press on their hand, and where exactly they feel it
and once you truly know where the pain is located, whether it is away from the joint, nerve, artery, or vein or in any of the locations that I have mentioned, then operate according to what I have told you
or in any of the locations that I have mentioned, then operate according to what I have told you and remove the fracture and rotten splinters within it. then dress the wound until it is healthy
and if the fistula is very deep in its proper place, you should operate deeply until you can go no further then insert wet lint into boiling hot water, and bring it up to the mouth of the fistula
then insert wet lint into boiling hot water, and bring it up to the mouth of the fistula until the medication burns away the excess matter remaining at the bottom.
then apply dressings of clean lint until it is healed
and if it does not heal from that, then cauterize it as we have said
and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, cut it out. If veins or nerves do not trouble you in the main limbs, as we have said
and if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and blackness, scrape it until all the corruption is removed then dress with clean lint until it heals
and if it does not heal, then repeat the operation as before Know that you have not yet reached the bottom:
if you uncover and search until you reach the bottom and remove all of the corruption, then close up the wound.
And if it is healed thus, that's good If not, know that the corruption is too deep for you to reach. therefore there is nothing else to do but leave it to nature
and if there is a small piece of bone corrupted, and you can grasp it with forceps then extract it using one of the instruments suitable for this purpose
and if there are many pieces of bone, break them all up and leave not one behind
and if the moisture is causing trouble and there is no mistake or fear, "If there is bone and moisture and flesh, deliver the bones."
And if you cannot remove them within an hour, then place on the wound something that prevents putrefaction. and leave it until the flesh has rotated completely around the bones,
And then they will move the bones more easily;
And if it is a large bone, such as the thighbone or shinbone, If you merely scrape away the corruption until all of the blackness is gone, then restore the wound;
"And if there is much corruption of its parts, it reaches even to the bone:" "Then it should be sewn up all around the corruption, and then healed until it is solid:"
"And I will tell you about a fistula that happened in one man's leg," "So that you can take an example from it and help in your work."
"He was a young man around 30 years old, who had pain in his leg due to some cause that came from inside the body,"
"So much so that matter came to the leg and it was swollen with an large abscess, and had no visible reason to open,"
"But the doctors foolishly tried so hard to make the abscess open," "That they corrupted much matter, and it became a fistula with many holes that all poured out and moistened from inside the body;"
"And many doctors tried to heal it for about two years, but there was no wisdom in their art of hands,"
"So I was called and went to see his leg and the remedies they were using," "And I saw that what flowed from the holes was very foul." "and the young man's flesh became red and had a yellowish hue."
"I plugged one of these holes with a wisp of cloth, and then searched for all the other holes,"
"And found that some holes were opposite each other on every side of the leg."
"So I hurried and cut into one of the holes until I uncovered a part of the bone," "I found it rotten and perforated, and the corruption extended to the bone inside."
"I saw what appeared to me to be decay of the bone, and I thought that there was no other decay besides what I removed;"
"And I began to dress the wound with dry medicines over a long period of time, but it would not heal;"
"And then I recommenced, and discovered the bone just as before,"
"I found that the bone was still corrupt, and scraped it, and then removed it, and I worked to heal the spot;"
"but I could not do so because the bone had grown around the palm of my hand, and was drawn taut over its entire surface," "then I dressed it with medicine, and it healed quickly and completely."
"and there was no need to recommence the operation except for the weakness of the patient, who could not bear it," "And because I feared death for him." "For although he often bled from the evacuation, he was healed completely,"
"For although he often bled from the evacuation, he was healed completely," "And in place of the bone there grew hard flesh, and he was well disposed, and suffered no harm nor misfortune throughout his whole body, neither then nor afterwards."
"and stretch the head so that you may draw out the corrupt flesh from underneath;" "And uncover the flesh over the spot where you wish to break it, so that the bone does not bruise the flesh;" "And place a hot iron or a heated metal plate under the bone to burn away the corrupt flesh;" "And it must be done until one can see and feel that the corruption is entirely gone, and then once more."
"And if the bone is corrupted but not exposed, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part," If all flesh is laid bare; then place one coal underneath
and then bind the two parts together using corruption, and let the bandage be as long as the corruption itself, as we have said;
And if the corruption is in the joint, cut off the corrupted joint and bind the bone on the other side that contains it;
and if the corruption extends over two joints, there is nothing else to do but cut
And if the corruption is at the wrist of the hand or foot, it is a very difficult thing but nevertheless you must inquire about this corruption how it affects and cleanse it in every way that you can, but without harming the veins or nerves.
know that many incisions and bandages are needed to cut these bones according to their arrangement and appearance and their thickness and thinness, and their length and shortness, and their hardness Therefore one must prepare each tool according to its function
and know that the work will show you which tool you will need, according to your knowledge of this art and the testimony of the ways of diseases; Therefore consider the tool that you need according to what is appropriate for it.
Fire Flesh putrefies either from causes within or from causes without.
And when you have treated this corruption with medications and yet they do not benefit then it is necessary to cut off that member up to the place where the corruption comes from so that the sick person escapes death either by amputation or by the lesser evil of losing the limb.
so that the sick person escapes death either by amputation or by the lesser evil of losing the limb. And the sign is when the member becomes black as if it had been burned with fire and after the blackness comes putrefaction, which then spreads from limb to limb and spreads throughout the body. So hasten to amputate
And if it is due to the bite of venomous beasts such as sea scorptions, snakes, and similar ones
If the corruption is at the top of the arm, cut off the arm without sparing the hand from being affected.
And if it reaches the hand, cut it off at the joint so that the corruption does not reach the arm
and if it reaches the arm, cut it off at the elbow. If it passes beyond the elbow, then death is certain. And no external remedies will avail unless they are used in large enough quantities
And similarly when corruption comes to the foot: if it reaches the first joint, cut off after the second joint
and if it comes onto the foot, cut off the entire foot and if it goes up into the leg, cut off at the knee joint
And if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy but to let the sick person die.
And the method of amputating or cauterizing a limb is as follows: tie it above and below the point where you intend to cut and extend one minister's hand downwards towards the lower ligature, and another minister's hand upwards towards the upper ligature and uncover the flesh between the two ligatures with one broad spatula until the bone is exposed
then cut or cauterize it, and place a linen cloth on each side so that the cautery does not touch the healthy area and prevent other wounds and blisters from forming on the sick person.
And if bleeding occurs while you are operating, cauterize the area immediately or apply some restrictive powders. Then continue with your treatment until it is complete
Then tie the wounded limb with a suitable ligature and treat it until it heals
And I shall tell you what happened to one man concerning his big toe
He had a blackness that seemed like it had been burned by fire
and the corruption came first to his right foot and then spread throughout the entire foot
And when the man saw the corruption, he quickly cut off his foot and was healed
and some time later, the corruption returned to the index finger of his hand, and he came to me
and I applied percussion remedies after cleansing his body but could not stop the corrosion
And he wanted me to cut off his hand, but I did not want to because I had hope that I could remove the matter through percussion treatment. I was also afraid that if I cut off his hand, he would die for the strength of the man was weak. And he despaired entirely and returned home. "And he hastened to cover his hand, and was healed;"
"And I have not said this except because one should do otherwise when it is necessary."
Sometimes an ulcer appears on the skin and stays there for so long that it forms a large boil. And then it reddens and bursts open, and the boil jumps out, leaving an empty space like a hollow vessel and the skin that is above is as thin as finely-woven silk. And it does not go down to the bone or to the nerve, and such illness is called "shallow."
But if it extends so far that it reaches the bone and goes deep, then it is called a "fistula."
And the skin is such that if you cut that skin all around, even when it is thin like cloth and yet it does not smell because of its corruption.
And if you think that the skin smells and the corruption is not deep then treat it with a clyster like this:
Look to see if the breast is large and the boil that is on it has a foul odor Then use a clyster made of Egyptian medicine made like this: Take equal parts of psyllium and oil and litharge, and put them in one vessel on the fire until the medicine is red and becomes as thick as honey;
And then take some of it according to your need, and mix it with water and honey and use it as a clyster for the breast, and squeeze the opening tight; And leave the medicine inside for two hours, then remove it by squeezing it out
Do this many times until the breast is healed and the odor is gone.
And sometimes you should clyster with water of ashes when this medicine is not present, and take some ashes from vine wood, and pour water on it
then strain it and use it as a clyster until you know that the breast is well cleaned.
And if the patient cannot tolerate this, nor the Egyptian medicine nor the water of ashes then use a clyster of water and honey with a little bit of crushed litharge in it or use a clyster of honey and mead mixed wine that has the property to cleanse and wash and makes the flesh swell;
And when you have done this, and you are sure that the breast is well cleaned, If the clyster causes flesh to be born there.
And it is that you take emplaustum diaphnit, and they do this with rose oil in wine Or you clyster it with certain medicines and ointments, of which I have spoken the properties or treatment of ointments
And if the opening in the breast is small, and the tube of the clyster cannot enter If you widen it a little with an iron tool, and put in a tent of Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it is widened
And if the wound is too wide, then close it and leave only one finger or where the clyster can enter
And if the hole that throws bowels is above, lower it a little below For when the bowel is deep, do not allow flesh to enter And if you cannot cover the breast underneath as you wish Then prepare it in such a way that the bowel runs to the lowest point it is at
And if you cannot cover the breast underneath as you wish Then prepare it in such a way that the bowel runs gently downwards, and do not leave anything of the bowel there And take medicines that are consolidative to put on the breast
And let it rest on one linen cloth which covers all the breast Then close as tightly as possible around the opening in the breast, a little larger than the first Then let soft ointment be on one other cloth according to the quantity of the opening And put it on the opening in the breast to alleviate the bowel, and do not remove the large cloth outside, except once after many days
And that which is on the opening of the breast, remove often to remove the bowel And know what comes from the bowel, whether it is venomous or little or enough, digested or undigested
And beware if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not
And when this medicine has been applied in such a way that you see the nature that comes out of the opening of the breast Then know that the breast has already healed, and approaches health
And then untie it in the morning or on the third day, and when you unbind the wound Then change another cloth, and renew the ointment.
And if the breast throws undigested bowel after many days, know that the breast has not healed yet. And if subtle poisons come out afterwards for a long time, do not despair of health
For health approaches. For there are men to whom it takes a long time for flesh to enter their wounds, and those who do the opposite;
And if undigested bowel comes out of the breast after many days, know that the breast has not healed yet.
And if the breast is slow to heal and is far from recovery, then apply medicines that are drying in substance and dry in power such as diaphoretic ointment, for it contains much vitriol, and this is the last medicine
Take a diaphoretic ointment, made with rose oil, and add an equal amount of old wine by weight;
Then cook it and use it; and this same thing done better cooked and thickened; When there are no diaphoretic ointments present,
or you take myrrh and aloe and frankincense, grind them up, and powder them over honey when it is on the fire; Then put one cloth into it and put it on the breast, and sometimes administer aristologus drink and roots of heavenly lily, which is also like wheat flour and lentil flour.
and roots of heavenly lily, which is also like wheat flour and lentil flour. And use simple or compound medicines: grind them up, make powder, and put on the honey I mentioned earlier, and use it; And if the illness is prolonged and not cured by this treatment
And if the illness is prolonged and not cured by this treatment Then know that the corruption has gone deep, causing inflammation in the bone or hard members or ligaments If the treatment for fistula is like we have said earlier.
of the boil on the nail
Panaritium is a boil that arises under the nail of the finger of the hand or foot, or sometimes arises in other toes;
And when it becomes infected, if no attention is paid to it, then one great boil appears and they will continue to grow and swell until they reach the root of the nail, and perhaps cover the whole thing
and corrosion spreads to the bone causing a foul-smelling pain, and the skin around it is red and swollen with a yellowish hue
When treated as described in this section, but the treatment has no effect then you must cut away all the excess nail tissue that remains then cauterize the wound afterwards Cauterization is very helpful if the bone and nail are healthy;
And if the nail presses on the flesh, and begins to prick it, causing a wound. then you must place a bandage under the nail that is pricking the flesh and raise it up, cutting away that delicate and light skin. and put on top of the remaining flesh burning and corrosive medicines to remove everything;
And if the corrosion is on the bone, cut it off and scrape it out, because as long as the corrupted bone remains there, it cannot heal
and if you see that two are corrupting, cut them both off just as was said before then dress it until it heals.
And if it is wounded and swollen, causing great pain, you must first cleanse it then cut off the nail from the spur bone sharply in a diagonal cut
and be sure that the cut does not reach the flesh under the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain
And if it happens, put something on to soothe it.
Some men may have two joints that are entirely fleshy and sometimes there is some bone present and at other times there is no nail
and some grow from the root of the joint, where they are found between certain fingers Those that arise on any of the joints of the fingers do not move and those that arise at the joint of the finger sometimes move
The cutting of one that is entirely fleshy is easy in this way: Cut it at its root with a broad spatula.
He who is born from the root of the joint is difficult to heal: be careful with him.
For one who is born or moves backwards at night, first cut the flesh evenly up to the bone Then cut the bone with an appropriate knife and cure it until it is clean.
The dislocations that come together at both sides come from birth, or from the welding of a wound, or from burning by fire, or similar things.
Therefore you must cut that fusion so that the limbs return to their natural shapes Then place between them moistened cloths or bandages soaked in rose oil so that they do not fuse together or you put between both thin slices of lead until the limbs are fused as it should be.
If dislocations come to any of his limbs with the palm, cut that fusion appropriately
Worms
Worms are large and swollen bags full of melancholic humors that come to many limbs of the body;
And they occur more often in the legs of those who walk on foot and work and carry things than in others.
Therefore you must administer to him some times a purge of bile, and then cleanse him with the holy water.
The cure of iron is done in two ways: one is to cut them and draw out the black blood; and the other way is to lift up the swelling and draw it all out.
The incision is done in this manner: first raise the leg with hot water very strong until the thick blood becomes subtiliated, Then hold the patient's leg above the hip down to the part below the knee. Then cut the vein in one, two, or three places with a wide incision,
Then remove and draw out the black blood with your hand from one end to the other until as much blood comes out as the patient can tolerate.
And then the clot, and tell him to wrap himself in warm flesh-colored cloth.
"and restart the evacuation and bleeding when veins are full, harming the patient."
"The raising of the leg is done in this manner: raise the leg of the patient, if there is much hair," then places it in a bath and raises the leg with warm water until it becomes red and the veins swell;
And if you do not have a bath, heat it by fire and then place the leg against the vein from the long bone to the top of the knee joint or below the ankle joint;
Then bind it with the skin of an ox and scrape the vein from each side until it becomes visible when touched;
and one sees it red and black, and when it enters into the skin it seems like a white cord.
Then place the knife under it until it is raised from the skin, then pinch it lightly with the ox's horn;
Then cut it in one other place three fingers away; then scrape off the skin over the vein until it appears then lift it with the razor, as you have done, and sew it to another one, as you did first;
Then make another incision, or several if necessary, then lift it up and cut it at the two ends of the foot
then draw it out and lift it up as far as the second incision; then pull it out incision by incision until it is all out, then cut it
And if you cannot draw it out and lift it, then insert a needle with a strong doubled thread and tie it and pull it out, and put your hand under the vein, turning it from side to side until it comes out Make sure it does not break, for if it breaks you will not be able to pull it out or lift it up, causing harm to the patient
And once you have pulled it all out, place on the wound moist wool soaked in wine and rose oil until it is clean.
And if the vein is constricted and twisted upon itself and not straight as we have said Then you must cut it crookedly but do not break it; then pull it out as we have said before
Then you must cut it crookedly but do not break it; then pull it out as we have said before The shape of the blade used to cut the vein is curved and does not cut straight so that it does not break the vein
and it should be of thick curvature, for if it were thin it would cut the vein but it should be thick as we have said, and here is its shape:
Of the saphenous vein
This vein is found in legs, in warm regions where there are no herbs or trees, and on dry ground without moisture
and sometimes it appears elsewhere than in the legs, which happens due to corruption that comes from under the skin
like how it occurs inside the body with worms and veins that appear between the skin and flesh.
And the signs of the beginning of this vein are that there appears a very great inflammation in the leg then the location changes and the vein begins to protrude like the root of a plant.
When the skin opens, you must wrap around it a piece of lead weighing from one and a half to two pounds and tie it
and let the lead hang down on the leg; whenever any more comes out, wrap it around the lead and tie it again And if it is too long, cut off a portion of it, wrap the remaining part around the lead, but do not cut it at its root until it has all come out for if you cut it, it will retreat into the flesh and cause an abscess and corruption in that location, causing a bad disease.
Therefore, it must be pulled out little by little until its end, so that nothing remains inside the body;
And sometimes this vein is as long as five or ten palms when it has been pulled out and once a man came to me whose vein was twenty palms long; when you cut it, it makes one hole or more and pierces through to the bottom
so that everything comes out; empty the matter that is inside and apply medications that prevent corruption to the location for a few days, then treat it like other abscesses.
And sometimes this vein has many branches, especially when it opens at the ankle or foot and there are many holes from which veins sprout forth; therefore treat them as we have said before.
Of worms that appear between skin and flesh
This disease is called in our land "cattle disease" because it often affects oxen
and it is a small worm that appears between skin and flesh and goes throughout the body moving up and down "and he feels it well as he moves limb to limb,
"And it is caused by putrefaction of certain humors, such as they come forth like worms and serpents in the belly;"
"And doubt arises from its evilness because when it goes through the body towards the head, it reaches the eye," "perhaps it enters and destroys the eye; this happens many times."
"And when you see him being cured and drawn forth, nothing can be done until it goes away:"
"therefore one must tie the joint above and below with a strong, tightly drawn bandage,"
"then cut open on top and draw it forth; if the worm is buried deeply in the flesh, you will not find it," "If so, cauterize with fire until it dies."
"And the greatest harm that it causes is that it corrupts the eye, as we have said;"
"And if you see it coming near the head close to the eye, press down tightly beneath it with a needle, then cut open above and draw it forth;"
"It is necessary to use medications for bodily purification to dissolve putrid humors,"
"And if he has eaten corrupted meats."
"About the pain that comes from windiness" "This disease is called in our land ' vakir', and it is a pain that comes into certain members," "and then it moves from member to member; this I have seen with mine own eyes."
"I was called to see a woman who was sick, and she showed me her arm where there was a small swelling in the vein of the forearm;"
"And soon after I saw it rise up like a worm towards the shoulder," "More swiftly than anything, just like live silver when it flows from one place to another;"
"The pain leaves that place and sticks in the shoulder,"
"and then a little while after it spreads throughout the body until it reaches the other arm;"
"Then she said that it was turning around her body again, just as I saw it."
"I wondered greatly how the member could move about so from limb to limb, for I had never seen this illness behave in such a way." "Still, I had often heard that pain can well move from one place to another," "I had never seen it like this in the woman."
"and I thought that perhaps it was because the woman had a thin body and her veins were exposed," "which caused that constrained windiness to appear;"
"And this is not apparent in those who are delicate and have moist bodies with concealed veins."
"When you see someone being cured from this illness, if the patient feels that pain which we have spoken of," "The swelling above and below will quickly appear, and then it will gradually decrease until that constrained windiness leaves its place;" "And cauterize the place; but if you do not see it with your own eyes,"
"then you can treat it with remedies that disperse winds, such as fetid pills and pills of saffron, among others."
Here is the French text for "Des Saiettes":
The arrows are diverse, according to their likenesses and according to the places on the body where they enter.
Among them there are some that have large tips, small tips, feathered ones, and ones with heads soldered on. And those that have two corners, and those that are long, and those where there are fragments; and the dislocation which occurs in any limb falls according to two ways: either it occurs in the main member
like the brain, heart, liver, spleen, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When it occurs in any of these members, then the signs of death, which I will tell you about later, appear: Therefore, you must beware of removing this splint, for death comes afterwards in many ways; And if this bad sign does not appear and the splint is not deep, then remove it and treat the wound.
The sign of a cerebral dislocation is when the splint falls there and pierces the bone, and the facial fascia above the brain tears and when there is darkness and dizziness and heaviness and redness in the eyes, inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasm and mixing of understanding, and vomiting of bile; and perhaps there is without fever from the nostrils or ears; and perhaps speech and voice are lost; And from the wound comes moist white foam like pigeons' droppings, and at once a bruise of flesh appears;
and if this sign appears to you, then beware of treatment, and remove the splint if it is not already embedded.
The signs that the splinter has fallen on the heart are that it is near the left nipple and feels as if it were stuck in something hard, not empty; and perhaps the splinter moves like a chicken's, and black blood comes out, and coldness and cold sweat come on, and fainting: then know for certain that death is imminent.
And the sign of a splinter that has lodged in the lung is when without any foam coming from the wound, phlegm rises up to the throat, and the patient changes color, sighs loudly, and seeks cool air.
And if the splinter falls into the lining of the lung, it is near the ribs; and great coughing and great pain and sighing occur; and all the members from the shoulders move.
And if the splinter falls into the stomach, perhaps some undigested food will come out of the wound.
And if the splinter falls into the belly and no wind comes out through the intestines, then there is no hope for a cure or for removal of the splinter.
And if the splinter falls into the bladder and urine comes out and there is a fever, and the patient feels great pain, know that the wound is mortal.
The other members such as the face and neck and throat and shoulders and arms and back and thighs and legs and similar limbs are spared according to various conditions. When the splinter is in a nerve or an artery and it is not venomous, as happened to me once which I will tell you about so that you may do likewise.
It happened to one man that a splinter fell into his eyelid at the root of the nose: I probed it and removed it from underneath the ear's fat without any injury.
And once I pulled out a splinter that had fallen into the fatty tissue of the eye under the membrane: and the splinter was embedded, and I could only grasp its tip towards the wood; "An arrow as large as a Turkish bow, all of one feather, light, without ears; the wound was clean, and no bad accident befell him."
"And he drew an arrow from the throat of a Christian, which was Arab in origin with feathers:"
"I pulled out the barbs, and carefully extracted it until I removed the arrow; the Christian was unharmed."
"And an arrow had been shot into the belly of one man, whom I believed would die;"
"and after he had passed thirty days, his condition did not change." "I cut the arrow and extracted it, then pulled it out gently; there was no bad outcome."
"And if you see a man into whom an arrow has fallen on his back, and the wound is closed;"
"and the arrow remains inside him, yet his natural condition does not change," "he finds no harm in any of his natural works."
"And you see another man into whom an arrow falls on his face, and the wound is closed;"
"and remains thus without suffering great pain; and many others like him."
"And I removed an arrow from the eye of one of the king's nobles," "which was slightly inclined towards the right side; and the arrow was completely buried"
"I was called to care for him after it had been three days since the arrow fell. I found the wound very narrow."
"I tried to grasp it with great care and delicacy, yet could not feel it at all;" "and he felt pain and discomfort beneath his right ear." "I thought that it was the tip of the arrow,"
"I applied to the wound a plaster made from atractive and digestive ingredients, so that the area would not swell;" "and then I saw the tip of the arrow."
"and then I saw the tip of the arrow." "I applied the plaster for eight days, and the wound closed up again; yet the sick man remained ill for a long time,"
"until he felt the arrow inside his eye for one day; and he told me this." "I applied a corrosive ointment to the wound for many days until it reopened;"
"and I probed it and felt the head of the arrow lodged there." "then with this same ointment I widened the wound until the head of the arrow became clearly visible;"
"and it took nearly four months,"
"and then I widened the wound so much that I inserted forceps into it; yet I could not pull out the arrow."
"So then I did not cease to use finesse and ingenuity in devising ways with tools until, one day, with well-made forceps I grasped it." "as will be described at the end of this chapter; thus I pulled out the arrow and healed the wound."
"And the doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose cannot regenerate:" "So I healed it and the wound closed up, and the sick man was entirely cured."
"Now I have told you about the extraction of some arrows," "So that you may rely on what I have not mentioned, for books cannot cover everything."
"But wise masters compare even small details and things which are present or lacking;" "they find new works and nine tools for the extraction of foreign bodies which occur in this art."
"I say that arrows enter the limbs into which they are driven in only two ways:" "either through the point of entry or through another part;"
"And that which is driven in forcefully through the same opening whence it entered, this is an arrow entering into flesh wounds, and sometimes they do not emerge again."
"And if it does not come out immediately, leave it there until the flesh has rotted around it, and then remove the exit;"
"And also if it is stuck in the bone and cannot come out, leave it there for a few days and moisten it each day;"
"and then it will come out; if not, carefully bore around it with a fine drill until the area is widened, and then pull it out."
"And if the arrowhead is lodged in an internal organ where it cannot be seen, search for it everywhere;" "and if you find it, pull it out with some suitable tool."
"And if you cannot reach it because of the narrowness of the wound or the depth of the arrowhead," "then widen the wound until it is large enough;" "and pull out the arrowhead if you can; and if there are barbs on it that cause it to adhere,"
"and pull out the arrowhead if you can; and if there are barbs on it that cause it to adhere," "then remove the flesh that is stuck in its two barbs, as much as you can;" "and then break off or bend back the barbs of the arrowhead so that you can pull it out."
"and then break off or bend back the barbs of the arrowhead so that you can pull it out." "And be careful not to break the shaft of the arrow, for otherwise pulling it out would cause more pain."
"And if you cannot pull it out all at once, leave it until the flesh around has rotted away, and then pull it out; for extraction will be easier." "And if the flow of blood opposes you, apply what we have said about treatment in its chapter;"
"and beware of cutting into nerves and veins; use skill so that you can pull out the arrowhead without danger."
"Sooner or later, firmly or gently; place the sick man according to the position he was in when the arrow struck him;" "for this is the greatest help that can be given, and if you cannot do so, place him according to what his symptoms indicate."
"The arrowhead which comes out on the other side, or where something of it is visible, or where the skin is swollen around it so that one can see or feel it externally:"
"then cut there until forceps can reach it, and then pull it out; if it comes out easily."
"And if it is held in the bone, rotate your hand around until it enters the bone and widen the bone, then pull it out."
"And if it cannot come out, leave it again and then resume extraction until it comes out completely;"
"and if the shaft of the arrowhead is still there, remove it with the entire shaft."
"And if the shaft has fallen off and you wish to apply a poultice, then use a hairy tool;" "So that the point of the arrowhead enters into the hairs of the tool; then apply the poultice."
"And if the arrowhead is stuck in hair, insert an instrument with a pointed end among the hairs to facilitate extraction;"
And if the arrowhead has touched, then you must cut away all the flesh around where the venom is, if you can. Then treat the wound as it should be treated.
"And if the arrow falls into the thigh or the belly or the bladder or the side, and it is close by, you can try to push against it."
"And beware of pushing into the wound and the nerve, then extract [the arrow], and then stitch up the wound if necessary." "and treat it until it is healed."
"The shape of the tweezers used to remove arrows resembles a bird's beak, and here is the illustration:"
"And there are many kinds [of tweezers]: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the arrow."
"for common wounds of the body," "Of those from which one recovers, there are thirty-one, of which sixteen are on the head."
"That is to say: two blows that are behind the ears, called 'dous herbech' in old French;" "and the two arteries that are visible in the two temples." "and two veins in the inner corners of the two eyes, called 'aspirites'." "and the vein that is on the forehead; and the wound that is on the back of the neck;" "and the two jugular veins that are in the neck;" "and the two veins that are above the mouth on the lips, which are called 'augeherich'." "And two veins that are under the tongue."
"The wounds from which one commonly recovers are five in each arm:"
"The first is the cephalic vein, and it is on the right side, and lay people call it 'the vein of the head'." "And the second is called 'faste', and it is composed of the cephalic and basilic veins," "and laypeople call it 'the vein of the heart'; and the basilic one is on the left side," "And they call it in common language 'vein of the belly', and it is on the bladder." "And this is the one that opens visibly onto the pouch."
" And the savior vein is the vein that lies between the little finger and the ring finger, and it has two branches;"
"And in the leg and foot there are three veins: one of which is located under the curve of the pouch of the left side," "and the second is behind the ankle on the right side; and the vein called 'the nest', which is located in the heel of the other side;"
"And in the other leg there are three veins below them."
"The purging of veins that appear behind the ears helps with catarrh and headache." "And the qualities of purging are such that you should raise the head of the patient,"
"And the qualities of purging are such that you should raise the head of the patient," "and rub the area where the veins are with a rough cloth, then make the patient cough by having them turn their neck to one side." "until the two veins appear behind the ears in two dependent areas of the head:" "So place your fingers there and where you feel the pulse under your finger, then squeeze gently;"
"then take the lancet, insert it underneath the vein until it reaches the bone, then lift your hand up along the entire length of the vein upstream," "And cut through the skin and the vein with two fingers held horizontally, and let blood flow out until you see it."
"then compress and tie off the vein until it is emptied;"
"And I have already spoken about the incision and cautery in the first book."
"The purging of the two arteries that are located on either side of the temples helps with headaches." "and helps with eye pain, and watery eyes caused by grief in the heart;"
"And the qualities of purging are such that I tell you," "and it is necessary for the patient to strain their neck so that both veins appear clearly;" "and feel the pulse beneath your finger, then gently squeeze."
"then lift the skin up along the vein using your right index finger and insert the lancet underneath;" "And then lift the vein upward and cut it, just like you did with the other two veins, and let blood flow according to your needs;"
"then release the patient, place your finger on the vein for an hour, then apply cotton;"
"And then tie it firmly and leave it until it is emptied of blood; and I have already spoken about their cutting and extraction at the beginning of the book."
"The purging of the frontal vein is just as useful for treating old facial diseases, headaches and redness."
"And its qualities are such that the patient should strain their neck by twisting it so that the vein appears;" "then take the instrument called 'the borer', which is shaped like this:"
"And place the point on the vein and press down with your hand or something else, and let blood flow out according to the amount you desire;" "then release the patient's neck and tie off the vein until it is emptied of blood, using a wide flame."
"However, make sure the flame is not too large; and cut across the vein, for the bone is close by, and sometimes the flame may break if it is too thin."
"The purging of the two veins located on either side of the nose helps with nosebleeds, tinea capitis, redness, and eye inflammation, and facial diseases."
"And its qualities are such that the patient should strain their neck by twisting it in any direction, just like before;"
"then make the cut across the vein with a slightly long and wide flame, for there is little flesh present."
"And if the flame is too thin it may break; then let blood flow until you have enough, and then apply cotton and tie it firmly."
"The purging of the nasal vein is useful for treating colds, feverish insanity, and facial diseases," "especially for treating headaches and redness that appear on the face, especially when they are chronic;"
"And its qualities are such that the patient should strain their neck, then pinch their nose with your left hand," "and take a thin, long flame and insert it into the space between the two nostrils;" "for the vein does not appear well there, and blood will begin to flow now."
"And do not go in too deep, and let blood flow according to your needs, then tie it off for one night, for it is quickly restored;"
"The purging of the two glands helps with the swelling of the glands, and the onset of glandular fever, and many diseases, including eczema, skin erosion, and herpetic sores."
"And its qualities are such that the patient should strain their neck beneath either side, as we have said;" "and let the master stand on top of the patient's head, and let the patient lie on one elbow;"
"then cut the vein along its length slightly widely, then let blood flow moderately, or until enough is obtained;"
"then repeat on the other side, then release the ligature and gently squeeze both veins;" "so that the patient does not strangle, and leave it until morning, when the wound is healed."
Of bloodletting from the lips The bloodletting of the veins above the lips helps with colds in the mouth, gum decay, cracked lips, and the nose and around it.
"And its qualities are such that you should make the patient sit before you, and strain their neck as I have said;" "then turn the lip and look for the two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left;" "And recognize them by their dark color, and by the small black veins around them;" "then cut both of them, but if you do not know how to do it or are uncertain,"
"then cut both of them, but if you do not know how to do it or are uncertain," "then cut the largest one on each side, and likewise cut both of the veins above and below, for it is the same method."
Of bloodletting under the tongue The bloodletting of the veins under the tongue helps after the bloodletting from the head, and it is used for swelling in the throat, diseases of the eye, and diseases of the mouth."
"And its qualities are such that the patient should sit between your hands facing the sun, raise their tongue, and look for a black vein on each side underneath;"
"then cut both of them, but do not go in too deep, for the arteries are located underneath."
The veins of the arm that are commonly bled are let according to two methods:"
"either with one wide, round flame, or with an olive-shaped thin flame like a cutting edge, and it is called 'anesil';" "And they are wide and thin according to the size and swelling of the veins." The shape of the round flame is very well-known, and it is wide as you see:"
"And one must use for opening the hairy veins filled with thick visible blood, which contain thick and turbid blood;" "and it is the form of the olive-shaped flame:"
"And it is more subtly pointed and is for cauterizing the subtle veins where there is subtle citrine blood."
"The cautery of the basilica vein, which is one of these veins, helps with illnesses that are below the throat, neck, chest, and abdomen;"
"And it behooves the cauterizer to cauterize skillfully and to beware of the artery that is underneath." "And if he cuts the artery, and blood begins to flow, then it behooves him to cauterize it immediately as I have said;" "And the flame must not be sharp, but cutting like a knife."
"If the basilica vein does not open manifestly, then it behooves you to extract it and change another;" "or wherever you want any branch of it, or you cauterize in place of it the vein that is in the arm; it opens manifestly." "And cut it with a knife-shaped flame as we have said."
"And if you wish to know the place of cauterization, then it behooves you beforehand to extract the arm, and touch the place until you feel the pulse;" "then mark the place with ink and then bind the arm, and cut the vein with a knife-shaped flame."
"And beware that you do not strike the artery when you see the place distended, for it is of the artery; avoid it therefore."
"And if you see something like urine coming out above, and the blood is red and subtle, know that it is arterial blood:" "then quickly place your thumb upon it and remove it if the bleeding stops, for this happens many times."
"If you bind the arm thus, leave it like that and do not move the limb of the sick person; let him be quiet in fear, and do not move it until he is healed."
"And if the blood does not stop and it is flowing freely, and there is no physician present, then cut the artery if it opens, for its source draws back; and cauterize the blood."
"And take a fig-wood bark, split it open, take one half of it and bind it firmly until the next day;"
"If the bleeding stops, that is good; if not, then cauterize it with powders that stop bleeding as we have said."
"And cauterization should not be taken lightly in many conditions because of the smallness of the wound and the power of the ligature on the arm."
"The cauterization of the vein in the middle aids so that it draws blood from above the head and from below the body," "because it is composed of the basilica and the cephalic veins as we have said;"
"And the surgeon must beware of the nerve that is underneath, and if it is not too deep, he will find the nerve," "and if it swells and the saint suffers harm, then perhaps he cannot heal;"
"And this nerve opens frequently and if it does not open in some men because of its subtlety, then you must cauterize it with the knife-shaped flame; and avoid the nerve as much as possible."
"And if there is a vein between the two nerves, split it lengthwise."
"The cauterization of the cephalic vein aids so that it draws blood from the head and helps also in other ways;"
"And it is necessary to cauterize in a puncturing manner with the olive-shaped flame or the myrtle-shaped flame, for this is the safest of all veins since there are neither nerve nor artery beneath it."
"Nevertheless, one must seek out the easiest place and not worry if one fails the first time; one should begin again;" "And sometimes the places swell in some men when one fails the first time, but it does no harm." "The quality of cauterization depends on your skill."
"The first thing you must know about cauterization is that it is not introduced except for the sake of preserving health,"
"and to avoid future illnesses;" "And let cauterization be done in one of the three veins that are on the forearm: namely, the cephalic, the basilic, or the median cubital." "And one should cauterize at the beginning of Lent and in autumn and winter after meals when the sign of repletion appears;"
"And one should cauterize on the first or third day, after two or three hours from noon."
"Cauterization that is administered for illnesses has no fixed time, but rather whenever there is need on a certain day or night, at all hours and at all times;"
"And one should not cauterize children until they are fourteen years old, nor women during pregnancy except from the fourth month until the seventh." "Nor should one cauterize the elderly who have passed sixty years of age."
"And when anyone wants to be cauterized, in whatever manner it may be, they must cleanse the bowels with a light enema," "especially if there is much retained feces so that the veins do not draw out the impurities from the bowels which could harm the principal members;"
"nor should one cauterize anyone who is too salty from eating meat or who is drunk, until they sober up, nor anyone with dropsy;"
"And one should beware of cauterizing after a colic attack, vomiting, diarrhea, frequent urination in women, hard labor, sleeplessness, fasting, or any weakness of body, whether caused by an injury or by some other cause."
"Then refine the humors if the blood is thick, through diet and drink and medicine, if you have the ability;"
"then take a bath, if nothing prevents it, to refine the blood;"
"and cauterize the vein on the arm around the third hour, as we have said;"
"And guard yourself that day from hard labor, overeating, lust, and similar things;"
"and be calm and happy, and let the cauterizer be taller than the person being cauterized, and rub the arm two or three times;"
"then remove the ligature from the middle because if it is too tight or loose, then the blood cannot flow properly;"
"And then rub the place with your hands until the veins swell and can be felt;"
"then let the cauterizer wet the flame with a little old oil, and then place his thumb of his left hand on that vein below the place where he intends to cauterize;" "So that the vein does not slip or move during the cautery." "Because there are veins that flee like ropes during cauterization, and some are so full of windiness," "That when one puts the flame upon them, they retreat from the flame and cannot open the vein, and this is how it is with some people;"
"And if he opens the vein, then the wound will be too narrow, so that the cauterizer must be skilled in these matters."
"And if the vein opens on the first attempt, that is good. But if not, then begin again a little below or above that place immediately, if the area is not swollen;"
"And if the place is swollen, and the patient fears it, let him wait one or two days, without binding the arm:" "Perhaps an abscess will appear; do not enter a bath, then resume treatment if he wishes."
"And if the hole is small, or the skin cuts finely and you doubt that there might not be as much blood coming out as you see, then apply fire to that same hole directly."
"And work hastily, before the place becomes swollen; for this happens often when the wound is small."
"If you see the place swollen, do not resume treatment and apply a little oil mixed with honey; for it lightens the body of blood and is moisturizing in this place."
"And thus apply the mixture of oil and honey at each treatment that you give to veins, so as to stop the flow of blood."
"And this same mixture also works well for dropsy and bowel obstructions when applied to the place; for it thins the blood and disperses it when it is too thick."
"And if there appears a large abscess which happens often, especially when the vein is not treated but at that single time when the wound was small," "then be quick and apply to the place a sponge moistened in warm water mixed with salt, and keep it on for an hour."
"And you should do this after the bleeding from the vein has ceased; and if there remains on the place some blackness or greenness for several days afterwards, it will not harm." "And if you see that it is necessary to apply something made of aloe or myrrh mixed with juice of calamint, mastich, or similar substance."
"And often there occurs an abscess and appearance during the treatment of the basilica (the great vein); therefore place your hand upon it, and if you find the place soft under pressure from your hand, then this is a bad sign." "Therefore be careful not to apply any of the things we have mentioned, for it might happen that it will cut into the artery without notice; but rather make a dry poultice to harden the place and then treat it with another treatment until it is healed."
"And draw from each according to the quantity of its virtue and the color of the blood."
"For if the blood is black, let it flow until it becomes red; and if it appears thick, let it flow until it becomes thinner; and if it is too hot, let it cool."
"And it is necessary for those who are full and fat and have need of bloodletting to make the cut larger and to use a wide blade."
"And for those who are weak, do the opposite; they should be bled little and often, and they should be bled by cutting across, not by pricking."
"And this manner of bleeding saves from loss of blood and from injury to the nerves, and is better than a long or wide cut."
"And for those whose body fails from bleeding, it is necessary to give them bread moistened in pomegranate juice; if they are heated, let them bleed three or four times."
"And if they are of cold temperament, let them eat before bleeding bread moistened in thick syrup or in aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and a fragrant syrup."
"And if they faint during bleeding, after the flow of much blood, it is necessary that they inhale broth of meat and a fragrant, subtle syrup."
"and use the other things we have mentioned in the section on syncope for evacuating veins."
"And if he wishes to empty one arm and bleed elsewhere another time, when he is weakened by much bleeding, it is necessary that he bleed little by little, according to the quantity of his continued strength."
"And whoever wishes to empty one arm after the first bleeding, and has a strong body, should bleed again 24 hours after the first bleeding or after the ninth hour."
"And whoever wishes to bleed elsewhere should bleed on the second or third day."
"For there is much blood in the body which is already heated and causes fever; therefore it is necessary to draw a large quantity of blood and widen the opening so that it flows easily." "Then when you have prepared all the conditions for bleeding and placed your hand on the pulse as it bleeds, make sure that the mouth does not come into contact with the opening." "And this happens very often when the bloodletter is negligent."
"And it should not be done when you wish to release the arm and cause blood to flow out a second time, for then the opening is closed, you should press strongly upon it." "nor if he is curved, let him extend his arm quickly, for this would be harmful."
"But let it flow until it bleeds the second time; or you may prick with the tip of the blade so that the frozen blood which blocks the vein opening flows out." "And place a little bit of fresh moss in water and press upon it lightly."
"And if the vein is swollen, let it be and do not compress it until the swelling has subsided."
"And if there is need to draw blood a second time, then bleed in the same vein or in another vein or in the other arm."
"The veins of the arm are bled instead of the cephalic vein because they are composed [of many small veins]."
"And the manner of bleeding is that the patient places his hand in warm water until the veins appear red;"
"then let it be bound moderately so that the vein appears well, and then bleed across, not wide or long."
"And let the opening be wide and bleed close to the joint of the hand; if blood cannot flow out, then place the hand back in warm water and allow the blood to flow into the water until you have enough."
"And if it is summer, do not place the hand back in warm water, for this is done more often in winter than in summer."
"And bleeding from this vein is safer than from all others because there are neither arteries nor nerves there."
"Bleeding of the basilica vein of the right hand is good for all diseases of the liver, and this is how it should be done:"
Hold the hand steady, and immerse it in hot water until the vein becomes visible. If the vein is swollen and if you bind all around, then there will be no injury;
"And do not cut too deep for beneath all flesh lie nerves."
"And then immerse the hand in warm water if the blood is frozen in the wound and cannot flow out."
"And once you have removed as much blood as necessary, then place oil and lint on it to seal it quickly, and do the same for each wound."
"The urine from the left hand is good for treating mousse disease, and do everything as I have told you regarding the right hand."
"Sphenoid bone urine is beneficial for all diseases that occur beneath the body." Such as marrow disease, retention of flowers (possibly referring to menstrual disorders), and diseases of the reins, thighs, and old legs, as well as similar diseases.
"And its urine's property is such that patients can soak their feet in warm water and rub the wound until it becomes soft." "Then place their foot on the knee; the wound is at the ankle, and many veins run from there to the foot;"
Therefore, treat it where the largest vein or at the ankle.
"And if you treat it on the foot, beware of the nerves that are beneath it, and cut across just as when cutting meat; let the blade be sterile."
"And if blood cannot flow out, then immerse the foot in water and allow the vein to empty well."
"If the cauterization does not succeed on the first try, then begin again a little higher up because the area is already burnt;" "do not hesitate to cut the nerve, as we have said, and do the same for the other sphenoid bone on the other foot equally."
"The scar of the sciatic vein is at the outer ankle, and its urine is beneficial for treating hip pain when it's due to hot blood."
"And its property is such that the patient enters a bath and strains four fingers while twisting over the ankle;"
"because otherwise the vein will not open, and if it opens, cauterize it in every way that you can, including across it." "And it's better for you to cut it because the scar is smooth, and it's very responsive to many people."
"And it's better for you to cut it because the scar is smooth, and it's very responsive to many people." "If you cannot find it, then cauterize any vein that opens on the back of the foot and towards the little toe, but beware of nerves;"
"And do so until you see blood flow, then untie the bandage, put cotton on it and bind it again; now it is cauterized."
Regarding the treatment of varicose veins
Ventouses are made from horn, glass, or earthenware and there are two ways of applying them: either by pricking and attracting blood, or without pricking.
And this application without pricking is done in two ways: either with fire or without fire;
and two others on either side of the neck; and the one under the chin;" and those on both shoulders, and that above the elbows;" and those on both arms, and those on both legs;" and those at the ankles; and cupping does not draw blood except from small veins that are scattered throughout the flesh."
And therefore it does not weaken anyone, unlike cauterizing veins;" and it should not be administered with or without fire in any disease that comes frompletion until the whole body is emptied."
And if it becomes necessary to apply cupping because of illness or custom, we will administer it at each hour from the beginning to the end of the month, and during every season;"
for there are those who, when they need cupping, have heavy heads;"
and others findpletion and redness in their face, head, neck, and darkness before the eyes;"
and those who find a drop of blood in their mouth, have an enlarged tongue, and spit blood;" And there are those who dream and see things like blood, wounds, death, and similar things."
And when we observe these signs, especially during the month of May, we order cupping to be performed after three hours of the day."
The cautery for the temple helps with headaches that occur in certain people, and it should not be performed after evacuating the entire body;"
and this cupping is a substitute for the cautery of the temporal vein;"
and those who have cold constitutions or phlegm should not use it, as it causes them great harm;"
And therefore old men and those with cold conditions in the head should not use it."
And those who often cauterize themselves become forgetful, so it is necessary to place the cupping jar a little further down to avoid forgetfulness."
Cupping on the neck is equivalent to cauterizing the head and the basilica veins, and it is particularly useful for chest congestion;" and for coughs, asthma, andpletion;"
But it should not be placed too firmly, as otherwise it could cause forgetfulness or harm the stomach or heart."
Cupping on both sides of the neck is beneficial for headaches, eyestrain, migraines, chest congestion, and toothache;"
and it is a substitute for cauterizing the basilica veins. Make sure to tell the cauterizer not to cut the artery or cause excessive bleeding."
Cupping under the chin is beneficial for mouth diseases, gingivitis, and similar conditions in the mouth, and it is a substitute for cauterizing both lips;"
Cupping on the shoulders is beneficial for illnesses caused by heat andpletion."
Cupping on the elbows is as effective as cauterizing three veins in the arm;" for it draws blood from these large veins;"
and tell the cauterizer not to pry too deeply, as this area lacks flesh and has nerves and arteries underneath."
The cupping jar placed on the buttocks is beneficial for hemorrhoids and lower abdominal diseases. The jar should be large and made of earthenware to draw well without breaking and causing large wounds."
Cupping on the legs draws blood from all over the body and is particularly beneficial for treating chronic back pain, sciatica, bladder problems, and gout. It serves as a substitute for cauterizing both sophenes veins and ankles, but prolonged use can weaken the body and cause paleness in various conditions."
To apply the cupping jar, you should first place it empty on the skin and suck temperately until the skin turns red and inflamed. Then quickly place the jar and move it evenly without stopping until you see the skin turn red with blood. After that, remove the jars, being careful about the condition of the person's body, as some have thin skin and fair pores; in such cases, it is best to cauterize only once, making wide and somewhat deep wounds, and sucking gently."
"And if the blood is thick, then one must strike twice: the first time to thin out the path of the thick blood."
"And if the blood is very dense, then one must strike a third time; and when we wish to draw out just a little blood drop by drop, then once will suffice."
"And if we wish for much blood, let us strike often; and if the blood is dense, then strike deeply, ensuring that the heart is pierced suddenly,"
"And those with thick and hard skin, and narrow pores, must anoint the places for the cups with oil that is aperient and dissolving:" If it is inflamed, use violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or gourd seed oil.
And if it is in a cold state, use mustard oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or something similar.
And if the swelling is large and cold, then take bitter almond oil, or balm oil, or aniseed oil, and similar ones.
If one has tender flesh and wide pores, no oil should be applied there.
But after the application of vapor, one should wash it with rosewater, or cold water, or cranberry juice, or gourd juice, or porcelain juice, or something similar.
And those who are very moist should rise using myrtle water, sumac water, and similar things.
And those who have large swellings should rise with old wine, or buckthorn water, or decoction of aniseed or chamomile, or other similar things.
And one should not apply cupping before or during the bath, but rather afterwards for an hour or two; and one should not sleep after cupping.
And they should be careful to warm themselves both when applying the cups and when being cupped. Beware those who are being treated have a choleric complexion, and whose skin is too dry and inflamed; "If it is necessary for them to take cold things, such as pomegranates and endive, lettuce, and similar things."
and drink chicory, roasted pork meat, moist meats.
And those who have a cold complexion should take honey syrup and moderate perfumed wine that is between old and new, and eat chicken and young birds and pigeons.
and on the day when he goes to vomit, he should drink more than he eats
and sometimes it is necessary to give certain people three times the amount of treacle or muscatel before vomiting, or afterwards, to strengthen the main limbs. Let the breath be subtle, but those who are hot should not drink it.
The cups that are placed without striking are those placed on the liver, spleen, kidneys and ankles, stomach, belly, loins, buttocks and thighs, for these members do not suffer being struck upon.
and this is only done to draw blood from member to member just as we place cups on the breasts when there is a damp heat, to remove viscosity from the member, so we place cups on the stomach and belly to reduce the member
and relieves pain when there is congestion or stone, sometimes removing the congestion or shifting the stone from its place through its attractive virtue
Thus it also does when placed on the liver and spleen where retention of wind exists
and these cups are administered empty merely to suck, sometimes they are administered together with fire, and at other times filled with hot water
just as in cases of pleurisy, and so that one fills the cup with warm water alone, or water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
The form of administering the cupping glass with fire is as follows:
And it should be two fingers wide and half a palm deep, and on the side around the middle there should be one small hole, like that for inserting a needle,
"Whether made of brass, soften it first so it does not burn the patient when placing it on the limb;"
"And let there be in the middle a transverse rod of brass or iron to hold a candle."
"[Let them have] both large and small ones, according to the diseases and the size of those who wear them."
"For the cupping glasses of children are different from those of the elderly, and those for the thin are different from those for the fat."
"And so one should place this cupping glass onto the limb:"
"Light the candle made of wax or linseed oil, and insert it into the cupping glass through the transverse rod that is inside the cupping glass," "So that the flame reaches the bottom of the cupping glass without burning the patient;"
"And then place it onto the limb, ensuring that it is over the hole we mentioned earlier so that steam can be released when desired and the cupping glass removed."
"And then apply the liniment as before, repeating this process frequently if needed."
"In the case of the cupping glass used for pleurisy or acute diseases, there is no transverse rod nor hole. It is only filled with water when it is full, and it is placed onto the limb alone."
"This is its shape:"
"Sanguis cupping glasses are used only in places where regular cupping glasses cannot be placed due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar locations." "And in areas of flesh devoid of hair, such as the scalp, eyebrows, and other similar locations;"
"The qualities of using sanguis cupping glasses are that when you find them without any apparent holes or damage, use them;"
"And place them in warm water for a while until they become soft and have nothing inside them;" "Then clean the cupping glass and sanguis cupping glass, rub the limb until it becomes red, and place the sanguis cupping glasses onto it;"
"And when they become full and begin to droop, if it is a location where a regular cupping glass can be placed, do so, as this is very beneficial."
"If not, then lift the limb gently and then rinse it with warm water, and finally squeeze it out;"
"If the limb is too dry after removing the sanguis cupping glasses, moisten a linen cloth in cold water and place it over the area to dilate the blood vessels;"
"And if there is too much bleeding, apply powdered vitriol or salt and similar substances to stop the bleeding;"
"Or you can place half a handful of peeled fava beans onto the area and leave them until they warm up against the skin, which will now stop the bleeding;"
"And if you need to use more sanguis cupping glasses, take additional ones."
"And if the sanguis cupping glasses will not adhere, rub the area with fresh blood or prick it with a needle until blood flows out;" "Then place them onto the area and as soon as they sense the blood, they will adhere."
"And when you see that they are full and dripping, apply a little powder made of ground aloe and salt or ashes to make them droop."
"Here begins the book of fractures"
This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and is a remedy for fractures and dislocations.
Know, dear son, that foolish physicians neglect this chapter, having neither seen any of the ancient books nor read a letter about it.
And because of this, knowledge in our land is strange, for I never found anyone good with this.
"And I know nothing about it except through the knowledge of old books which I have studied so much that I have written about this science, and through experience, and through the practice of my life."
"I have described for you in this chapter what is contained therein, and I have summarized it at the end, and have clearly shown the shapes of the instruments that are arranged, as I have done in these two chapters before."
"It is therefore necessary that we say in the prologue of this book the sums of words and chapters where the wise puts his understanding, and remains on the truth, so that those who are skilled know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others."
"I say that when fracture or dislocation or torsion or sprain occurs to anyone, it is necessary for you to hasten to heal the sick on both sides, if possible, except in cases of weakness of body, childhood, or old age;"
"unless the time is very hot or too cold; and eat cold foods, that is to say cold drinks, and flesh of fowl and hare, and do not drink wine nor eat fatty meats, nor fill yourself too full with foods that fill the veins with blood, until you have doubt about a hot aposteme, nor expansion of matter in the limb; then bring back the sick person to their previous regimen that they had used."
"And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that you feed the sick person with foods that promote growth and viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, rice, eggs, fish, milk, wine, and similar things." "For with this nourishment muscles are rebuilt more quickly and the fracture heals sooner."
"And know that the bones of the elderly and those who are decrepit do not heal well nor fuse according to their nature due to the weakness of the limbs, nor those that are too tender, such as the bones of young children;"
"but take care and attach a splint made of one large beam to the broken bone, joining it together so that it strengthens as it was before; do not remove the device until the work is complete, and for this reason they must be nourished with fatty meats, as we have said."
"And know that fractures are diverse in many ways."
"For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the arm or the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all the ways that fractures can occur." "For there are fractures that go to the bone and others that do not affect the bone, such as cutting off the tip of a quill for writing."
"For there are fractures that go to the bone and others that do not affect the bone, such as cutting off the tip of a quill for writing." "And there is fracture with wound, and fracture with just a small crack."
"And each type of fracture has its own method and proper instrument for restoration, according to what the memory comes into place;"
"and a fracture of the bone is known by the fact that the site is twisted and clearly visible through deficiency, and it sounds hollow when pressed with the hand;"
"and when there is no twist nor sound upon touching, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture."
"But it may still have twisting, cracking, or a small fracture." "So do not move the limb by hand, but apply the medicines that are mentioned below and then gently immobilize it."
"And know that fractures which affect the bone and consist of two disjointed parts must be set back in place evenly before any inflammation occurs;"
"and if inflammation has already occurred, leave it alone for a few days until the inflammation is reduced;" "then set it back in place gently and smoothly, and know that restoring this fracture is easier than restoring those with broken pieces. Then immobilize it as needed."
"And if the bone has broken into pieces, then grasp it with two hands if it is an arm or leg, or use one hand for smaller limbs, or use two cords or one cord and your hand;"
"and place the limb according to its natural shape so that when the broken pieces are aligned, use all means to attach them in their proper places without causing injury or pain to the patient;"
"And join the two ends of the bones together with the best possible alignment."
"And you can tell by feeling if it is not properly aligned: straighten it gently and do not immobilize it too tightly or apply pressure as some people do to cause inflammation and contractions in the limb, as we have said many times."
"And once the limb is properly aligned, instruct the patient not to move it while awake or asleep, turning or in any other way;" "and make sure that the limb is well secured so that the patient feels no pain." "For if the patient feels any pain, then it is not properly aligned, and you must reposition it so that they feel no pain;"
"For if the patient feels any pain, then it is not properly aligned, and you must reposition it so that they feel no pain;" "And make sure that it is placed correctly so that there are no twists when it is restored;"
"The condition of the broken limb is according to what I tell you."
"Know that broken limbs are diverse in size, length and shape."
"For there are small limbs such as arms, legs, and similar ones which should be wrapped with soft and thin linen cloths;"
"And those that are thick such as the thigh and leg should be wrapped with wide and strong linen, for wide linen wraps around the entire large limb and immobilizes it evenly so that there is no leakage."
"Then tie it around with light bandages, three or four times according to the limb, and hold your hand gently on all of the linen. Then go above the fracture and tie less tightly so that the fracture can move a little away from the fracture;"
"And loosen the bandage bit by bit until you grasp a large part of the healthy area. Then take another bandage and wrap it again around the broken area;"
"then go back to the part below the fracture and tie it moderately, not too tightly nor too loosely, as we have said in the first section above;"
"then place linen bandages or cloths between the layers of linen until it is all even. Then tie everything together with one bandage, and finally apply well-made splints if there is no inflammation or swelling."
"And if there is inflammation or swelling, apply something that reduces heat and draws out the swelling. Leave it on for a few days;"
"then apply your splints and they should be half the width of a smooth rod or made from wood used for stakes or palm reeds. They should be shaped like this:"
"But the splint placed over the fracture should be slightly larger and wider than the others;"
"And it should also be as long as needed for the limb's size or length;"
"then tie it over the splints just like you did in the first section. Then tie everything together with a suitable thread."
"And tie it more tightly above and less so below. The thread should be medium-sized, not too thick nor too thin, and made of soft linen;"
Because if the threads are thick, as in some works of foolish people who tie their bindings with twisted linen cords, which is a great error; for the binding cannot be even if it's too thin, nor should there be less than two spans between each stitch.
And if the patient is wounded by the edges of the stitches after they were placed in the healthy places, then put pieces of linen or wool gauze underneath them so that they do not become inflamed.
When the wound is accompanied by a fracture and the bone is broken, I will describe its treatment hereafter.
And know that it is not advisable to stitch all the broken limbs on the first day. For when the limb is large, one should not put in stitches until after five days or six, or more according to the heat of the inflammation appearing;
And here is the manner of ancient plasters for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists: Take some flour that sticks to the walls of the mill, and mix it with plenty of eggs; then use this mixture, not too thin nor too thick, and it is the common way of plastering to restore fractures in many positions, especially in women and young children, for it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Another way of plastering to restore fractures and dislocations and twists: Take aloes, ladanum, enula, asafetida, gum arabic, mastic, myrrh, and aloë wood, each three ounces; and make them into powder, then mix them with plenty of eggs. If the complexion of the man is hot, use this plaster, for it has a good composition and restores broken bones quickly, and it's useful for many people.
Another way of plastering that is useful for twists: Take mastic and bdellium, each three ounces; myrrh and aloes wood, each seven ounces; gum acacia six ounces; balsam of Armenia ten ounces, and grind them well, then mix with water or plenty of eggs, and apply it.
Another way of plastering for joints and bones dislocated from their places, to ease pain appearing, and the swelling of bone and fractures: Take new flax and soak it in warm water and oil, then put it on the place. This plaster does not restore, but it is good for easing inflammation and removes pains properly.
Another way to plaster that restores broken bones: take dry fig leaves, and earth wormwood leaves, crush together, make plaster.
Another method of plaster for the restoration of broken bones and to soften the swelling of the bruise. Take root of mallow, camomile, violet flowers, wheat flour, each one part; crush and mix with wine, and if the limb is hot, mix with coriander water or water, and use.
Another method of plaster stronger than the first one for restoring a member with hard swelling. Take roots of mallow, linseed, balm, melilot, and savory, violet flowers, and camomile flowers, all in equal parts; crush and mix with salt water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb and its rest.
Hippocrates says in his book that one should only apply on the broken limb for restoration a cerate made of wax and oil, nothing else more. He says it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
And it seems that Galen agrees that one should apply on the broken limb for restoration dry things somewhat warm, such as myrrh and aloe and frankincense and similar things, as we have said.
Another method of plaster that is good for wounds and pain: take male pigeon droppings or human hair cuttings, or chicken feathers, and mallow, mix equally, crush them, make a plaster with the liquid.
And then wait a little while afterwards, and take care if the patient feels no pain, nor if the bone has moved from its place; then do not remove the plaster for many days
And if pain or itching comes to the place, with restlessness or swelling, then hurry and remove the plaster immediately; take a light cloth and damp sea sponge, dip it in water, and wipe the place until the itching stops, and the pain is relieved. Then let the limb rest for an hour, then apply dry linen soaked in rosewater or warm oil, and bind it tightly with a bandage until you are sure that the swelling is hot.
And let the inflammation of the limb rest, and let the pain be gone, then begin again the gentle binding, and a little plaster, and do not bind too tightly as before; continue until it is healed.
And if you see that the swelling is hot and red and painful and swollen are all gone, and you need plaster and binding again, then begin again gently, just as you did at first.
And if there is nothing of what we have said happening to the limb, then do not remove it except after three or four or five or seven days; sometimes leave it on for twenty days, according to what one sees, until the fracture is healed, and the joining of the flesh approaches.
Then tighten the bandage more than before, and let the flesh grow thicker, as I said earlier. And if you see the place becoming too dry, know that there cannot be any suppuration there. Then apply warm water gently to the limb every time you remove the bandage, once every three days, and loosen the binding a little.
By this treatment, then the suppuration will come out of the limb, and quickly heal what foolish doctors do wrongfully to limbs twisted: that is evil, and they are doing it incorrectly; I see nothing else but letting [the bone] rest and operating correctly.
Of diverse kinds of fractures There are many kinds of fractures, with diverse appearances, and their causes differ:
"For there are fractures that are caused by blows from a sword, and the collarbone breaks the entire bone down to the syfac, which is beneath the bone, like wood or firewood; and for this reason this type of fracture is called 'haichure'."
"Or if the sword strikes the bone from above without piercing it, this type of fracture is called 'absolute'; and the wound of these two fractures may be large or small."
"And if there is percussion that strikes in, or cuts into, the collarbone of stone, or from falling onto stone, or other similar ones."
"And if there is a persistent fracture, approaching close to the membrane that is under the bone or over it, and this wound is large or small."
"And if there is a wound that has healed within the bone so subtly like a hair, and the crack is small, therefore this fracture is called 'capillary';"
And if the wound is made by striking with a stone or falling, or by something similar, and causes the bone fragment to go inwards, and the area is raised like when coppersmiths strike on anvil; then the stone goes inside.
And this happens more often with young people who have moist bones at the head of their shoulder joint, like that of a child's.
and occurs in all manner of fractures where small fragments are dislodged like stars;
"And we know all kinds of fractures by their retraction upon them, and detection through probing, and by the corrupt flesh that is upon them."
The capillary appearance is known by this: when the bone is uncovered and rubbed on top, then the fracture opens black.
In the treatment of a fracture, beware of accidents to the patient. And if you see no evil accident such as vomiting of bile and loss of consciousness and extension and paleness and intermittent fever and eyes coming out black and red and other signs in various conditions, then it cannot heal without doubt
And if you do not see any astonishing accident and hope for a cure, then begin the treatment.
And when the wounded person first comes to you, if it is in wintertime, then remove the bone before the fourteenth day after the injury.
And if it is in summertime, hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, before the flesh under the bone becomes corrupted and the accidents that we have spoken of occur.
And if the fracture of the bone comes to the flesh that covers the brain, then you must split the broken part like this: and take hold of the head of the wounded person and uncover the bone in all ways that you can, and on the surface of the wound more gently than you can.
And if bleeding occurs when uncovering the bone or a black abscess forms, then help with what is necessary. And fill the place with absorbent cloths moistened in rose oil. And let the wound rest until the black abscess is appeased and you are sure that there will be no more bleeding; then begin to remove around the bone, which can be done in two ways:
And then he makes another incision larger than the first one.
The second method is that you have many different incisions made, some narrow and others wide, pointed, and made of soft iron; perform them gently so as not to cut the head.
If the bone is prominent and hard, then it must be perforated around before making incisions with trepanes, not too deep so that they pierce through the outer bone layer. Each trepan should have a margin or circle above its point to prevent the point from protruding beyond the bone; you should have several of them so that each one fits in its proper place on the bone's edge. This is how the three kinds of trepans are shaped:
The qualities for perforating around the broken bone are: place a trepan on the bone and twist it with your hands until you feel that the bone has been pierced. Then move the trepan to another spot further along, and repeat this process all around the bone. Then use chisels carefully and gently (as we have said) to remove the space of bone between the holes made by the trepan, so that you can grasp the bone with your hand or any tool such as pliers. Make sure not to touch the brain or the sinews.
Once you have perforated and removed the bone, you must then remove any remaining sharp edges with another tool resembling a chisel but thinner and more delicate than regular ones;
If any small bones remain or scales, remove them easily with one of the instruments; then treat the wound with bandages and ointments as we have said.
And another way to perform it is what the Galien says, which is easier; he recommends it strongly and this is his opinion. Firstly you must uncover a part of the bone where the fracture appears open, so that when you have uncovered this part, you will place underneath the head of this lens-shaped chisel, its shape is shown here:
And do not cut on one side only, but make it sharp at both ends so that the cutting edge is towards the bone; then strike gently with a small hammer until you have easily cut around the bone and be careful of the tissue underneath;
If it is adherent to the bone, remove it gently because it can be removed without harm or fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not reach the tissue and the bone is only cut on top with small pieces remaining, then remove these roughnesses using a fine file that you should have in various quantities to prepare each area according to the work and shape of the fracture.
Then use coarse files first, followed by finer ones until it is smooth enough.
In each of the other types of capillary fractures and fine breaks, you must adapt your approach according to its direction; this is something that is not easily learned by someone who has dedicated themselves to this art.
And if the sinew is exposed, you must take one piece of linen according to the size of the wound and soak it in rose oil and place it on the wound; Then take another cloth doubled in two or three and wet it in wine and rose oil, and place it on the first cloth; and do this more lightly than you can so as not to weigh down the side, then apply another linen above and do not pull too hard until it touches only the wound.
and let it be so for one or two days until the swelling has subsided, then remove it and apply medications such as lily roots, vey flour, incense powder, aloe, and similar things; grind these things into a powder and apply it to the wound, and apply medications without biting.
and make sure the wound is always clean, so that you do not leave any ointment or let bowels gather on it, because when bowels accumulate on the cloth of the cerebrum, they corrupt and carry it off, causing great harm to the patient; for when one puts something irritating on the side, it necroses above.
Therefore, beware if any bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, that it is doubtful without doubt.
And if blackness appears on it due to the medication that was applied, such virtue having it, then you must take one part of honey and three parts of rose oil and put it on a cloth, and place it on the side. Then follow the methods of treatments which are necessary until it is healed.
You should know that sometimes both of the two parts of the shoulder above are broken, or just one by itself, for they are two bones; and the lower one is cartilaginous, and does not break, unless it is struck forcefully or twisted, then it can heal.
And if one of the two parts is broken, you should place your little finger or thumb on the opening of the shoulder and put the break evenly under your index finger and press gently on it until the shoulder returns to its natural position. Do this gently, making sure that the patient does not feel pain due to your actions.
And if the break is in the upper part of the shoulder and the arm cannot be moved into place, you should put it against the head of a slightly thick stick.
And if the break is in two parts, do likewise, and try to reset it on the first day if you can.
But if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the swelling has subsided, then apply bandages of linen cloth to the head of the shoulder if the break is in one part.
Or you should bind another bandage on the other part if there is a break there as well; and the bandages should be thick enough to fill the openings of the shoulder.
Some physicians say that the bandages should be moistened with butter and changed every day. But it does not seem to me that this is good, rather the bandages should be moistened in a mixture of oak bark powder and egg whites, then leave the bandage on until the bone is firm and the cartilage hardened.
And sometimes they use goose feathers in place of bandages, with one soft cloth around them to hold the break in place and relieve the patient's suffering. Do whatever you see fit.
And if swelling comes to the shoulder while you are working on it, put cerote or cotton moistened in rose oil or a little diacodium upon it.
And if swelling does not come to the shoulder, apply a plaster of powdered sesame flour and frankincense mixed with egg whites, then place light dressings over it without binding the shoulder.
And if the break in the shoulder is small and broken into little pieces, extract the fragments with appropriate instruments, then sew up the wound and treat it with healing substances such as plasters and ointments suitable for this purpose.
And if there is no wound inside the shoulder, treat it with bandages and apply splints made of lead until it is healed.
Regarding the fracture of the jawbone
When the jawbone is fractured underneath and there is no wound on the outside, and the break is only on one side with no other fragments inside, it can be easily recognized.
If the fracture is on the right side of the jawbone, insert your right index finger into the patient's mouth; if it is on the left side, use your left index finger. Gently push the break inward and hold it in place with your other hand from outside, making sure to keep it even.
And if the jawbone fracture is offset by two parts, you must provide traction on both sides to ensure that it is aligned evenly.
And if there is movement or fracture of the teeth, use gold, silver or silk thread to secure them. Then apply cerote on the broken jawbone and cover it with a double cloth. Place a well-made splint or a piece of leather shaped according to the jawbone on top of the cloth, tie it under the chin that you can reach, and tell the patient to rest and eat soft foods.
And if you see that the jaw is misaligned, untie it on the third day and then reposition it correctly. Remove the cerote and apply a plaster made of flour from the mill mixed with egg whites or sesame flour. Then place a light linen over the plaster. If the plaster becomes dry and the patient's condition does not change, leave it until it is healed; it often takes about three weeks to heal.
And if swelling occurs, use the treatments we have mentioned many times before.
And if there is both fracture and wound together, make sure that no fragment of bone has been pushed out. Then carefully remove the fragments using appropriate instruments.
And if the wound is narrow, widen it with fire according to your needs.
After removing all the fragments, if there is no more remaining, sew up the wound if it is large and apply healing plasters until it is healed.
Regarding dislocations of the joint The shoulder dislocation often occurs at the front and is broken in three ways:
"And the work is thus when there is fracture without wound, that you have two assistants: so that one holds the arm that feels the broken force; and the other extends the neck towards the part; then place the fracture evenly on your two hands, so that the form is as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor shortening."
"And if you need to extend more, place under the shoulder of the patient a round spear of cloth or wool, and let it be thick according to your necessity; and stretch and lift the arm, and constrain the spear with your hand, so that you set the fracture evenly as it should be."
"And if you cannot draw the head of the arm forward because it is too deep, then the patient must lie flat on his back and place under the shoulder a medium ear-pad, and push the shoulder backward until the bone of the fracture rises."
"And then align the fracture with your two hands, and if you find it displaced, then you must cut; and gently pull out the pieces, and if the bone cannot join due to some obstruction, then cut one of the incisions that you have; but place this instrument under the fracture to guard the soft tissues:"
"And it resembles a spoon, and is not raised, and let it be as wide as necessary according to the size of the bone and the power of the work; and have two prongs, as you see, one wide and the other narrow like the route of the wound that you made when you pulled out the bones;"
"And when you are sure of having hot swelling, then close the wound, and if the route is small or you doubt there will be hot swelling, fill the wound with lint and bandages according to its quantity."
"And if hot swelling comes, wet a piece of linen in rose oil and hyssop and wine, and put it on."
"The bandaging of the bone when it is without wounds and cuts is that you put on the bone the plaster made from the powder of millstone and egg albumen, and place light dressings on top, and place a spear under the elbow if necessary;" "then take a very wide bandage of one palm's width, then place a double drapeil on top of the dressings and plaster; then take a subtle splint of three fingers' width and length, and wrap it around this bandage so that the ends of the bandage hang down;" "and place the splint on the fracture and twist the bandage up over the neck, and under the healthy shoulder, and under the injured shoulder; and the corners of each part, and when you see that the wrapping holds the fracture firmly in place, and you clearly see that the splint does not move on top of the broken bone, then rewound it every day, and when the wrappings loosen, tighten them;"
"and make the injured person lie on his back, and place a small pillow under the elbow when he sleeps to raise the arm support; then align the fracture by raising the shoulder with the help of the bandage that ties the arm to the neck, and do not untie it unless some mischance happens, for up to twenty days;"
"then recommence the plastering if necessary, and tighten it and leave it like that until it is healed; and it heals in at most twenty-eight days, and sooner for some people."
"Regarding the fracture of the shoulder"
"It happens sometimes that the shoulder blade breaks or is displaced but not moved from its place, and it cannot be seen except by touching; then arrange it according to the shape of the fracture, and align it according to its natural form in every way you can; then put on the bone powder of millstone with egg albumen, and light dressings, and place a double drapeil on top; then place a wide and subtle splint, a little wider than the shoulder, and if there is any convexity under the splint in some part of the shoulder, fill that concavity with linseed dressings so that the splint lies evenly; then bind it tightly with a wide bandage so that the splint does not move from its place, and check the wrapping every day; and whenever it loosens, tighten it, and make sure the splint is in place if it has moved, and have the injured person lie on his side; and the shoulder heals in twenty days or twenty-five at most. And when this number of days is completed, then untie him, but be sure, for it is not a bone that moves easily."
"And if a piece of bone sticks out in front and not under the heart, then cut it off, and do what we have said regarding the fracture of the arm to appease hot inflammation."
"Regarding the fracture of the wrist"
"The wrist is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; but it often breaks at the end. And when it is broken in the middle, it sinks down and the injured person feels great pain, loss of alignment, weakness, and dizziness, and sometimes vomits blood, and you can see the convexity on the broken bone."
"And the restoration is that the injured person lies frequently on his back, and place a cushion between the shoulder blades, then press the shoulders down and bring together the ribs of the two sides with your hands, aligning them subtly in every way you can until the figure of the bone is as it should be; then place plasters and dressings on top of a subtle splint of salt or another light wood, and wrap it in a drapeil and tie it to the broken bone so that it does not move; then twist the wrapping around the back and tighten it firmly, and rewound the bandage every hour and tighten it if it loosens; and if it needs to be untied for corrosion or pruritus that comes to the place, or pain or inflammation, then hurry and untie it, remove the plaster, and address what has come from the methods of treatment; then align the plaster again and bind it until it is healed."
"Regarding the fracture of the ribs"
"Know that rib fractures only occur in large places on the back and at the top inside, and they only bend because they are hollow; and you can feel them well with an examination of the back."
"And the restoration is that you align the fracture correctly. Then place a plaster and bind it with a splint if necessary."
"And if the rib fracture sinks inward, then the injured person feels very great pain and stabbing pain like pleurisy, because the bone pierces the lung; and coughs, dizziness, and vomits a lot of blood, and it is a serious condition, and the ancients used to apply much effort."
"And there are those who say that one should administer foods that inflate the belly to push the fracture outward."
"But we do not do this, lest boils come if they have not already done so." "And if it comes to this, then heal it."
"And some said that one should apply cups there to draw out abundantly, and this seems reasonable. Nevertheless, there is doubt that the cups may attract the excess towards the joint due to weakness."
"And some said that one should cover the joint with moist wool soaked in hot oil, and apply bandages between the ribs to make the binding even. Then it should be treated with the cure for pleurisy, meat, and medicines."
"And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot bear because of the bone sticking out through the flesh, there is doubt as to what the patient should do. It is necessary to cut open over the broken rib and place something underneath to ward off the stomach. Then one must break the bone and draw it out gently, after which the two lips of the wound should be sewn up if it is large, and then dressed with poultices until healed. And if hot inflammation comes, one should put moist cloths soaked in rose oil on it and place them on the joint; treat the joint as for inflammation, and have the patient lie constantly on the side that they must lie on until they are healed."
"Regarding the fracture of the neck"
Sometimes a bone break occurs in the neck, rarely does it bend; And when this happens to someone, and you wish to know if they will recover or not, take heed if you see their hands softened and swollen and numb, and cannot move or extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it. Know that they are mortal in many dispositions, and if they move and feel well when the joint is strained and pricked, know that the bone's articulation is saved, and that the patient will be cured if treatment is applied there.
And if such a thing happens to the spine of the back, and you wish to know if it will recover or not, take heed if the feet are softened, and if the hands are affected, and wind and excretion pass involuntarily from the back; and when one lies on their stomach, excretion passes involuntarily. And when they lie on their back and try to rise, they cannot. Know that it is mortal: do not labor in its cure.
And if this accident does not happen to them, then the matter is lighter.
And the treatment is: if there's a hot boil, apply rose oil or goosefoot oil until it cools down; then apply one of the comforting and drying plasters, and tie it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not let them sleep on the painful area until they are healed. And if any bone becomes dislocated, it should be immobilized immediately. Remove the dislocated bone and then sew together the two edges of the wound if it's large; then apply a poultice made from healing herbs until it heals. But if the end of the bone is broken (which is called the "knuckle"), you should place your left hand on the injured area and use your right hand to gently realign the bone, then apply a splint and bandage it securely if needed; then compress it, and if there are any dislocated bones, reduce them and set them back in place, and treat the wound until it heals.
of the fracture of the thighbone
It may happen that the thighbone is broken, and if it does happen, it will cause some dizziness in the head. It feels long, and slopes toward the knee, causing pain and soreness at the fracture site, with swelling around the break.
And the treatment is: extend your hand over it so that you are directly above the fracture. Identify where and how the break occurred. If the break is only at the top of the bone, gently align it until it is in its natural position.
And if the break is long or slopes inward, make the patient lie on their stomach so that you can easily see and treat the fracture. And once you have aligned it, apply a splint made of wood or bone, and secure the fracture so that it does not move. Then elevate the injured area on pillows to keep the limb in alignment during healing.
And tell the patient to sleep on their healthy side or on their back.
And if any inflammation occurs around the break, do not touch it until the inflammation subsides. Then apply the splint as mentioned earlier, and continue to treat the fracture as needed without causing further injury. This is the method.
of the fracture of the shoulder blade
The shoulder blade (adjutoire) is located between the rib cage and the head of the shoulder. If it is broken, it should be treated in one of two ways:
And tie two joints together with two ropes, and hang them upwards, and have the patient sit on one seat; then throw his broken arm onto the wood, until it reaches the elbow and has its middle in a curve of wood, then hang some heavy thing upon which the assistant extends downward; then the physician places the break evenly between his hands together, so that the break returns as it should.
And the other manner is that one supports the patient on his hatchet-blade, and he holds his hand to his neck, then orders two assistants: one takes what is above the break in his hands, and the other takes below at one link, and each extends to its part.
And if you see that the extraction is too strong, then tighten one link below the break and another above it, and let each assistant extend to his part. And if the break is near the head of the shoulder, it is necessary to put one link in the middle below the elbow, and another towards the side below the break; likewise, if the break is towards the side, then it is necessary to place one link lightly without labor until the break is even on the level and on the side; then set the break even as it should be, and tighten it so that no fracture comes.
And if swelling comes about, then do not tighten for at least twenty days, and put on a wet linen cloth moistened in hot rose oil until the swelling has subsided; then tighten it, and the manner of tightening is as follows: place the splint upon the break, then assemble the arm onto the support, and put your hand upon the shoulder or upon the chest; and put the bandage on, and tighten onto the support and onto the arm so that the arm is in a straight line if nothing prevents it, or if the bone has not moved.
And if you doubt that the bone is not moving, then use splints and place one wider and stronger than the others upon the break, with two spaces between each splint; let each splint be so large that it passes the break three spaces on either side. Then tighten onto the splints as I have said at the beginning of this chapter regarding the break, tightening more firmly and less widely apart.
And if you see the position of the splints and the tightening as we have said when restoring the broken member, and you doubt the heat swelling, then leave it alone for seven days as we have said; then look every three days at the bandage to ensure that there is no itching or inflammation or that the member cannot move due to being too tight. Then adjust it as we have said.
And if no such accidents occur, then do not remove the bandage until after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on their back with their hands upon their stomach; place one cushion filled with wool evenly beneath the support, and watch every hour of the day or night to ensure that the position of the broken member does not change or that the bandages become loose. Then adjust it by means of medicine, and give the patient the food that we have mentioned earlier, so that the first food is subtle and when they begin to regain their strength, let it be thick. And it is customary for the support and the leg to be removed after forty days in total; then one should remove the bandage and administer baths and ointments to straighten the limb properly. And if the stiffness is ugly and distorted, it may take ten days or two months to remove the bandage.
Chapter on the fracture of the arm
The arm is composed of two bones called the "humerus," one of which is small and forms the elbow joint, while the other is large and lies beneath it towards the little finger; sometimes only the larger humerus is broken, or sometimes only the smaller one, but sometimes both are broken together.
When the smaller humerus is broken, restoration is easy, and recovery is also quick; but when the larger humerus is broken, recovery is difficult and more painful than when both are broken together. If it is only the smaller humerus that is broken, then it must be extended slightly and set evenly in place.
And if it is the larger humerus that is broken, then one must tighten more firmly; and extend it upon one cushion, raise the hand higher than the other, lower the little finger below the others, let the patient cross their legs beneath them, and place another cushion in front of them to prevent any discomfort. Then a servant should extend their arm at the part beneath the patient's hand or with a bandage, while another servant does likewise above it. Then the doctor must set it evenly according to its best shape.
And if there are any fragments in the break, then put each one back into its proper place; and if there is any excess that cannot be grasped with your fingers, then press upon it lightly as we have said earlier.
And if there is also a wound along with the break, I have spoken about that in its own chapter; so treat it accordingly.
And if hot swellings appear at the beginning of the restoration, then take one sheet of rose oil and white wax cerate, neither too hard nor too soft; fold it finely and bind it lightly enough that the swelling is alleviated. Then remove the cerate, apply a plaster made from wheat flour with abundant egg whites, place the splints on top, making sure that the splint over the break is stronger and slightly wider than the others. Know that there should be six splints on the arm in various arrangements: whether the break is in one bone or two; tighten more firmly above the break rather than elsewhere, tightening less widely apart every day as I have said at the beginning of this chapter. And let the bandages over the break be soft and moist, neither hard nor harsh; let the linen thread used for binding not be too thick or too thin, as we have said. Finally, check on the limb and the bandage after some days have passed. And if any bad accidents occur to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, then you must wash the limb with warm water until the itching is alleviated; and allow the limb to rest without being too tight. Then begin tightening again; but if the bandages have become loose or the bones are out of place, and similar situations arise, then adjust them.
And beware that the nourishment cannot reach the limb because it is too tight; if so, then loosen it slightly and leave it thus for a few days until the nourishment arrives, then tighten again.
And if none of the things we have mentioned occurs for the patient, then do not remove the bandage for up to 20 days or thereabouts; then when he can bend his hands to his neck and his shoulders are even, beware of movement and dislocation, and let him sleep on his back. Know that this break will be restored in 30 to 35 days, or perhaps in 20 days, according to the compositions and complexions of the virtues.
Of the breaking of the hand
This is because on the back of the hand and in both hands there are few breaks, but rather many dislocations.
And when the palm of the hand is broken or dislocated, then it is necessary for the patient to cross his legs and sit upright facing forward; then place his hand on a flat surface, and extend the broken bones by the surgeon's hands until they are properly aligned. Then apply the dressing and compresses if necessary, then apply a splint according to the size of the area; and wrap it with one cloth of linen.
And if the fracture is on the inside edge of the palm towards the belly of the hand, then make a splint of cloth and command the patient to press it against his broken palm; then wrap it with a long cloth strip, and let the splint be soft enough and as large as the palm of the hand, and bind it tightly so that it fits properly.
And if the fracture is on the outside edge, then it is necessary to place a splint above and another below in the palm so that the hand is open and straight, then wrap it all around the hand, and secure the tie between the two sides.
And if the fracture is in any of the fingers, if it's the thumb, then align it properly and bind it with the palm, and if you see fit place a small splint to hold up the fracture so that it does not move; and if the fracture is in one of the other fingers, like the index finger or another, then align it and bind it with the healthy finger that comes after, or bind them all together in one bandage, whichever is better, or place a splint above like on the thumb. And be careful about the restoration and position of hot compresses, and treat any inflammation that arises as I have said.
Here is the text for "de la cuixe brisie" (for a fractured thighbone):
The thighbone is often broken, and it can be clearly seen when the leg turns front and back; the treatment for this involves tying one bandage above the break and another below it. And the patient lies on their face, then each assistant extends their bandage to its respective side evenly; this is done when the break is within the bone itself.
And if the break is near the root of the thighbone, then one bandage should be placed towards the ankle, and the other below the break. And similarly if it is near the knee, the bandage should be placed at the knee and extended downward; then the doctor puts the bone back into its natural position with both hands, and then applies the splint and ties the bandage, making sure no infection occurs.
And if there is an inflamed wound, allow it to cool down first before returning to your task and treatment; the bandage should be tied in this manner. It is necessary that you wrap a hard doubled bandage around the break, removing any excess material, then turn the leg so that the heel is at the root of the thighbone, and insert a long thread between the thigh and calf near the knee below, with both ends coming out on top; then wrap the bandage up the leg and thigh again, placing wedges over the break and one wedge on the shin bone, then fill the space between the leg and thigh with soft cloth to ensure equal tension, then begin tying firmly with three or four turns above the break, decreasing the tension as you move farther from the break; then tie the two ends of the thread that were inserted between the leg and thigh to the three wedges placed on top, then return to the bottom end of the thread until you reach the foot, pulling tightly so it doesn’t move from its place, then leave it like this until no infection or inflammation occurs.
And if an infection occurs, untie it and treat what has occurred, as we have said many times before; and if there are pieces of bone sticking out, they should be removed if possible; and if not, then the space should be opened up and pus drained; and the treatment should continue as we have said until it is healed.
And sometimes the thighbone may break in such a way that wedges are not used, as in the case of the arm; nevertheless, with this treatment there is no impairment to the patient's mobility.
And know that the thighbone takes about one month to heal, give or take a few days depending on individual constitutions.
Regarding the kneecap
Know that the kneecap rarely breaks but often dislocates. If it does break, it is usually just a fissure or hole, which happens with and without pain, although this can be well felt.
And the treatment is to place what was dislocated back in its proper position as best as possible, then apply splints and possibly a round wedge if needed, tying it securely. Then follow all the instructions given for other fractures regarding infection, heat, etc., applying whatever remedies are necessary until healed.
Regarding bone fractures of the leg
Know that the leg has two bones called "fibula" and "tibia," with the same types of fractures occurring as in the arm. Therefore, treatment is also the same, using the same techniques for reduction and splinting.
And if both bones are broken at once, turn the leg in every direction.
And if the delicate bone is broken, so turn [it] forward.
And if the large bone is broken, so there will be great pain, and it can be seen clearly; and turn [it] downward. Therefore prepare an extension, and place [it] evenly, and bind the splints evenly; but nevertheless, if the fracture is ugly, and there are many pieces, then make the extension smaller and lighter; and adjust according to your ability.
And when you have completed your task, then take two strips of wood smoothed that wrap around the leg on either side, and are the length of the leg from the knee downwards; then wind around them twice with a bandage above and below, and tie them in the middle likewise, and at this tying the leg will not be able to bend to the right or left, and so it is well. And some people provide one splint made of wood that is the length of the leg, and place the leg upon it to prevent movement, and this is properly done at the site of the fracture where there is a wound; and move the leg each day to see if there is any hot swelling or other accident; so care must be taken until it is healed.
About the fracture of bones in the foot
In the ankle there is no fracture, but sometimes a bone in the foot is broken and in two pieces, and there occurs only quassure in various positions.
And if there is a fracture of the bone in the foot, and you see these bones protruding one over the other, then put your foot on the ground like someone who wants to walk, and then place your foot upon his where the bones are raised, and press down until they return to their places; then put splints and bandages on it, and place under the instep of the foot a small table with two holes filled with plaster, and strap it firmly against the foot forwardly, and then wrap cloths around it, and other things that you need.
And when three or four days have passed, then untie the bandage, for you will find the bones even, whether they are broken or dislocated.
And if there are any of the toes broken, then restore them as we have said for the toes of the hand; then place on the broken toe a splint according to its length, and let it be a little wider, then place under the foot that table which I mentioned, and strap it firmly against the foot forwards; and if there are two or three, or more, toes broken, then place on each toe a splint according to their quantity, wrapped in one linen cloth, and strap the table under the foot; and let them be standing upon the top of the table so that they touch well the sole of the foot.
And you must not forget the other things that I have mentioned for other fractures, and take care of each accident as it should be.
About the fracture of the bone of the thumb
When the bone of the thumb is broken in a woman, then make her sit upright, then incline her towards the back and let her be held by someone behind her; then fill the thumb with cotton, and put in it as big as one walnut; then raise the woman up little by little, and now the cotton will come to the entrance of the thumb, and the bone will return with the walnut; and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, replace it, and do so for about seven days: then the fracture will be restored. And if you see, take a bladder of a sheep, and tie a tube at the opening, and put the whole bladder inside the thumb; then blow into the tube strongly until the bladder is inflated inside: then the thumb will return to its fractured place; then fill it with cotton, and leave it like that for some days, until it is healed.
And when the bone of the thumb of a man or woman is broken, then restore it as we have said for the bone of the heel; and these fractures are not hidden from those who put their study and use in it, and understand my book. For the fracture indicates in many ways the right way to restoration: therefore, pay attention to it.
In the penis, when it is broken, take a goose neck and put it around the penis; then wrap cloths around it, and leave it for three or four days around, and it will be healed quickly.
About fracture with wound
He who has a fracture with a wound, even if it is large, such as the bone of the thigh or the arm or similar, must be healed now, so that the healing that we have mentioned proves it.
And if the wound heals, then rinse it with vitriol, if you don't have anything else, then begin to restore the fracture in that same hour or day, if no inflammation occurs.
And if inflammation occurs, then leave the restoration until the ninth day, until the inflammation is appeased, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, for you would bring bad accidents upon it.
And if the broken bone is appearing above the exposed heart, then it must be put in place lightly with your hands, with slight traction.
And if the extension is not convenient for you to put it in place with your hands, then use this instrument which is made of iron, which has seven or eight fingers long, and its width is according to the size of the wound; and it is necessary for the surgeon to prepare three or four, according to what he needs in each case of fracture. And let it be round and a little thick, so that it does not bend under compression on the limb during your operation, and let it be pointed at the front, and thicker towards the middle forward, like this:
And it is called a "palainche," because the curved bone must be placed on top of the exposed bone; and push it in at once until it returns, and let them be equal one against the other. And if the fracture is slight, and the instrument cannot well grasp the bone, then cut off the end of the bone so that the instrument can have hold of it.
And if you cannot bring the bone back as we have said, then cut off with an appropriate instrument such as the chisel or saw according to your ability; then scrape what remains on the bone with sharpness and small scrapings.
And when the bone is put back in place and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural position. Then do whatever is necessary to put it back in its proper place, then moisten one cloth in black styptic wine, and apply it properly if it is in summer; and do not put on the wound cerote or anything else with oil, for it will bring corruption and decay. Then apply bandages when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cut away the covering all around according to the size of the wound, and be sure that the wound is not constrained with the fracture; and many times foolish surgeons have done this and brought death or corrosion upon the patient. And let the binding be softer and more gentle than for other fractures.
And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that evil accidents will come of it, as we have said, and you find pain in its place, then one should not put on bandages; but wrap it around tightly with hard cloths, and tie them. And when after one or two days you see that the wound begins to heal, then remove what you have placed there, and put on healing ointment such as tetrafarmakon and similar ones.
You must wash the limb twice a day, in the morning and evening, until it is solid and healed.
The limb should be placed in such a way that the wound drains easily.
And if many days pass and the wound does not heal but continues to suppurate, know that there are small bone fragments present, for which reason you should cleanse the wound with tincture and remove all these unwanted fragments that cause pain.
And if a fistula appears in the place, or some other type of corruption, then you should treat it according to what is said in its chapter above. And when the bone is broken and exposed on the limb, such as the hip bone or the shoulder blade, and others like them on large limbs, do not pull it out for many times the flesh follows it; let it remain until it rots; perhaps it will fall off by itself after twenty or thirty days, then treat the wound if you can; and if you cannot, leave it alone.
about the burns that come on top of the scab
Many times after the fracture has healed, burns can appear on top of the scab, especially if it is near the joint, and the appearance of the limb is unpleasant; and sometimes the limb cannot perform its natural functions.
Therefore, beware if the bone is fresh: have the physician administer medicines that are astringent, such as aloe, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocol, acacia, and similar others; so that you take any of these things or all together, and confit them with wine that is astringent or with egg yolk or with oil; and put them on the bone in bandages, and tie it tightly and do not untie it for many days; then remove it, and start another one again until the inflammation is gone; or you can bind it to a well-made piece of lead; for the property of lead is that it removes all swellings from the limbs. And if the inflammation has already turned into hardness like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, cut off what is on top and remove the excess; or have a barber shave it until it is removed, and treat it until it is healed.
When bone fracture is healed,
And the treatment is thus: you should make the patient eat, and stretch the body so that blood multiplies within them; the servant should give baths, and bring joy and laughter; then place poultice on the limb so that it attracts to great nourishment, and repeatedly wash it with hot water until the nourishment reaches the limb; and return it to its natural shape.
The limb twisted after recovery
When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the bone breaks openly, and the form of the limb is misshapen, nonetheless it does not lose its natural function: thus do not believe the foolish who say that one must break the limb again anew, for many a foolish physician has done this in our land; and such operations are blameworthy, and great evils result, and sometimes even death. Nonetheless, if the dislocations and distortions are recent, they should be bathed with hot water or mollifying herbs cooked therein, such as fig leaves and roots, and mullein, and like substances; and make one mollifying poultice, such as well-made diacere, and take the mucilage of figs and cook it with goose grease or sesame oil, and apply the poultice thereon; or take ripe figs and grind them with coltsfoot, and like medicines that soften the union.
And sometimes the dislocation is removed by continuous rubbing for a long time with moist hands. And let the limb be moved each hour.
And if the twistings are old and hardened, like stone, and it is necessary to remove them with iron, then one must cut down to the bone, gently with a sharp lancet; and put care and skill into the treatment.
Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations are when a joint leaves its place, so that it cannot move, and the limb is misshapen, and the sufferer feels great pain and great injury.
When dislocation comes to anyone, they should try to reduce it immediately.
For if one delays, the place becomes inflamed, and perhaps it will not be set back in its proper place. Therefore one should not attempt to move it when it is inflamed: many times this brings about spasms and other pains;
When this occurs, nevertheless, wash the patient, then leave him until the inflammation is appeased; then raise the limb with warm water and oil, then gently reset it, and care for each limb as it comes back into its place.
And I have ordered the chapters of the dislocations from head to foot.
of the jaws
Sometimes the jaws become dislocated upwards, and their dislocation occurs in two ways: either they are a little displaced from their places, and softened somewhat; or they are entirely dislocated, hanging towards the chest, with saliva flowing out of the mouth so that it cannot be held back, nor can the mouth be closed, and speech is impeded by the tongue.
When dislocation is slight, it returns spontaneously in most cases.
And if it is complete and total, then you must reset it quickly without delay;
And in this manner that the servant holds the patient's head, and the physician places a pouch of his one hand at the root of the jaw dislocation inside the mouth if the dislocation is on both sides; and the other two hands should be free to keep it even; and instructs the patient to soften his jaws and move them in all directions.
And the physician places it back until it returns to its proper place
And if the dislocation is severe, especially if both jaws are dislocated together, then raise them with hot water and oil until they become slightly softened; do not force the repositioning, as we have said
And when they are repositioned correctly, and the patient closes his mouth without softening, then place wet cloths made with a salve of rose oil and wax on it, and bind it lightly with soft bandages
and the patient should sleep on his back with two pillows under his shoulders so that he does not move to the right or left and does not attempt to chew but takes only soft food until the pain is gone and the jaws are at rest
and then he may chew what he wants easily, and should not force his mouth open while eating or drinking until the jaws are fully healed and strong
And if both jaws cannot be put back in place within an hour and are not returned to their proper positions, then fever and chills may occur, sometimes with diarrhea and occasionally vomiting of clear bile
And when you see these signs, know that it is a loss of life; many times the person dies within eight days
of dislocation
The dislocation cannot be dislocated from the inner side of the cheekbone nor from the breastbone; sometimes it is dislocated backward and can be felt quite well
And the reduction is done by having the patient lie on his back with arms extended, pressing firmly on the cheekbone with the palm of the hand until it returns to its place, then placing the emplastrum and binding it tightly
and the chin which is towards the face cannot be dislocated; if it can, then it should be repositioned as we have said, then place the emplastrum and bandage and bind it tightly, and tell the patient to rest until healed
and so too is the chin of the shoulder repositioned when it has been dislocated from its place
Chapter on the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder is dislocated outward in three ways: firstly from the lower part of the socket, secondly from the side of the chest, and occasionally from above, which happens rarely
And the shoulder does not dislocate backwards nor inward towards the nerves; often it dislocates downward toward the socket, especially in those with little flesh, for then it springs out quickly; but in those with abundant flesh, it barely springs out and scarcely returns
And sometimes there occurs a blow or fall which causes the shoulder to swell with a hot hematoma and the person believes that it is dislocated because of this
Therefore you must examine him closely until you are certain; then begin treatment
And it is known when the dislocation has occurred downward toward the socket, for there will be a noticeable difference between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, with clear manifestations in between and you will find a hollow at the top of the shoulder and beneath the socket a touch like that of an egg, and the patient cannot bring his hand to his neck nor move it in any way
and likewise if it is dislocated upward, it is not hidden but can be felt distinctly upon touching
and this manner of dislocation cannot be reduced except when it is new or if the patient is a child
And the method is for the practitioner to raise the patient's hand upwards, then place his fingers beneath the socket and forcefully raise the joint upwards into its proper place, and then lower the hand downwards
And if it does not come back as we have described within several days afterwards, then the patient must be bathed in warm water and given softening and soothing remedies to drink, such as a decoction of mallow, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and he should be treated accordingly
then have the patient lie on his back with a piece of cloth folded into a roll placed beneath the socket, not too soft nor too hard, then place the practitioner's heel upon the cloth and gently raise the diseased shoulder while pulling the patient's hand in this way
and another practitioner should hold the patient's head so that it does not move downwards; then the shoulder will return immediately into its proper place, and you may reduce it in this manner
and have present one man who is larger than the patient, standing on the diseased side with his shoulder placed beneath the socket of the patient's arm and raising it upwards so that the patient hangs in the air and another practitioner pulls the patient's arm downwards towards his belly. And if the patient is too light, have him hang with some heavy object and the dislocation will return into its proper place
And it may also be reduced in another manner thus: take a long stick and fix it firmly into the ground so that its end is as high as a man's fist and neither too thick nor too thin then place it beneath the patient, but let him have soft cloths underneath to prevent injury, and have him stand upon the end of the stick, then extend his arm downward forcefully on the other side and the joint will quickly return into its proper place
and if it will not return by all the methods we have described, then do this treatment: take a stick two and a half feet long and four fingers wide with a rounded top to allow easy entry into the socket beneath the arm in this way
then place soft cloths upon the top of the stick to prevent injury to the patient, then place it beneath the socket of the diseased arm; extend the patient's other arm upwards along the length of the stick and tie the elbow to the stick with a bandage, then place the forearm upon a support made from a piece of wood about half an inch thick; let the hand hang downwards on one side and allow the body to hang freely on the other side: the joint will now return into its proper place
And when it has returned into its proper place, however this may have happened, then you must place a bandage of wool beneath the socket, sprinkle the whole shoulder and surrounding area with powdered mallow leaves mixed with incense and egg-white, then draw the bandage tight beneath the arm and tie the ends securely around the emplastrum; fasten the hand to its collarbone and let it remain in this position
And it is necessary that he fast for a few days until the member is strengthened, for it will heal more quickly; and then after five or six days he may eat again and move about, and if it remains firm without becoming softened, then it is healed.
And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has come into it, or for another reason, then you must administer cauteries at three points, as it is set forth in the chapter on cauteries.
And if you do everything, and it remains dislocated after seven days, and the shoulder cannot be raised above the arm, then know that the nerves at the head of the shoulder are cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never again be fixed in its place.
Dislocations that occur toward the chest or back are caused by pushing or pulling with great force, and bandages should be applied to support them until they are healed.
And if after the healing there is stiffness in the limb and difficulty in movement, then let the patient exercise many times until that stiffness is alleviated and returns to its original condition.
of dislocation of the neck
Know that the joint of the neck is easily dislocated and easily relocated; and if it has been completely dislocated, both front and back, and the dislocation cannot be reduced because it is visible and palpable in every position. And when you join the sick neck with the healthy one, you can see it clearly because the joint is dislocated and the arm cannot be bent nor touched to the shoulder in any way.
And it is necessary that you reduce it before inflammation comes, because if inflammation should come, reduction will be difficult and perhaps the dislocation cannot be completely reduced, especially when it is on the back; such cases are worse than others and cause greater pain, and sometimes the mouth becomes twisted.
And reduction is when the dislocation can be replaced so that you grasp the patient's hand with both of your hands; and extend their arm, placing your hands around the neck above and below, and push the joint back into place at the wrist or root of the palm until it returns to its proper position.
And if the dislocation is on the front, it can be reduced by doubling the hand onto itself and pressing the root of the palm against the dislocated neck.
And if it does not want to return to its place, apply strong traction; and this is done by two ministers extending the arm, and holding it tight with two cloths so that it does not move during traction. Then twist the arm on both sides, having wrapped a long and wide cloth around it.
And when the physician has joined the joint with their hand, they should oil it with some oil to lubricate the joint, then push the joint firmly until it returns to its place.
And when it is in place, apply a dry compress with egg albumen and press it firmly. Then wrap the arm around the patient's neck and leave it on for a few days before removing it.
And if the joint is firmly fixed in its place, remove the bandage and leave it alone. But if you see that the joint is not yet stable, then begin again with the compress and bandaging, leaving it on for a few more days until it is securely fixed, before removing it.
And if the patient feels pain after reduction of the dislocation and it moves again, then bathe it and rub it gently, pressing firmly until the pain subsides. Or you can apply a poultice of fresh sheep's wool, leaving it on for one day and one night before removing it and immersing the limb in hot water. And when it sweats, rub the joint temperately and then reapply the poultice and immerse it in hot water. Repeat this process two or three times until it is healed. And if necessary, apply a moist cloth heated with butter and press it on the joint for support.
Dislocation of the hand
The dislocation of the hand is easy to reduce, easier than other joints. However, it should be reduced as soon as possible after it occurs, before swelling sets in or inflammation comes.
And reduction is done by placing the affected hand on a table and extending the ministers' hands. The physician then places their palm over the appearance of the dislocation and pushes until it returns to its place.
However, you must ensure that the reduction is complete by having the patient place the back of their hand on a table and then extending and reducing it again. And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand, the patient should place their hand palm down on the table and the physician should place their hand over the appearance of the dislocation. If it returns now, that is good.
If not, apply cold compresses to calm inflammation and leave them on without starting again.
And if the patient cannot tolerate it and you cannot reduce it after a few days, the joint will remain dislocated;
"And harm nothing to the patient but as long as the hand is weakened, and cannot grasp anything at all: then know that the nerves or arteries are cut; so there is no other remedy but to squeeze with a fire cautery near the case, and perhaps nothing else will help."
"And when the hand is in its place, put on the dressing that we have said, then bind it and leave it for five days, then untie it and let it remain thus."
"And if he cannot move it well, and there is some stiffness, then make him warm water compresses, and rub him until he is free."
"on the dislocation of the fingers of the hand"
"No fingers of the hand are dislocated on any side, none at the back of the palm or belly."
"Then grasp the finger, and press on the joint until it returns, then hold the head of the finger and push it towards the part where it is dislocated;"
"and leave it for two days, and then put it in a bandage that day; and do not tie it too tightly, as we have said, and untie it the next day, and make him move it, and bind it again loosely; and do this often until it is healed."
"And do likewise if it is dislocated on the palm of the hand, and do as you have done here until it is healed; and do likewise if it is dislocated elsewhere."
"on the dislocation of the shoulder blade of the back"
When the sciatica of the back or neck is dislocated, or if there are many dislocations, there is no treatment, for the patient hastens his death.
And the signs are that evacuations occur without volition, and cannot be held back, and many times some limb is softened, such as both thighs or both arms or one
And often the sciatica moves in four parts; that which moves at the back is called "gibbosity":
The treatment for gibbosity, if it has come from childhood, is that there should be no hope of recovery or healing at all.
And those that come from falls, blows, or similar causes, the ancients prescribed various treatments with great words, but they had little benefit in all cases.
But I have abbreviated it according to my intention, and have formed diverse instruments in various ways.
I say that in gibbosity which comes to the chest before, there is no remedy nor healing
and likewise that which comes directly into both sides, and one cannot cure it except for that which comes properly onto the back, as I say
and that the patient should lie on his face on one level surface, and have a blanket under him so he does not hurt himself
then drive one stake into the ground firmly at the head of the bed, and another at the feet, and tie a rope around the waist of the patient, and another at the hips, knees, and ankles
and two ministers hold the ropes, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the two stakes
and let them be tied firmly, with the stake as we have said, and the doctor put his palms on the spine forcefully until it returns to its proper place
And if it does not return with this treatment, take a board three feet long and place it under the patient's back while they are on their side, then insert the end of the board under the patient's spine, then place the middle of the board onto the spine and let the doctor put his feet on the other end of the board and press firmly until it returns to its proper place; and if you see that it does not work, then do it on the other side which turns towards the hand
And it is that you drive two stakes into the ground at the head of the patient's bed and two others towards their feet, with a space of one palm between each stake, both above and below
and each stake should have a hole where the rope can be inserted, and they should be firmly in the ground so that they do not move, and between each pair of stakes there should be one turning stake upon which the rope turns, with two small stakes of one palm length on either side to turn the turning stake
and then tie the rope that is between the shoulders to the turning stake towards the head, and the other rope towards the feet to the other turning stake, and each minister turn their stake with all the rope, and the master put the spine back into place as we have said.
And when it is aligned, then put on a dried plaster with egg white, then the poultice, and then the iron plate three fingers long that covers the area of the gibosity and the healthy part of the spine, then tie it on with a rope as we have said, and let the patient rest until they are healed.
And if any other problems arise at the end of the healing process, then one should administer softening and soothing medications along with the iron plate that we mentioned earlier, and sometimes one may also administer a piece of lead
and sometimes the appearance of a displaced spine in the lower back may arise, and one might think that it is a dislocation; but it is only the bone which has appeared, so one should not make assumptions about this: for it could lead to death
dislocations of the hip
Know that the joints of the hip and shoulder only suffer dislocations, unlike other joints, and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four parts: inside and outside, front and back, with more dislocations on the inside than elsewhere, and few dislocations in front and back.
And the sign of an inner hip dislocation is that when the diseased leg is placed next to the healthy one, it appears longer and the diseased knee joint opens wider than the healthy one, and the diseased leg cannot bend at the knee. and the location of this dislocations is indicated by the presence of a hot swelling or abscess near the hip joint
And the sign of one that comes on the outside is that it is opposite to those that have come before
And the sign of one that happens in front is that he walks well with his leg completed; nonetheless, he cannot bend his knee without pain, and if he wants to walk forward, he cannot do so, and he retains his urine, and the angle swells, and when he walks, he walks on his heel.
And the sign of one that happens behind is that he cannot straighten or bend his knee, and his leg is twisted compared to the other one, and the angle is softened, and the hip joint is located beneath the ribs.
The treatment of this type of hip dislocation is that you should ascertain whether the dislocation is recent or old, and if it has remained in its position for some time, then there is no need for treatment; but one must not make assumptions about this.
And in the case of a fresh hip dislocation, which can occur in four ways, you should quickly put the joint back into place, and stretch it inside and outside, and move it to the right or left; perhaps it will return to its proper position, and no other treatment is necessary.
And if it does not return to its proper position in this way, then you should prepare one strong assistant and stretch the leg strongly with both hands or use a rope tied above the kneejoint and another assistant places their hands under the shoulders and then ties a soft rope around the hip, while another holds onto the end of the rope
and all pull upwards and downwards at once so that the patient is lifted off the ground and remains suspended
This method of stretching applies to all four types of hip dislocation, and if the dislocation has returned to its proper position as we have said, then that is good.
But if not, then you must treat it according to its type. If the dislocation is on the inside of the hip joint, then you should have the patient lie on their healthy side, put a rope around the root of the thigh and below the angle, then pull the rope up towards the angle and the groin
then another assistant should take the patient's arms and embrace the large area of the diseased thigh and stretch it outwards forcefully: now it will return to its proper position, and this type of dislocation is easier than the others.
And if you cannot reduce it using the method I have described, then you should tie both of the patient's feet together with a soft rope around both ankles and both knees, and stretch the diseased leg two spans further than the other one
Then he should be hung from the head of a beam, and let him hang two arm-lengths above the ground; then command one minister to embrace the top of the thigh, and let another minister hang with the patient embracing the thigh tightly, for the joints return quickly now.
"And when the dislocation is at the thigh, let the patient lie down as we said for one with dropsy, and stretch one leg properly upon the sick limb, and also upon the foot."
"Then place two pieces of wood: one at the head and one at the feet, then insert one piece of wood between the thighs of the patient in this shape:" "And place moist bandages around to prevent scorching the patient, then each assistant extend towards him, and let the physician put his hand evenly on the dislocation."
"If it returns to its place, that is good. If not, place two boards on top of it and press down as we said in the case of dropsy, then let the patient lie on their healthy side."
"And when the dislocation is anterior, it is necessary to extend the sick limb quickly, and according to what I have said; then let the physician place his knee upon the angle of the sick leg, then press with his other hand and stretch downward towards the knee."
"And if the dislocation is posterior, it is not necessary to extend the patient downward or lift them up from the ground, but rather they should be positioned as if their hip had been dislocated backwards, just like we said about childbirth on two hips." "and they should be lying on their face, and the bandage stretched out as we said earlier, and one must press upon the joint with the board."
"And it will be known that the patient has recovered when they extend their legs and they are even. Then adjust the thighs, place the splint, and fasten with a bandage so that the hip does not move."
"And let him rest for three or four days, then remove the splint and place it back on. If you see that they are even, then fasten again as before and leave it for another three days. Then remove it and let him go gently until the member is comfortable."
"Of dislocation of the knee"
"The kneecap can be dislocated in three ways: inward, outward, and backward; it does not dislocate forward."
"And the sign is that you tell the patient to bend their leg towards their thigh, and if it does not articulate with their thigh, know that it is dislocated."
"And the reduction of all these types is that you make the patient sit up straight and extend their leg if they can. Then place your back against their face and put your foot on theirs."
"Then take their kneecap in your palms and draw it between your thighs, then bend both sides of the knee forcefully. Another assistant should extend the patient's foot until the kneecap returns to its place, and the sign is that it articulates easily with the thigh."
"And place the splint on it and keep the leg articulated with the thigh for three or four days, then remove it. The patient should not walk until the member is comfortable."
"And if the limb is not well placed, one must extend it forcefully as we said in the treatment of the hip until it is healed."
"Of dislocation of the heel"
"The heel can sometimes be dislocated and sometimes completely dislocated, both inward and outward."
"And the sign is that the ankle is swollen, and it points forward towards the part where it is dislocated:"
"The reduction is easy, and one must extend it gently with both hands when it is only sprained."
"And when it is completely dislocated, you must make the patient sit up straight and have one assistant pull them forward by the leg above the ankle;"
"then pull the foot towards your right hand and then your left hand twice, then extend it upwards and gently put the foot back in place;"
"and do this twice as we have said, pushing and pulling the foot; if it returns, that is good. If not, start again, for it may return;"
"and if it cannot be reduced in this way, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground and firmly stick a peg in the earth between their thighs. Then tie the straps around so that they do not hurt the patient;"
"then have one assistant hold the thigh and another extend the foot with both hands or with one hand holding it at the ankle;" "then each assistant should extend equally, and the peg should always be between the patient's thighs to hold them down when extending;"
"then the surgeon must gently push the dislocation back into place with both hands while another assistant holds the healthy leg below. The dislocation will return quickly."
"And when it is in place, put on the splint and bandages and strap the foot to the leg tightly. Be careful of the nerves that are behind the ankle joint so that the straps are not too tight;"
"then leave it for two or three days and if the straps have loosened, tighten them. Then remove them on the fourth or fifth day, but do not let the patient walk for four days;" "and if they walk before this time, there is no certainty that it will not dislocate again."
"And if inflammation occurs afterwards, you must calm it as we have said elsewhere until it is healed."
"of the fingers"
"When the fingers are dislocated, they should be gently extended without force, and this is an easy matter."
"And if the dislocation is at any knuckle of the hand, you should make the patient sit on a low stool or table with their back straight. Then place your foot on what opens from these joints and press down hard until it returns;"
"and when it is equal and nothing opens, place a two-legged table under the sole of the foot. Then extend it forcefully and leave it for three days before removing it. Let them rest until they are healed."
"of wound and dislocation together"
When a wound comes with dislocation, and one wishes to reset it,
"If you are not presumptuous in the treatment, if you are wise in the art and have practiced it for a long time, and if you are compassionate, merciful, and careful, not hasty."
"And at the beginning of the treatment, use soothing remedies for hot inflammation, and leave the patient in God's hands if there is no hope of recovery." "And when you see hope, then set the limb back in place before the hot inflammation comes."
"Once the limb is back in place, apply remedies to cool the inflammation and treat the wound with drying ointments as needed."
"And if there is also fracture along with the dislocation, and small bones are dislocated, set them and do what we have said for simple fractures."
"And guard yourself from taking the path of fear, as I have said, for it is better for you to die according to your Creator, and for the safety of your soul and body. Amen."
