O thou, dearest son, I have completed this book which is the last of medical knowledge together with its fulfillment; and have brought it to an end by its explanations and declarations. And there came unto me in vision that I should complete it for thee with this treatise which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
And because the work of hands is neglected in our region and has been entirely destroyed throughout, therefore its science has perished and been cut off; and there remains nothing but small descriptions about it in books which hands have moved. And from this ignorance and vanity have come, and intentions are closed and the science has been forgotten.
But it seems to me that I desire to revive this science together with the ordering of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and also to bring the forms of cauterizing irons and other instruments of the work along with their description and preparation, as is necessary.
And because no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine has been neglected. And he who engages in this must rise up in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he may know the judgment of the members and their forms and conjunctions and separations, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and sinews and the number of joints, and the movement and the moving and resting veins, and the place of their exit.
And therefore Hippocrates says that a name with no deed is much, but with a deed it is little; and the same is true in the art of surgery.
We say to you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not acquainted with the things said above should guard against falling into error and killing men, as I have often seen many do who engage in this science without skill or experience.
For I saw a foolish surgeon who cut off one aposteme of scrofula on the neck of a woman, and cut the arteries of the neck; so that so much blood issued forth that the woman died in his hands.
And I saw another surgeon who removed a stone from the bladder of a man, and the stone was large; so he carried away with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
And I had already been called to him to remove it, and saw the condition of the sick man and the greatness of the stone; and knew well that if it were cut into he would die.
And I saw another surgeon who took in hand the cure of one of our dukes who had his leg broken, and with the break there was also a wound; and the surgeon, full of ignorance, bound the break upon the wound with tight bandages, and did not leave any salve to the wound, and left him thus for some time. And he commanded that it should not be unbound; and so it remained until the leg was entirely swollen and the foot came to ruin.
I was called to go to him, and I hurried to come and unbind the leg; and when I had it unbound, he felt no pain at all.
But the corruption was already well established in the member and could not be healed; and the corruption did not cease to spread through the member until the whole limb was lost.
And I saw another surgeon who burst open an inflamed carbuncle and then burned it through his own wickedness.
For a carbuncle, when it is free from melancholic humor, ought not to be touched with iron unless it is in such a place that all that is corrupted can be entirely removed.
And therefore, dear son, you ought to know that surgery is divided into two parts: that is, the work where there is danger in many conditions; and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
Therefore it is necessary for you to be careful so that foolish surgeons may not speak evil of you.
Therefore take your arms in hand, and approach your patients lightly and boldly, and use the best way so that through the grace of God you may come to health and be praised; and leave difficult diseases alone. And remove your arms from what causes you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you may come from this world to the other of glory.
Galen says in some of his admonitions: "Do not undertake the care of serious diseases, lest you be called a foolish surgeon."
I have divided this treatise into three chapters.
The first chapter is about hot cauteries and medical cauteries, and it is ordered from the head down to the feet; and it contains the forms of instruments, the irons for cauteries, and all that is necessary in the work.
The second chapter is about cutting and puncturing, and about cupping glasses and wounds, and the extraction of splinters and similar things; and it contains the forms of instruments.
The third chapter is about reducing dislocations and torsions and similar things; and it is ordered from the head down to the feet, and contains the forms of instruments.
Before we remember the work, it is necessary for me to tell you about the quality of the temperament and the harm of each complexion.
I say that the qualities of temperaments and their harm is the longest speech and most subtle science, and its secrets are difficult to answer. And about this most wise men have spoken and agreed among themselves. But I will give you few words because I fear lengthiness.
I say that cautery helps universally every temperament where there is matter, except for two temperaments: namely the hot and dry temperament without matter.
Some people divide the hot and dry temperament with matter into two parts and say that cautery is great help there. But others say the opposite, that cautery is not good for diseases that come from heat and dryness.
For the nature of fire is hot, For when you compare the body of man and its moisture to the temperament of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this word. For I have found it many times through experimentation.
But let none meddle therein but he who hath tried it and knows well the book of cauteries by long experience, and the diversities of temperaments in men, their positions and causes of diseases, and seasonable times; concerning other temperaments we have no fear, especially cold moist ones. And all the physicians assembled and agreed upon the cautery.
Know, my son, that fire alone is the secret of remedies and has greater efficacy than a cauterizing medicine.
For fire is simple and acts only upon the member which it burns, and does not harm other members if one takes care.
Burning medicines spread from member to member, causing severe inflammation and sometimes even death.
Fire does not cause harm due to its height and the goodness of its substance if there is no excess.
And this I have found by experience and the length of service and study that I have devoted to the art, and it is based on the truth of things. Therefore, I apologize for the length of my speech, but I do not wish to deprive you of the secret contained in fire and the quality of its work, as the philosophers demonstrate; now receive this in your thoughts.
And know, my son, that they agreed upon the time when cauteries should be performed and chose priests.
And I say that cautery is suitable at all times, because the evils that occur are prevented by its help. Especially if the cauteries are necessary for sudden and urgent pains which cannot wait until greater mischief comes to the member.
And never think, dear son, as foolish physicians do; for a disease cured by cautery has no return. And they say so, but it is not entirely true because cauteries are medicines that alter the complexion and dry up the humors that cause pain, and they are more effective than medicines due to their swift action, virtue of their work, and sovereignty.
And it can happen that diseases arise according to the complexion of the patient and the location and nature of the disease. And they are assembled within him by the acquisition of foods and similar things, unless cauteries are administered in places where there is little superfluity or moisture, such as dental cauteries for toothache, etc., and such pain does not return; but this happens rarely.
And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the last resort of medicine, and indeed they are wrong; but they do not believe that cauteries have value after medicines. Their intentions are false, for when we administer various cures in any disease and they do not work, then we apply cauteries, which are effective. Therefore it is clear that cauteries are the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish physicians.
The ancient ones said that cauteries of gold are gentler than those of iron, and they said this because of the quality of gold and its high substance. They also said that the place where a cautery is applied does not cause decay, but this is not entirely true as I have seen in some people; however, cauteries of gold are indeed milder than those of iron, just as they said.
Moreover, when you heat an instrument of gold, you cannot tell whether it is hot by the color of the gold, and it cools down quickly. If you heat it too much in the fire, it will also damage it. Therefore, there are enough obstacles to this method.
Therefore, we use cauteries of iron that have been more appropriately prepared for our work.
I have arranged this chapter from head to toe so that it is easier to find the way.
olive cautery
This cautery is useful for moistness and coldness on the head. There are two types of it made due to the cause of an illness called "soda," and also because of many humors that flow down from the head to the ears and throat, causing numerous dreams, toothache, sore throat, and especially all illnesses that come from coldness like paralysis, sciatica, apoplexy, and similar ailments.
The form of this cautery is as follows: the patient should be purged by a dissolving medicine that opens up the head for three or four nights, depending on the strength and age and constitution of the patient. Then apply the cautery to the back of the patient's head.
Then have the patient sit crossed-legged between your hands and place their hands on their knees. Then place the root of your palm on the root of the patient's nose between their two ears. Wherever your middle fingers come together, make an incision there and then apply the cautery called "olivare" which has this form:
And place it on the spot marked with ink, and press down gently but firmly while turning your hand back and forth. Then lift your hand slowly, and wait a moment to see if you can see the bone of about one inch in length; if not, then continue applying the cautery until you do see the bone as I have told you. Then take a small piece of wool, dip it into soft cotton, and place it on the spot and leave it for three days. After that, put moistened cotton soaked in butter on top of it and let it stay there until the burn is healed. Then treat the wound with ointment called "tetrafarmacon" until it is completely healed.
And the ancients said that the more open the wound remains, the better it purges itself. Therefore, this cautery helps greatly with that.
Some also say that one should leave the cautery on until part of the bone is burnt, and then scrape off what has been burned from the bone and heal it.
Others say that one should leave the cautery on and press it so hard that a piece of bone about as large as a thread used for sewing by women is scraped off, so that humors can flow out more freely. Then the wound should be left open for a long time before being dressed and bandaged.
But these two methods of cautery do not seem entirely good to me except in some cases where there is a risk of paralysis. Therefore, it seems best to leave them alone. Because the flesh becomes weakened by continuous solutions of nature as we see in other members, and especially when the flesh of the patient is naturally weak, the first method of cautery appears more cautious and gentle to me, and that is the one I use most often with good results.
For chronic headache
When a chronic pain comes in the whole head and lasts for a long time, the patient should use pills called "cochies," purgatives for the head, ointments, and plasters. If one applies the cautery I mentioned earlier without success.
Be careful if the patient's flesh is strong and not too cold in nature, then apply the cautery a little below where you applied the one mentioned earlier.
After that, apply a cautery to each horn of the head up to the bone, as mentioned earlier, and apply one cautery to the spot called "vasselz," which is where cupping glasses are placed. Be careful not to press too hard so as not to burn down to the bone: the patient feels more pain with this cautery than with others, and I will speak about it later. The cauteries on the horns should be finer than those used for the middle of the head, and here is their form:
"Of the cautery of the head," When sudden pain occurs in one part of the head and the illness spreads as far as the eye, and the flesh has been purged with medicines that cleanse it, and all the other treatments I have mentioned in the division of illnesses have been performed but they do not help at all: then cauteries are applied according to two methods, namely those made of medicine and fire.
The cautery with hot medicine is performed as follows: take a handful of dried basil leaves, remove their outer skin and crush them into powder; then make an incision in the temple where the pain is felt so that you can place the handful of basil leaves beneath the skin. Then bind it tightly and leave it like that for twelve hours. After that, untie it and remove the basil leaves and let the wound remain open for two or three days. Then apply cotton soaked in butter over it until it closes up.
After the wound has healed with ointment, if you wish to apply any burning medicines that I have written about in the twelfth chapter on treating burning medicines.
The cautery of iron is performed as follows: heat the cautery, which has this shape:
It is called "closed" because the head is shaped like a closed lock with a slight curve and a small indentation in the middle. Place it on the painful area and turn the fire gently until half of the point of the cautery has been burned; then lift your hand so that only the artery, which is located outside, is burned, and allow an abundant flow of blood to come forth.
Afterwards, apply cotton soaked in water of salt on the wound for three days. Then apply cotton soaked in butter over it and treat the wound with ointment until it heals completely. If you wish to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called "cutellare," which is pointed at both ends, be careful not to cut the artery that runs through this migraine if it is not an ancient one.
de migraine
If you are treating migraine as we have previously discussed in the section on diseases, and it does not improve, and you see that the cauteries made of medicine and iron do not help, then you must heat the cautery called "cutellare" until it turns white. Then quickly place it on the painful area and trace a line about half an inch long with it, making sure not to cut the artery or go all the way down to the bone. Be careful not to harm the jawbone which moves when chewing, and make sure that the patient does not move their neck so as not to cause spasm or fright. If there is heavy bleeding from the artery after cutting it, do not panic, especially if you are not familiar with this procedure or have not practiced it before. Leave the wound open for now, but I will tell you how to stop bleeding when an artery has been cut and show you where it can be found in this book.
And if you find that these cauteries do not help with the illness and the patient is suffering, then cauterize them on the head as we have described earlier, and treat the wound until it heals completely. If you wish to use a cautery that has been mentioned in the chapter on extracting an artery, then use one with two blades; this cautery is better than the previous one and more helpful.
Chapter 49: On the Pain of the Ears Due to Coldness
When cold pain comes to the ear and one has opened medicinal solutions there and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division, but the pain does not cease, then heat this cautery called "point":
After applying the cautery all around the affected ear, or around both if the pain is in both, and then move it a little away from the root of the ear since you have marked the spot; and use ten points on each ear; afterwards clean the spot until it is healed.
Of the Torture of the Mouth
Torture that must be treated by cautery is only that which moves with phlegm, as we have said in the division of diseases; and do not perform cauterization on those that come from sore and sores.
When you are treating this type of torture that moves with phlegm from dryness and purging of the head and gargling, and these remedies do not help, then it is necessary to cauterize the affected area with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, another a little way outside the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips; and place the cautery in the part that appears healthy, and make a cautery mark on top of the ear a little below the horn of the head, and another on the temple as long as a finger's width; and leave the cautery there until half of the kernel is burned; this is the form of the cautery.
And this is the form of the cautery that we have placed before, but it is a bit more subtle and it is necessary for the knife to be slightly larger; afterwards clean the spot as I said earlier until it is healed.
When apoplexy is chronic and you treat it as we have said, but there is no improvement, and the patient has no fever, then perform four cauteries: two on the two horns of the head, one in the middle of the head, and one on the spot that is called "vessels" as we have mentioned earlier, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach; and cure it as we have said before.
de la litargie
For this disease, give the patient large ointments and pills made from mignonette to cleanse the brain. Afterwards, shave the head of the patient entirely, and place on the occiput the plaster of mustard that is written about in the treatise on plasters; and this is the manner of cautery: perform it as I have said.
If it is healed in this way, good; and if not, perform three cauteries in the middle of the head going down to the neck, with a space of two fingers between each cautery; and cure it as the others, and if you see it join together, and the patient is suffering, then perform one cautery in the middle; and if necessary, perform two more on the two horns, and cure it until it is healed; and these cauteries are called "olivary," as I have said before.
Pour traire la froideur du chef, il covient mettre li malaides en un lit bien chauffez et bien couverts, et doner lui un bains d’herbes chaudes, c’est à dire verveine et sauge et chouli ou chous vert; aprés doner lui yeres de graisse doree sur le chief, puis li met sus la teste ung emplaustre de canelle et de girofle en poudre mis en un lit dou pain; puis li fai .iij. cauteres emmi le chief comme j’ai dit devant. The chief must be cleansed of hairs and of that which we have said before. After this, raise the patient's head, then apply cauteries within the chief and upon each horn, and one behind and three upon the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is enduring, and the disease is severe, apply four cauteries upon the spine of the back. Leave them until the best of the heart is burned, then lift your hand; afterward care until it is healed, and let the cautery which is called 'olivare' be that which we have said before.
Of epilepsy
Epileptics should not apply cauteries except for the phlegmatic type. First, cleanse the brain of hairs and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is large and capable of taking medication.
And if it is a child who cannot endure this, perform gargarism and mastication to cleanse the brain often with good foods. After that, raise the child's head in the middle, and apply one cautery according to what we have said before, and one cautery upon the vessel, and upon each horn; and if the patient is severe and enduring, apply cauteries as I have said for those who have paralysis and weakness of body, upon the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped according to the manner that I have said.
If the patient is a child, apply one subtle cautery in this manner:
When the cause of melancholy is the presence of superfluities or corrupt humors and thick phlegm, then apply cauteries as we have said for those who have paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is that superfluities tend towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give him to drink something by which the brain may be cleansed, according to what is said before in the division.
After raising the head of the patient, take one well-made linen cloth, like a circle, and place it on the head. The patient should sit crossed-legged and be held securely on all sides. Then present the linen and pour melted sheep's butter onto it. Heat the butter gradually over a fire so that the dough can withstand it. Afterward, empty the circle inside the head and let it cool. Do this once each week with other good treatments until the patient is cured.
Or if you wish to cauterize the head by making several punctures along the entire cautery, this method moistens the brain excessively. Instead, apply cotton soaked in butter and goose grease.
For the treatment of eye pain When pain first comes to the eyes due to the signs that I have mentioned in the division, begin by giving the patient something to drink that cleanses the head and guards against all moistures. Make him sweat or take baths several times while fasting.
After him, he commands to raise his head, and makes a cautery on the head, and makes two cauteries on the two temples if the descent of the water is at the two eyes together, or one if the descent is at one; and cut all the veins and arteries that are under the heart with every cautery, and let the cauteries be long according to the width of the temple; and beware of excessive bleeding, and if you see too much blood coming out, stop it with such power as you have.
And I will teach you about the extraction of arteries and the incision of cauterization, how you will perform it; and never do cautery or burn beneath the two rear bones.
of the body of tears
When the tears from the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins or near the arteries that appear on the forehead outside; and one sees that it is cold, superfluous fluid, then he makes the cautery I mentioned at the beginning of the descending aqueous humor to the eyes: one cautery in the middle of the head, and two cauteries on the two temples, and two cauteries or burns beneath the two bones behind; and if there is a need for more, he cauterizes skillfully above the eyebrow with small cauteries.
When the aqueous humor descends inside the eyes
When you treat it according to what we have said in the division, and it does not improve, then give the sick person three cooked chickens to drink after; then raise his head, and make a cautery in the middle of the cautery olive; and make two cauteries called "clavilis" on the two eyebrows, a little below the eyebrow ridges; and beware of cutting the artery. And this is the shape of the cautery called "clavilis":
When the paper (sclera) of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery called "olivary". Here is its shape:
And if you see fit to make two cauteries on the two eyebrows as long as the eyebrows are; and do not leave your hand there until a third of the paper (sclera) is burnt, according to the manner I have described.
Regarding the hair that points at the eye Sometimes it happens that the hairs of the eyes turn towards the partedens and prick the eye, and cauteries are made in two ways for this: either by fire or with burning medicine.
Or the fire cautery commands the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their origin, he should restrain his eyes so that they do not move until they have grown.
When they have grown and are even, then the patient should lay on his back; after that, he should draw a figure on the paper of the eyes like a mirror's surface, with its beginning near the hairs; then place cotton soaked in egg white and groundsel on the eye, and afterwards heat the cautery which has this shape:
After cauterizing gently several times on the figure you have drawn, so that the skin is burnt at that spot; and the sign of the work's healthiness is when you see the paper recede and the hairs rise to the point of the eye; then lift your hand, and leave it thus for three days; afterwards place cotton soaked in butter until the burn has healed; finally treat with ointment until it is completely healed.
And if after this the hairs come back and the paper is softened, then begin again with the cautery on that same spot as you did first; and if the hairs are defective, cauterize until the paper rises to its natural level, becomes even, and does not prick the eye anymore.
The burning medicinal cautery is performed by commanding the patient to let their hairs grow long and even; then make a parchment shape like the leaf of a myrtle. Next, take three each of frankincense and white wax, grind them together well, and make it quickly so that it does not cool; then spread it on the shape you have made like the myrtle leaf, place it on the paper of the eyes; if the patient has only one eye affected, work on one, and if both are affected, do both as well. Place cotton soaked in egg white underneath the eye, and let the patient lie on their back with their two hands pointing towards the medicine, pressing gently each time the patient feels the sensation of the medicine, for it burns like fire. After you have done this for some time, then remove the medicine from your hand. And when the sensation has passed, then lift the eye cover and observe if you see the paper raised as if it were lifted by constraint of fire or incision; and if it is so, then all is well. If not, then apply more medicine on the spot where the medicine did not work, until your work is even and your eyes are sharp; then place cotton soaked in butter until the burnt skin has healed, after that treat the eye with the ointment called "diaphoresis" and others, until it is completely healed.
And if you need to be very careful with your work so that no medicine falls into the eye. And if the paper becomes soft afterward and the hairs prick the eye, then begin again with the medicine on that spot where the paper is softened properly, just as you did before; after that treat until it is completely healed. This is the form of the myrtle leaf:
And know that the eyes of people are diverse in size and smallness, and according to this adjust your cautery; and do not stray from the right path that one who learns this art should follow.
Regarding the treatment of fistula by cautery
When you are treating a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not help, then it is necessary that you perform a cautery on it in this manner.
Command the patient to place their head in your hand; and hold the patient's head between your hands so that they do not move or turn their head. After that, place cotton soaked in egg white or in persimmon juice on the eye. Then heat the cautery which is shaped like this: it is pointed at the top like a dovecot roof tile, with the point being the cautery itself; if you see, then it should be pointed from one end to the other, and if you see, then it should also be like a tent; but in any case, this shape is most useful for your work.
After that, press the fistula if it is open and remove the pus from it and dry it. And if it is closed, then open it and draw out fluid from it. After that place the hot cautery on it and hold your hand on the cautery at the part of the eye closest to the nose so that your hand does not tremble. Then insert the cautery into the fat of the eye and burn it.
If you reach the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, then that would be good. If not, then begin the cautery again once more and another time if necessary, leaving it for three days. After that place cotton soaked in butter on it and treat with a drying ointment until it is healed. And if forty days pass without healing, then apply corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed; and according to what comes out of its channel.
And there is another method of cautery for fistula that some of the ancients spoke about. Understand about fistula and cut it open; after that place one small clove, shaped like this: and make it the size of a grain of pepper. Then hold your hand on the clove firmly and do not let the patient move their nose so that the melted wax does not run into their eye. And it is necessary to place cotton soaked in egg whites or in water on the patient's eye. The wax will then seal the fistula, and will heal it with wonderful speed.
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have mentioned, then that is good. If not, then it is necessary to make a puncture in the nose and bring the fistula back into its proper place inside the nose according to what is necessary for each one's own case.
Regarding cracks in lips Many times, cracks appear on the lips which are called "cracks," and especially on children's lips.
When you treat these cracks as we have mentioned in the division of diseases, and the treatment does not help, then heat a small cautery scalpel according to this shape:
And place him immediately in those crevices until it reaches the source; afterwards, cleanse the wound with wax until it is healed.
of the boil of the throat
When an abscess appears at the root of the throat or in the uvula, or on the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, it produces putrefaction and becomes swollen and turns into a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in the sections, but it does not improve: then it is necessary for you to apply one cautery according to the size of the fistula; afterwards, close or pierce the opening of the fistula, and hold your hand until the hot iron reaches the source of it on the inside; and do this once or twice, after that treat it as we have said in treatments, until it is healed; and if it is cured thus, it is good; but if not, then it is necessary to uncover the wound and remove the rotten bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
on toothache
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines but it is not effective, then place the head of the sick person on your lap; afterwards heat the cautery whose shape will come later in this manner, so that you place a pipe over the tooth; and put the hot cautery inside, and hold your hand until the sick person feels the heat reaching the root of the tooth; after that, remove your hand and begin the cautery again according to your desire; afterwards, have the sick person fill their mouth with salted water, and keep it there for an hour and then spit it out.
And in this way the tooth that was loose is made firm again, and the softened gum is tightened, and the corrupt moisture is dried up.
on toothache
When toothache comes from coldness, where there is coldness or truth, and the remedies of medicine do not suffice, then there is need for a cautery in two ways: cautery of butter and cautery of fire.
The cautery of butter is such that you take butter from cow's milk and put it on the tip of an iron or brass spoon; afterwards take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a thread, and moisten it in boiling butter, and quickly place it on the painful tooth until it cools down; and do this often so that its effectiveness reaches the root of the tooth. And if you see that the wool and cotton are moistened with cold butter, put them on the aching tooth, and put a red-hot iron over it until the fire reaches the neck of the tooth.
The fire cauteries should be such that you take one of iron or brass, and it should be thick enough so that the heat does not reach the patient's mouth. After heating the cautery, as described below, place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery has cooled down; do this often, for the pain will be alleviated on that same day or the next. And the patient should fill their mouth with good butter during the application of this cautery, and then rub it in; this is the shape of the cautery:
When boils are of hot and moist nature, and are not yielding to treatment with medicines, then heat the cautery described below, which has two openings for the smoke to escape from the other side; place the heated cautery on the boil once or twice until it reaches the center of the boil. If the boil is small, adjust the size of the cautery accordingly and leave it in place for three days. Then apply cotton soaked in butter until the burn is healed. After that, treat the wound with ointments and bandages until it is healed.
When moist humors prevail in the channels of the lungs, especially when it arises from a cold complexion, the patient should first be treated with solvents. Then perform a cautery at the root of the throat, taking care not to reach too close to the throat and not to burn the heart but only slightly. After that, perform another cautery at the junction of the neck and head, using a cautery called "clavile," for which we have the shape described earlier. Treat the wound with ointments and bandages until it is healed, as described previously.
de la toux When coughing and lung disease are caused by cold moist humors, and the patient does not have fever or shortness of breath, and the condition is chronic, perform two cauteries on the skin over the lungs. Then perform another cautery between the breasts, near the nipples, using a cautery called "clavile" according to the shape described earlier.
And if you see that the pain is severe, perform a cautery using the cautery called "poins," for which the shape is described earlier in the section on ear diseases. Use this cautery to prick all around the affected area, up to thirty or forty times. After that, treat the wound as described previously, using a cautery with three points according to the following shape:
And because these cauteries are easier to perform, you should make three incisions at once.
de la dislocation de l'épaule When the head of the arm bone is dislocated due to moist humors and is repositioned but keeps slipping back and becomes dislocated again even with slight movements, as we have experienced, it is necessary to first reset the dislocation. Afterwards, have the patient lie on their back and side. Then lift the chest with the palms of your hands. If the joint is dislocated inside, heat the cautery that has two points as shown here:
"and cauterize the lung until it pierces to the side, and there would be four cauteries from the cautery figure; and therefore it is done with the cautery that has three nerves, for which reason the figure of cauterization are six cauteries; and the nerves are according to the thinness of a thread, and this is the form of the cautery that has three nerves:"
"And sometimes it is attached above this one nerve, for which there are eight cauteries."
"Then put on the cautery quickly broken with a thread; afterwards let the patient rest, and do not move the limb for a long time until it is well comforted."
"And if it is dislocated above, which happens rarely, then make a cautery on the thick part of the cautery clavicle, or many cauteries piercingly. For the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed, and the patient is healthy."
"of the cautery for pleurisy"
"The ancients said that one should make for pleurisy cauteries with roots of aristologus, and in this manner: take a root of aristologus long, the largest you can find, and let it be dry, and also thick and as long as your two fingers; and moisten it in oil, and put it on the fire, and cauterize one cautery between the armpit and the neck, and two small cauteries a little descending in the part that is below the beard; and two cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, inclined backwards a little; and one cautery amidst the breast, and another above the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two on the two sides of the breast before the cautery that is between the two shoulders; and do not press your hand, but do openly just as in smelling."
"And some ancient ones said that some people used cauteries like a razor's edge, and they heat it up and put it between the ribs until it comes to this aposteme; and when the pain is gone, just as we have said in the aposteme of the liver. But in this work there is fear that the patient will die now, or that a fistula will come which cannot be healed."
"of the mouse"
When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have said in the sections on treatments and it does not improve, then there are three methods of cauterization that are all beneficial.
Of these, the first method is as follows: you should make three or four cauteries along the length of the mouse according to the shape of the liver cautery that we have described earlier; do not press your hand too hard during the entire cautery process, and ensure that the patient remains lying on their back.
"And another way of cauterization is that you heat the cautery which has two nerves, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and raise the heart which is near the breastbone, where the rib cage of the patient comes towards the left, and let the elevation by which you raise the heart be according to the length of the body, and let the cautery be according to the width of the body."
"After that, insert the two inflamed nerves until the heart is pierced from the other side, and then remove the cautery, so there will be four. And if you wish, you can cauterize with the entire cautery having three nerves. After the treatment, when the gangrene has been cast off for a long time, this method is better than the others mentioned before."
"of dropsy"
"A cautery is not good for a dropsical person, except in the manner which is called 'ascites'. When you treat it according to the methods that we have mentioned in divisions, and your treatment does not help at all, then you must make four cauteries around the belly button, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the breastbone, two behind the back on the spine, and one near the nipple; and let the cauteries be very close to the space of the heart."
"Afterwards, leave the cautery open for a long time to cast out putrefaction, and do not neglect the treatment of the patient afterwards; and healing will hasten, and both intentions will be together with the help of God."
"The form of the cautery for the belly should be like the one we have shown before, which is a key-shaped; and those for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what has been put forth beforehand."
"of the swelling of the feet" "When the feet are swollen in a dropsical person and are full of yellow water, you must cauterize on the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring finger; and raise your hand with the cautery without turning it. And do not enter too deeply in case you burn the yellow water, and let the cautery be according to this shape:"
"Afterwards, make two cauteries on each leg at the tip of the shinbone; and let the cauteries be long, one in front of the knee and the other behind it, in the middle of the leg. Leave the cauteries open for a long time without treating them, until the water comes out. After that, treat with the other methods that we have mentioned."
"of pleurisy"
"When pleurisy comes from coldness and moisture to such an extent that the retaining and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and cannot be cured by methods of treatment; and you see the patient suffering greatly and with great strength, then make one large cautery on the stomach according to what has been spoken about before regarding the cautery of the stomach, at the circular cautery. And make four small cauteries around the navel, each the size of a small key-shaped cautery, and two cauteries on the hips."
"And if you see that there are abundant moistures and the patient is suffering greatly, then make a cautery on the point of the chest, one cautery on each armpit, and two small cauteries near the large one on the stomach, for the treatment is profitable when there is good help."
"of the treatment of hemorrhoids"
When hemorrhoids are at the fundament, one or several, and are old and are large cold moist corrupt humors, and are treated as we have said in sections, but there is no benefit, then apply cauteries: three on the spine of the back, that one which is completely behind the bladder in a triangular fashion, little by little, and one cautery below the buttock. Two days.
And if you think that his stomach is cooled, and the meat does not cook, and the face swells up, then apply one large cautery on the stomach as it is stated above, and another on the liver, and one on the muscle with a full cautery; leave the cautery on for a long time. Then treat the wound until it is healed.
Of the fleshy tissue called "thelul"
When you remove the fleshy tissue called "thelul", if it is inflamed use a cautery that resembles a razor, and then place it completely burning on that removed piece of flesh; leave your hand there until the cautery reaches the root of the vein, from which blood comes forth. Do this once or twice, and if there is much fleshy tissue, cauterize each one as we have described; afterwards profit from the care of ointments until they are healed. And if you cauterize with a large cautery on fleshy flesh, it will be more helpful.
of poorly treated wound
When the patient cannot endure being cut or opened, which we will describe in its proper place, then comes such an illness that it can only be healed by cautery.
When a fistula occurs and is inflamed and filled with corruption and putrid moisture, you should probe it completely with a thin probe, ensuring that you know the full depth of the tunnel. Afterwards heat the cautery that resembles a razor and insert it into the fistula according to its depth, and continue using the cautery until all the rotting flesh is burned away, once, or twice, or three times depending on what is needed; be careful not to burn the nerves nearby, nor the large veins. If the fistula goes towards the bladder or the intestines, be careful about those places and do not perform this procedure unless in a narrow place, thinking that it should not pierce through. Afterwards treat the wound until it heals completely, and if the wound is dry and the materials have been removed for some time, then know that the wound has healed entirely; but if the materials are not removed, know that the wound is too deep and rotting bone lies beneath; and so on as we will describe in its proper place.
Of kidney disease When cold pain comes to the loins, and there is great windiness, and no menstrual flow,
From the bladder When the bladder is weak and flaccid due to coldness and moisture, causing the patient to retain urine, then make cauteries on the part below the bladder, where the hair of the pubis begins, one on the right side and one on the left side, each cautery being about the length of a hazelnut; and make one cautery behind the back, or two if necessary; and let the cauteries be nail-shaped according to the form mentioned above.
Of the womb When the womb is cold and moist, preventing conception, and the menstruation is corrupted with delayed onsets accompanied by great pain upon arrival, then make three cauteries around the vulva as previously mentioned for bladder cauteries, and two cauteries behind the back; let the cauteries be nail-shaped as we have said.
Of the beard
When viscous moistures descend to the beard's bag, causing it to become displaced from its usual position, with the sign being that one thigh is longer than the other when measured together, and the place of separation is found empty; then cauterize the patient above the beard's bag with a circular cautery, encircling the bag around its base before cutting into it, so that the bag is within the circle; let the cautery be like those used for stomach cauteries.
And if this cautery is not present, then make three large olive-shaped cauteries around the base of the beard's bag, with each cautery being as deep as all the others; let the cautery be clean.
Of the pain in the beard[TOOL_CALLS]Quant tu sentirás grant dolor en la boiste de ta hainche, si prent une plume de penne de galline et la met sus la boiste de ta hainche, et le meins que tu puedras souffrir; et quant tu auras ainsi soffert tant qu’il te puisse plaire, tu laisseras cheoir hors de ta boiste de hainche une gotte de ton sang. Adonques covient que tu fache .ij. cauteres environ la boiste de la hainche, si com nous avons dit ou cautere de la vessie. When pain comes to the hip bone,
Afterwards one performs the cautery; and the manner of cautery is according to two ways: namely, hot medicines together, and fire cautery. Fire cautery is according to many ways, of which one is such: that you cauterize upon the box of the haunch three triangular cauteries according to this form, and make them of good depth and wide, and have between each cautery a space the size of two fingers, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped; sometimes one makes a cautery in the middle upon the head of the haunch, whereby there are four according to this form.
And if you see, then cauterize upon the cautery of the circle which we have spoken about beforehand in the dislocation of the haunch; but do it in such a manner that the circle contains all of the haunch, and all the thickness of the bone is burned.
And this is the manner that one does in sciatica, when the pain holds in the haunch and does not reach the thigh nor the leg. And if it comes to the thigh and the leg, then one makes two cauteries where the patient says that the pain holds, and one cautery above the ankle four fingers on the left side; and let the cauteries be cutellar-shaped, and let the thickness of the bone be burned; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two fingers of the foot or near there, then cauterize where he feels the pain three or four points at the cautery which is called "points".
And if it is necessary, then one does more; and if he knows that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, then one makes a cutellar or circular cautery there, and take good care in all your cauteries that you do not leave too much of the cautery that you burn the nerves and the large arteries, and that you do not cause greater harm and contraction to the patient.
And I myself have seen many who made cauteries upon the ankle of the foot, and they left them so much that the leg became all swollen, and the foot also, and it was pierced and corrupted altogether the whole foot. Afterward a flux of the belly caused his death.
And if the pains are in two parts together, make cautery in one and in the other, according to this manner. // And the wise say concerning the cautery of the haunch, this is the manner: make one such iron as big at the head as a hazelnut kernel, or a little less, and let it be with notches and let the notches be spaced from one to another like the thickness of a pea; and let the notches be on both sides and also like nuts, and there should be one main part of iron well-made; and this is the shape:
And let it be heated until it is all red-hot and glowing hot, and then place it on the sick haunch bone, and turn it towards the healthy side; and cauterize once with one cautery, and leave it for three days; and then make a plaster of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time; afterward cure it with ointment until it is healed.
Albucasis says that we use little of this cautery because of the fear of its regret, and few who use it. Nevertheless, it is one of the good cauteries, which can be endured where it affects.
for the pain in the back
When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or from percussion or from too great an evacuation or from similar symptoms of spread-out cold matter, none of these symptoms warrant cauteries except that which comes from an infusion of cold matter.
It is necessary, after the patient has been voided of fetid pills or other such things, that one make upon his back where the pain holds three lines signed with a compass, and in each line five cauteries or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure; and let the cauteries be made according to the cautery which is called "points"; and if you see fit, make three cauteries or four at the middle clavicle bone according to this shape:
Many times this disease comes to small children, and the sign of its beginning is that they have narrow urine when they rise up, and fear; and you find on the back spine and in our appearance which comes upon the other spines.
When you see this and you wish to cure it, then cauterize with the cautery of the navel according to this shape:
So that the cautery covers each part of the spine evenly. And if you wish, then cauterize around the spine with the pointed cautery two or three lines apart, and let the points be near one another. Afterward cure it with leeches until it is healed according to what we have said, and take care that you do not bring cauteries into gibbosity which is in spasm of a nerve.
for the pain in the joints
When pain in the joints comes from moistures that are spread throughout each limb of the body, and when pain comes to the feet, which doctors properly call "podagry," and when it is of cold cause and cannot be cured by medications, then it is treated with cauteries in this manner: make many cauteries around the ankle joint, and let the cautery be olive oil according to this shape.
And if it is necessary to press on the face of the foot, make one cautery for each cautery that is called a "point." And if the pains extend up to the knees and to other joints, which happens often, make three or four cauteries on each knee joint, each cautery being olive oil; and if you need more, then make more, but do not hold your hand too far out until the space of an inch is burned.
And if the pains descend to the knee and to the back, administer the cautery that we have spoken about in its chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, make points around the wrist two finger-widths; and if there remains any pain in the fingers, then make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come to the elbows or to the shoulders, cauterize each part, and take good care of the sick person and give medications. For if you take good care of them and purge phlegm, they will be healed by the help of God.
Here is the recipe for a poultice for the spleen:
When an inflammation of the spleen comes on suddenly, and the bowels descend to the groin, and it is newly come upon, then it is necessary that when you see him to cure, that he not eat that day; and that he use things that leave the belly, so that the wind may descend from his belly. Afterward, make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to stretch out his arm as much as the bowels are repaired, and hold the sinew in your two hands, and press down hard beneath the spleen on the bone of the elbow, and there make a sign like half a circle above the body. Then heat the cautery which has this shape:
until it is white and gives off sparks. Then put the bowels back in their place, and the minister shall hold his hand upon them that they do not return backward. Then open the thighs of the sick person well, and put a cushion and a servant under him on the thighs, and another one under his chest to hold his hands. Then put the cautery on the sign with your whole hand, both your right hand and your left, until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, then begin again until you come to the bone. And be careful that the bowels do not slip out when you make the cautery, lest you burn them; and lest by this the sick person die or suffer some other harm.
"Know that when you do not reach the bone with a cautery, your efforts are worthless. And it is necessary that cauteries for children be thin according to their size, and for large people they should also be large according to their measure; afterwards, three days after the cautery, treat the place with butter until the scalding is gone; afterwards, treat with other ointments until it is healed, and let the patient lie on his back for forty days until the wound is well healed; and it is necessary that his fasting be prolonged so that his eyes do not bulge when he tries to get up to go to bed."
"And after forty days, when he wants to get up, let him have a well-made splint ready for him and wear it for forty more days; and let him rest well, so that he works little and takes care not to overindulge in drinking and eating, or raise his voice too high. And when this instruction is followed, he will be entirely healed. I will discuss the treatment of cutting in its chapter." "Of the rupture of the abdomen"
"When ruptures come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they are not growing any further, make one cautery cut with the cautery according to its quantity, and burn the third of the heart; afterwards treat according to what we have said; and some of the ancients say that it should be cauterized at three angles in this shape:"
"but first mark the spot of the beginning and make a line across the width above the rupture and another below it, and then cut around the entire cautery with a scalpel. But the first cauteries are lighter and gentler."
"Of old pain in some limb" When pain comes to any limb,
Of dislocations
If the dislocation occurs several times due to cautery and is particularly severe, it may be caused by inflammation of the brain resulting from putrefaction of phlegm or black bile. If you suspect that cauterization has not been performed correctly at the beginning of the illness, and if there are doubts about whether the cure has been carried out according to our instructions in this section, and if the disease remains uncured and unchanging, then perform five cauteries on top of the head: one in the middle of the forehead, another towards the front between the eyebrows; two on either side of the horns; one behind the occupit; make sure your hand is placed so that the cautery reaches the bone and causes blisters to form, allowing the fumes from the thick humors to escape; and perform cauterization on the mouth according to what is described above.
And if the dislocation is widespread and clearly apparent, it is necessary to perform cauteries as described above on top of the head, one near the nose, two on either side of the neck spine, five on the back spine, one large one on the stomach and another nearby, two on each shoulder blade, two on the ribs, two on the inner arms, one on each wrist joint and hand pit, and also cauterize behind the feet. Be careful not to burn any nerves located at the back of the legs, and perform one cautery on the ulna bone and another on the stomach bone, and one more on the liver.
And know that the more cauteries you perform, the greater help you provide and benefit it brings; and know that patients do not feel pain from the cautery as healthy people do, because their body is already entirely corrupted. And it is necessary for the cauteries to be large or small according to the limbs and joints, as you will find described in books on iron techniques. Afterwards, treat the site with buckwheat flour mixed with honey and other cures until it heals.
of inflammation
When inflammation appears in any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and poultices but is not cured, then perform cauteries on the limb according to its size and smallness. The cautery should be slightly inserted into the flesh of the heart; afterwards treat it with ointments until it heals. Sometimes cauterization is performed on the hand, foot, or back at the exit point of the nerve that moves the limb, and thus inflammation is removed. However, no one should attempt this unless they are knowledgeable about limbs and the exits of moving nerves in the body.
of white spots
When the disease called "albaras" is inflamed and medical treatments are ineffective, then cauterize it with a slightly deep cautery according to the thickness of the flesh. Continue until the white spot is removed and its color returns to normal. Then treat it with buckwheat flour and lentil flour mixed with rose oil, plantain leaves, pigeon blood, and swallow's blood (equal parts each). Mix everything together, tie it in a cloth, and apply it to the site until it heals.
The treatment of chancre by cautery
When a chancre appears at the beginning, and you see it halt, then cauterize it with the cautery that resembles a circle, all around the chancre's perimeter. And although some wise men say one should also cauterize in the middle of the chancre; yet this does not seem good to me, for I fear it may become ulcerated and corrupted, as it has happened before on several occasions; and it is more advisable that it be cauterized around, with the cautery called 'circule', as we have said regarding many cauteries.
of the inflammation that cannot die
When someone has an illness called 'adubelati', and it is delayed in dying, either due to the excessiveness that it causes or due to the frailty of the sick person when they are very old (that is, too elderly) and have little blood, or due to the time; and you see it hastening to die: then cauterize it all around with many small cauteries pricking sharply; afterward leave it thus. For it will hasten to die.
And if you see it pierced all through the cautery, then heat the cautery which is shaped like this:
And place your hand in the middle of that illness called 'adubelati', until the cauteries have pierced the heart, and make the cauteries such that the sick person feels drawn outwards in this manner so that the course of corruption is alleviated. Afterward, heal him until he is perfectly sound.
The cure of fire by iron
There is another kind of disease called "corrodens", which is nothing but a consumption of the limb, for it consumes the limbs just like fire consumes dry logs. If you see this disease in a place that can tolerate cauterization by fire, then heat the cauteries, both small and large, according to what is needed for the affected area; afterwards, cauterize all around until you have removed all corruption, leaving nothing remaining that is corrupted. Then leave it for three days, and apply compresses with crushed plants mixed with oil so as to remove the burns from fire and all corruption. After that, use ointments that promote flesh growth. And if after three days healthy flesh does not grow, then recommence cauterization on what remains of the corrupted limbs. Sometimes this consumption has been cured by means of hot medicine instead of cauterization by fire; but nevertheless cauterization by fire is more helpful, and I have already spoken about the cure using hot medicine in the division: take as much as you need.
Of the moles that come upon the feet
Many times there occurs at the feet a disease called "claw" according to our understanding, which is a large, broken thing that wounds the foot. And there are two cauterizations for this disease: fire cautery and hot water cautery. Fire cautery involves heating an iron needle until it glows like a coal, then placing it on the nail so that it surrounds the entire nail with subtle margins; keep your hand moving around the nail until you reach the tip of the nail; leave it in place for three days until it begins to ooze pus. Then make a poultice of crushed mallows with oil and let it sit overnight, and the nail will fall out and be removed from its roots. Then apply healing ointment made from ground-up earthworms daily until the wound is healed.
"If the [hairs] are turned away from the body and this happens frequently in hands and feet, then you must bring cautery of hot water; and it is done thus: take a pipe of brass or iron, or a goose feather, and place it on thewart and the other, that is to say on warts; and place the pipe on it so that it encompasses all around, then put some hot water inside, and hold your hand well, and press your hand while turning so that the edge of the pipe comes to the root of the Wart, and may find a profound path for the hot water even unto the root; and let the patient suffer a little the biting of the hot water for an hour; then leave it thus, and it will deroot itself entirely with all its roots. Thus do one after another, until you have rooted out all those that are on the body, then heal them with ointments that produce flesh."
"the treatment for trembling"
"If some [person] trembles from coldness of the nerves, or from quartan fever or other [fever], then you must make for them four cauteries or five on the spine of the back, one cautery between each spine; and one cautery on the foot, and one on the stomach at the olive-shaped cautery; then the trembling will cease, and the health will hasten the cold sickness."
"putrid pustules"
"Sometimes on the body appear baths or smelly pustules that come from large corrupted matters. Therefore, as soon as they appear, one should make a cautery on each head of the pustule: a fine juniper wood cautery, whose tip has been heated in fire, or long aristologist root, or lenticular cautery. And sometimes they are cauterized at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow further but the excess from which they come is disrupted, and they become clean. However, this should be done after blood evacuation."
"When the artery is severed" Many times there are great flows of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to the surroundings, or at the incision of the abscess, or at the cautery of the limb, and similar things; and it is very grievous to smell.
And moreover, when this happens to anyone, you should quickly put your two index fingers on the wound of the vein, and press very hard until the blood is calmed under your fingers, and no more drops come out; then heat some small and large olive cauteries in the fire until they are all red; then take one, either large or small according to the wound and where the artery is cut, and put the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and keep the cautery there until the bleeding stops.
And if it happens that when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cautery is spent, then quickly take another one of the cauteries that are in the fire.
And do not stop doing this one after the other until the bleeding has stopped; and be careful that you do not burn the nerve that is nearby, and that no other harm comes to the sick person. And know that when blood flows from the artery, it cannot be easily stopped unless by one of the four ways that we have said: either by cautery, or by extraction if it has not been treated, or by strongly tying a thread, or by medicines put on that have the power to stop bleeding; and let it be tied and bound properly.
And those who bring about stopping of bleeding by tying very tightly with cloths or putting hot things on top, or other similar things, do little good if any at all.
And if this happens to anyone and there is no doctor or medicine present, then one should put their index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and press very hard until it stops above the wound and the vein; and do not move your finger, but moisten it with cold water often, making it as cold as possible until the blood is frozen and solidified and stopped. And then do what is necessary with cauteries and medicines afterward.
In the first chapter, we have told you about all diseases in which fire cautery or burning medicine is necessary, and their causes, instruments, and forms. And I have put that chapter from head to foot, so that one can find more easily what one wants in this chapter by following the same path.
And before I begin this chapter, dear friend, you should know that there is more danger and fear in this chapter on cauteries than in the first one, and therefore it requires greater caution.
For in the practice of this chapter there is often much loss of blood when opening veins, making incisions on tumors, treating wounds, extracting splinters, and making incisions on stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die as a result.
"And I advise you not to undertake foolishness. For many kinds of people come for treatment, some who are so attached to their illness that they die easily because of the frenzy that their disease brings them, and from the greatness of their folly; and these ones one should fear." "And there are some who give their sense to it and say: 'Wait, I am cured'; but the disease is deceitful. It is not necessary that you consent to those who come to you with this manner, but put greater care in your honor than in your greed, and do not open foolishly but wisely for what you are certain of, and from which you can have taken and praise; and use prediction and indication in the treatment of your patients so that they may be converted to health; and this will help you to acquire good reputation, glory, and memory of praise."
"Dear child, Our Lord grant you good understanding and uprightness, and if it pleases Him to inspire you with His holy breath, Amen."
"Or I have arranged this chapter for you by chapters, according to what is before the chapter on cauteries which I have already arranged from head to foot, so that you may find more easily what you will need."
"A full head of water"
"Know that this disease often comes to children at birth, and when the head of the child is too tightly constricted; but sometimes it happens from a hidden cause that one does not know."
"And I have never seen this disease outside of children, and in all those whom I have seen it occurred suddenly; therefore it seems to me that it is not fitting for me to leave out the treatment of such cases."
"And I saw one child whose head was full of water, and the head swelled every day so that he could not support it; and the moisture grew so much that he died, and this moisture gathered under the bone above the syphac, between the heart and the bone. And if the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscess is small, then you should make a wide opening in the head, as long as two fingers, until the moisture flows out." Here is the shape of the spatula:
"If the moisture has grown more and the abscess is larger, then make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:"
"And if the moisture is under the bone, and you see the signs that the angles of the head are raised on each side, and water spurts out when you press it with your hand inside, but this has not been revealed to you: then you must make three incisions in the head according to this manner:"
"And after the incision has been made, remove all the moisture outside. Then press the incisions with bandages and powders, apply wine and oil, and leave it like this for five days. Then unbind it, and cure the wound by tents and poultices, and keep the head bound evenly, and give the sick person dry food to eat until the member is strengthened and healed."
"And another manner of incision is to look where the aperture of the swelling appears, and where the gathering of water is; for sometimes it is in front, sometimes behind, sometimes on the right, and sometimes on the left."
"Therefore cut there where the swelling appears and the gathering of water is, and make the incision according to what you have the power to do. And take care not to cut into the artery; otherwise a great vein of blood will flow out, so that the sick person dies from bleeding and evacuation of moisture."
"of boils"
When a person contracts an illness called "cataract" in the eyes or the foot, and if that illness is chronic, and medical treatment does not help, then the final remedy is cauterization with two arteries being tied off.
Therefore, when you tie off the arteries, the patient should lie down with their head back; then rub the area with a rough cloth until the arteries are visible. After that, twist one cloth around the patient's neck; next, look for where the veins are located, which are usually behind the ears and close to each other. Then mark these locations with incisions, after which cut both arteries using a sharp spatula at two points, cutting deep down to the bone level, ensuring it is wide enough for the head.
And if you see one artery, insert the spatula underneath it and cut it from above at two points across its width.
Once the vein is cut, blood will flow out continuously upwards.
And if the artery does not open upon feeling it, you must measure a space of three fingers and mark an incision down to the bone level; usually about six ounces of blood should be let out, but this may vary depending on what the patient can endure and the fullness of the artery. Afterward, examine the wound: if there is still some flesh sticking up like a syphac point, cut it off so that no part remains raw, then press the wound shut and bandage it until healed with ointment.
"de emigrainne" translates to "of migraine".
When an ancient migraine comes on, accompanied by catarrh and severe headache with moist eyes, heat in the temples, and other such disturbances which do not improve with medical treatment, then it is necessary to tie off the arteries of the temples and cauterize them as we have described.
And the method of tying off these arteries is for the patient to shave their temples and find the artery that can be felt pulsing in the temple. If it is not visible, the patient should tie a cloth around their head, then rub the area with a rough cloth until the artery becomes visible. Then apply warm water to the area until the artery appears clearly. Next, take the spatula which has this shape:
Then gently cut through the skin until you reach the artery. Next, grasp it with forceps and carefully separate it from the tissues beneath it on both sides. If the artery is thin, use the point of a nail to twist around it before cutting off one part according to the width of two fingertips. For if it is not cut all the way through, blood will not flow freely out completely.
And let out six ounces of blood, up to three. If the artery is large, you must tie it in two places with a strong silk thread to prevent infection before the wound heals and ensure continuous bleeding. Then cut off any excess tissue between the two ties immediately afterward. Afterward, if necessary, cauterize the cut with a hot iron down to the bone level so that the flesh is sealed completely; this should be done only if the patient does not have a fever and has a warm complexion.
For the cautery helps to stop bleeding: therefore it is more helpful for stopping moisture. When performing the tying off of arteries, it is important to fill the area with cotton and place well-made bandages on top. After removing the bandages, apply dry medications that promote tissue growth and more bandages until healed. If bleeding occurs from the artery while working, quickly cauterize with a hot iron or use vitriol and press your hand over it until the bleeding stops. Alternatively, press your thumb onto the area to freeze the blood, then rinse with cold water until the bleeding ceases, and tie off as necessary. A simpler method is to use a cautery that cuts in two places but has wide edges to retain heat longer. For when the instrument is too thin, it retains its heat less well. And there should be one thumb's width of space between the two knives, then when you have marked the two places to cut with hot iron, hold it against the skin until it reaches the bone. Cut through the flesh at both marks, but keep them a finger's width apart because the cautery does not seal completely along its entire length; here is the shape of the cautery:
tears
When tears from the eyes flow down into the channels above the brow of the head, and no medication applied brings relief, and you observe the patient's face becoming redder with heat and tension felt in their forehead like tremors; if these tears are thin and moist so that the hair around the eyes falls out and the skin becomes hot and raw from the flow of tears, then this treatment is necessary.
And this treatment was called by the ancients "contusion cure", and it involves making three incisions on the forehead of the patient affected by this condition: one down the middle of the forehead from eyebrow to nose, and two others at each side above the eyes, being careful not to cut into any arteries present there. Avoid the area near the jaws and make each incision about three finger widths across.
Into the incision that runs from the temple to the second incision, and scrape away all the fat between the two cuts down to the bone of the face. Then remove this spatula.
Then insert into the first incision the instrument called "the curette", which is very sharp on one side and blunt on the other. Here is its shape: "And place the sharp blade towards the flesh near the heart, and the blunt side toward the bone, and press until it reaches the middle furrow. And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes until the incision is continuous right up to those that open from the heart, and then do likewise in the middle furrow up to the other end; and then extract blood evenly, and squeeze the area for the taken blood; then place a bandage of old cotton in each furrow, and lay damp cloths soaked in wine and oil and honey on top, ensuring no pus comes close; and on the third day untie the bandage, and apply abundant water from the red mallow plant, then treat with basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil, and other treatments for wounds until it is healed."
"of the eyes"
"When catarrh comes on repeatedly, and you see the eyes thin and small, and weaken the sight, and the membranes burned; and the hair falls out, and deep in the head there is feverish pain, and the sick sneezes; then know by these signs that those matters and this catarrh come from many veins, and the remedy for what is inside is as follows."
"And it is that you command the sick to lie on their back, then make a large incision across the forehead and another one wide. 1 pc. And begin from the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision go down to the bone; and keep your hand away from the muscles of the temples that move when chewing; and when the bone is exposed, then wipe out all the blood with a sponge, and then open between the two lips of the incision and put old cotton and linen bandages inside; then lay damp cloths soaked in wine and oil on top, and guard against hot pus; when it is healed, then you must rub the bone until flesh begins to grow, then treat with drying substances that cause flesh to form."
"In this manner: take 2 parts of wheat flour and 4 parts of colophony, and make an ointment; and administer it to these wounds to cause flesh to grow throughout."
"about the blocking of the ears"
"All that falls into the ears is one of four things: seeds, an animal, a stone or something similar like iron; grains such as peas, beans, chickpeas; or flowing substances like water and mucus and similar things."
"When something like a stone or another kind of thing falls into the ear that does not fit in the ear and does not grow in the ear, place the ear toward the sun. If you see the stone, then drip a little violet oil or sesame oil, then administer extraction; and when doing so, make them sneeze with condurango, and hold their nostrils closed when they sneeze, and put pieces of cloth or wool around the ear; and tilt the ear upward. Many times it comes out through this treatment; and if it does not come out, then administer extraction with delicate forceps, of which here is the shape:"
"If it jumps out with the forceps, that is good; if not, then administer extraction with a delicate hook of small size; and if it does not jump out through this, then make a tube of lead and put the end of the tube into the hole of the ear very strongly, and stop up what is around the tube with soft wax so that wind cannot enter with the tube; then try to extract it forcefully, for many times it comes out in this way as we have said; and if it does not come out in this manner, then take glue which birds use, and put some on an instrument that is sharp for this purpose, and put a little cotton around it; then press the glue onto the stone or whatever thing it may be, and try to extract it." "And if it does not come out with all these things that we have said, then hurry to cut the ear before hot pus and spasm come, and the manner of cutting is this: first make the sick person drink cephalic water and remove blood according to their strength, then make the sick person sit between your hands and turn the ear upward, and make a small cut in the root of the ear at the fat or where it depends; and let the cut be like a crescent moon so that you can reach the stone, then extract it according to your power, and suck it out quickly into your mouth; and continue treating until they are healed." "And if it is grains that are inside and it swells, then administer extraction; and if it cannot come out, then administer 1 thin, delicate spoon according to this shape:"
"and administer incision of that grain. But do not do this if you think the grain is moist due to the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces; then extract it with delicate forceps and suck it out, as we have said, so that the extraction is complete."
"Therefore, in the case of water that falls into the ear, it behooves the sick person to use condurango sneezing first, and fill the ear with old cotton. And let them lie down on the same ear where the water is. If it comes out through this, that is good. If not, then take many thin and light stones according to the length of your thumb, heat them a little in the fire; and have the sick person insert one stone into the hole of their ear, and jump up on the other side with another stone, and strike one stone against the stone that is in the ear; and do not cease doing this from stone to stone until all the water comes out, and thus it will all come out; and if you see, take 1 reed, and put one end into the ear, and hold the other end near the fire until the reed burns up; then repeat with other reeds until all the water comes out, as we have said in the case of stones."
"In the extraction of an animal, if it is small in body, like a flea or similar thing, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is large in body so that it can be felt, then administer extraction with forceps; and this is the easiest thing to remove from the ear."
"In the extraction of earthworms that enter the ears, when you treat it as we have said in the division and in treating distillations, and the cure does not help at all, then it behooves you to look at the ear toward the sun: if no worms appear, then extract them with delicate forceps; and if none are seen, then take the tube of which this is the shape:"
"And let it be narrow below and wide above. And put the more delicate end into the ear according to the quantity of the suffering of the sick person, then suck strongly all along the tube; do this often until all the worms come out. And if they do not obey in coming out, then stop around the tube with cotton as I have said in the stone; and if they do not jump out as we have said, then administer distillations that the ancients have proven in the case of worms, and you will find them in treating distillations; and so distill your oils and medicines into the ear through all this instrument, of which this is the shape as you see:"
And let there be silver or narrow-bore bronze beneath a small hole, and above it to drip through; and for pressing during distillation use one well-made bronze tool for this purpose, and if you wish take one razor and wrap cotton around its point carefully; then pour your oil or juice into the tube along with whatever medicines you wish, placing the tube in the ear; then insert the razor with all the cotton into the ear, and press your hand temperately until the oil has distilled well from the ear; and let the patient feel it inside, and let the distillation be one small heated pot over the fire before distilling it into the ear; and ensure that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not then be as good.
Of earplugs
No child is born without some perforation in the ears; and the same thing happens with adults through injury to the ear or birth of flesh inside it, and these pluggings sometimes occur deep within the ear so that one cannot see them; sometimes there is a hole missing the aperture, which can be seen well.
Therefore the one that comes deep within, so that it cannot be seen, is difficult to treat in many conditions. And for that one which can be seen you should put the patient's ear to the sun and look inside: if you see the opacity clearly, then this is all that this remedy will accomplish among those mentioned here:
"And it should be sharp and cutting both front and back, entirely full, so that it does not wound the ear; if the growth is of flesh born on the body of the ear, hold it with fine pincers, and cut lightly until all that flesh has been removed."
"And if the growth is deeply embedded in the ear, take one fine razor and heat it a little on the fire, then apply it to the body of the ear. If you sense the growth which the patient feels gritty when hearing, cut lightly, taking care not to damage the nerves of the ear; then place a bandage according to the width of the opening, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment."
"Continue doing this for a few days until the wound is healed. Then take a bandage and moisten it with rose water, and sprinkle powdered vitriol on it; if you see the ear swollen, then it must be that you draw out the bandage and replace it with another moistened in cerote made from rose oil and wax, until the swelling is gone. Then cure it until it is sound."
"And if bleeding begins to flow, then dip a sponge and wring it out in cold water, and place it on the ear. Use other remedies that stop bleeding which are found in treatises on distillation."
"de la chair des papieres"
This balm that comes on papers from the eyes when they are moist and dry, you must stretch it with tweezers and forceps, and cut off its roots with a spatula; then put powdered vitriol on the place.
And if it does not dry out, then cauterize it with a small round cautery and the cautery should be moved after the incision. And many times they are repaired because something remains of their roots; but when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Hail
Many times things come on papers from the eyes that resemble hail in their shape and hardness, and because of this the disease is called "hail", and it is a collection of thick moisture on the paper above and below. The treatment is as follows: be careful if the hail moves from one side to another, and it is an easy thing to know; then make the incision wide, then scrape each part lightly, then grasp it with forceps and cut it off. If you cannot cut it off without piercing the paper a little, do not worry about the patient; and if the slit is large, then sew it up, and cure it until it is healed; and if it is small, do not use any force, because ointments will restore it soon and make it flesh-colored again.
And if the hail descends into the ear towards the top part, turn over the paper, and grasp the hail with forceps and cut it off and press on both sides; and if the paper is pushed back by the incision, do not worry about it. And when the hail has been cut off, rinse the eye with saltwater and cure the place until the patient is healed with flesh-colored skin.
de la graisse des eulz
Exinach is a grease that is inserted into the tissues of the papers above, and this happens more in children than in others, and it greatly hurts their eyes, and they have catarrh in the mornings, and they cannot look at the light of the sun because tears rush to their eyes; and because of this they lie on their faces all the time, and sleep like that, and their papers are under their eyelashes moist, which causes swelling and appearance has been covered by the exinach that opens in the eye. And when you press there with your fingers and feel the exirnach between them.
And the manner of operating is that the patient puts their head on your hand, and then takes one linen cloth, prepares a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that contains exirnach from each part, then places it on them; and presses with their fingers on both sides so that the exirnach gathers within the circle; then cuts with the spatula knife a slit in the middle moisturizing it, not too large but like the wound made in the vein of wine; and cuts the skin deeply until you reach the exirnach; and from various directions comes exirnach from the slit, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Then take out all at once a piece of cloth soaked between your fingers and wipe it back and forth with your hand from right to left until it is spread; and make sure that you do not insert in the slit, so that you do not get all the spatula up to the eye, so that you do not cut it.
And if the exirnach does not open at the beginning of the slit, then slightly widen the slit lightly until it appears; then remove it as we have said, then wet cloths in warm and cold water, and place them on the wound, and wipe with bandages.
And if there are such people who crush themselves and place on it to corrupt that moisture which remains. Then the cure until it is healthy. And if there comes an abscess hot in the wound, then treat with plaster soothing until it is healthy.
Of the hairs of the papers
When hairs are born in papers other than those that are natural and are entangled, they harm the eyes and cause diseases such as accustomed tears and softening of the papers and cloudiness, so much so that it is the cause of destruction of the eyes; and there are four ways to cure it: either by cauterizing together with fire, or by applying hot medicine according to what is written above or the cautery chapter, and it is done either by incision and stitching or by tweezers, according to what I will say.
It is necessary that you put the head of the sick person in your hand, then turn the paper from the eye with your left hand; if it is turned over, that's good; if not, then insert a needle through one thread on top; and whether it is near the edge of the paper or the hairs are born next to these hairs, and pull one thread up all along the paper, and turn it with the razor; then cut with the spatula knife below the paper, below the attached hairs, from the large lacrimal gland to the small; then remove one thread, and place a small tent of cotton and cloth underneath the paper, then press on the paper with your finger like the mirror bellows, and always it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see lift up the divided paper.
And if there is such a person who needs to cut off a large quantity of the paper according to how much the paper has softened; then cut with the spatula knife above the two lines that you have marked, and begin from the large lacrimal gland up to small; and let one of the slits be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then insert the needle into one of the corners of the heart, then remove it all; then bring together the two lips with a stitch made with a needle and one thread of fine wool, and wipe away the blood, and make dry the excess threads on the two eyebrows with any sticky substance if you see fit to do so; and if not, pay no mind, then leave the stitches and threads for three or four days; then cure the wound without stitching with drying and tightening things, because the paper revives at the union of the wound and its gathering together, but stitching is mute (as the ancients said), and this is a useless work.
And there is another way to do this: you should mark the paper with a figure like the mirror bellows, as we have described, with three needles placed apart according to the shape shown below:
"Then cut those that exceed the small forces evenly according to the shape shown here."
"And if you cannot hold the pliers and the thing is not even, then take a needle with one thread, and insert it into the figure; and insert another thread near the large bell, and the second thread near the small one, and bring the two threads together evenly; then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin that you have marked, as we have explained, then sew the two lips of the wound together with stitches, and care for it until it is healed; and if a scab forms on your incision, smooth it with cerote and similar soothing ointment."
"And sometimes it happens that the hairs of the paper are inverted: in this case you should use what we have said about incision; but the stitching in one and the other is more artificial."
"The care of the veins is according to this shape: and it is that you invert the paper and cut into it as I have said, and then make two veins artificially, and two fine threads as long as the paper and the width of the spatula; and cut at the two points of the two parts where you hold the threads; then join them together finely above the paper of the oil, and stretch the two veins from the two parts firmly; and leave it thus for a few days, and the skin that is stretched will die, shrink, and dry out until it falls off by itself."
"If it takes too long, cut it with more force, then care for it until it is healed; and when the wound has healed, and the paper has been removed, the hairs will no longer point; this is the shape of the two veins that you should make according to this figure, and according to this length and width: ..."
"The procedure is as follows: take a fine needle and insert one soft and fine silk thread into it; then join the ends of the threads and tie them together finely, with the length of the threads being a palm long. Then prepare another fine silk thread briefly in the eye of the needle and tie its ends to the thread. Then have the patient put their head on your stomach, and let them be near the sun so that the procedure is clearly visible, for it is a subtle and delicate procedure. Then insert the needle into the root of the hair near the paper, and pierce it quickly until you draw it out over the natural hair. Then pull the hair up to the eye of the needle, and insert that hair if there are one or two or three or more hairs. Then pull your hand so that all the hairs come out of the eye of the needle along with the natural hair."
"And if the eye is pierced and the hair does not come out with it, then pull the eye down along all the thread that you have prepared, until the eye comes out of the hole above and you can see it through the vision of the eye. Then pull the eye and the thread, and close the eye and leave it closed for two or three days, until the hair grows back in its place and flesh grows over it. And if the hairs are small, accompany them with one long natural eyebrow hair, and lift it up with that one which you leave, so that it is separated and then lift it up."
"About the rottenness of the eye"
"There are two ways in which the disease called 'aleacrati' or rottenness can occur in the eye:
And the manner of working this is that you cut that suture and separate the lips of it, and put linen wicks inside, and hold them there until it is healed; and indeed, it is not necessary to use things that dry and constrict in its treatment. For if you do so, the disease returns worse than before; but one works with softening things, such as fenugreek; and rose water or bitter almonds cooked along with linseed are beneficial, and anointments of diacylglycerol melted in some oils, and a wick is wrapped around it, and this is the treatment.
And the treasure of your treatment is that you must be wary that it does not heal in its former shape, and these works that we have said are remedies against this disease, so that it may not return in its former shape.
of flesh that comes into the oil
This disease that is under the skin is truly called "axacrati," and it is both natural and accidental. The accident comes from wound or split and cauterization and things similar to this; and the manner of working in it is that you take a needle, on which there are two threads, and stick it into the flesh, and make it pierce from the left eyelid towards the right, so that the thread comes out in two places in the flesh; then stretch the flesh upwards along the entire needle, and cut it with one scissor broad as a span.
And if the figure on the paper returns as it should be, that is good; but if not, then take a razor and put it in the split, and turn the paper over, and make two splits inside the paper along its edges; and let the openings of the two splits be at the two angles of the incision you have cut, and make one angle so that when they are joined together, the figure is like the figure of a letter called "gamma" in Greek. Then remove that flesh according to the quantity that its sides are away from underneath it from what supports the paper; then join the two severed parts and sew them with a thread of wool. Then perform the cure of this that we have said about softening medicines, and bandages, until it is healed.
And if the disease comes from split or stitching or cauterization, it is necessary that you make a full cut under the hairs of the paper, and according to what was said before; then open between the two leaves of a bandage, as I have said. And one must perform the work according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in shape, and skilled masters devise every means possible to make the figure return to its natural shape. And the sick person himself, according to what he needs in remedies and instruments, varies in many ways.
Of the suddenness of the paper
When this suddenness happens to many people in such a way that the paper above is stuck with the white of the eye, and cannot move or perform its natural works, it is necessary then that you put the point of a razor under the paper and lift it up; and stretch it with pincers, until you cut what is too thick with a fine scissor, which should not be too thick nor too sharp, so that the sick person cannot suffer that the scissor cut too much or scratch the eye. And let your incision, from which you peel off that which is stuck together, be light, so that the paper returns according to its natural shape; and all that is stuck together is healed, and sometimes they make in the eye salted water, and wash it with fresh water, and with collyrium. Then put between the paper and the eye a linen bandage, and put on top of the eye wool moistened in egg yolk. And afterwards on the third day use collyrium and things that soothe until it is healed.
Of the corner of the eye
Know that the corner is in two ways: it is nerve-like and resembles one hard pimple, and another which is not nerve-like but resembles a white moist congealed blister, such that when touched with iron and attempted to be grasped with pincers, it cannot be seized. And both of these appearances begin towards the large tear duct and gradually grow larger until they cover all of the eye's vision and movement.
And the manner of incision is that the sick person puts their head in your hand, then opens their eyes; and you lift the paper with your hand, then grasp the corner with pincers of small width, and stretch it upwards. Then take a needle, and put one horsehair, or cow hair, or ox hair, and one strong thread on it; and double the point of the needle slightly and stick it into the corner, and pierce it all the way through with the needle, and tie the corner with a thread and stretch it upwards, and peel off everything along the side of the corner that faces the pupil and the skin up to the head, then cut the remaining part at the root of the tear duct with the fine scissors and small forceps, and leave the natural flesh in the tear duct so that by the incision the usual course of tears is not obstructed. And sometimes they stretch the corner only with the onyx and the thread, as we have said; then they peel it off with the soft scissors according to this shape:
And ensure that the spatula does not touch the soft flesh and tear it, and that the needle is not pierced; and after the incision, pour a little of fine-ground barley into the eye, and make a poultice with litargite, and leave it until the next day; then treat it as necessary until it is healed.
And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot insert the needle, and the tweezers cannot enter, this kind of nail is often cured with medicines; and they grow as I have described in the division, and if you cover it with coppersmith, then the eye of the patient works, and take a light spatula with a little point according to this form:
And carefully lift up the nail and if you see that it does not thin and the reason presses upon it, then distill from your mouth into the eye a poultice made of litargite and red collyrium and ground barley, and stop up the eye until the next day; then resume the other operation according to this same work, until it is all removed.
If there is any obstacle in the eye that opposes this operation, such as a hot aposteme, then apply cold compresses and first treat the hot aposteme until it is healed; then resume the operation as before until it is healed.
And if the appearance of the flesh around the eyelid causes great harm to the eye, then suspend it with a needle and cut off part of it but not all, so that tears do not come into it; then apply red collyrium made of litargite.
And regarding the flesh that grows upon the pupil
There are some men in whom sometimes red flesh grows and covers the pupil and adheres to the margins of the cornea and appears like a bloodshot eye; and the operation for this is that the patient places his head in your lap, then opens his eyes, and coil all of that flesh with suitable tweezers and hold it firmly; then cut off the first layer of flesh, and continue cutting until the end, but be careful not to injure the eye during the operation; and let the incision of the spatula be as we have said in the incision of the nail, and use small forceps such as those used for extracting a tooth, as shown in this chapter.
"When the incision is complete and all the flesh has been removed, then apply to the eye powder made from crushed silk or distill red collyrium onto it along with other corrosive medicines. Then place cotton dipped in egg white over the eye so that it is securely sealed against a hot abscess; and if anything remains and hot blood accumulates, and you suspect a hot abscess, then leave the eye alone and treat the abscess with things that cool heat. Then return to your work once it is healed, and do likewise for each piece of flesh attached to the eye by this manner."
"But nonetheless you must align the treatment of each weak eye according to its natural course; and in case of an accident, especially with ironwork; and do not put your hand into any of these works until you see that these members can withstand this work."
"of the veins of the eyes"
"These veins are red and cover the eye, taking away from its sight and weakening it every day. Therefore, you must first examine the eye in which the sebaceous matter is present, making sure that there is no other external disease besides the sebaceous matter; then treat it in this manner: tell the patient to put their head on your lap, then carefully press these veins with all your skill, using a bandage doubled according to this shape:"
"And there should be two bandages placed at intervals along one course according to this shape:"
"Then carefully press the veins with force using these bandages and remove the blood afterwards as often as you see the veins come out from the eye; but make sure not to scratch the eye with the points of the tweezers, and perform this work at midday before the sun, being very careful in your work so that you do not squeeze anything but the veins; then distill green and red collyrium onto the eye to dissolve what remains of the sebaceous matter."
"And if you are unable to completely remove it in that hour, then apply a plaster made from soothing substances for the pain of the eyes onto the eye and leave it on for a few days until the pain is appeased and you are sure there is no hot abscess, then resume according to this manner before until it is healed; and here is the shape of the pressure:"
"of the fistula of the eye"
The physicians call a fistula "arissati": when you treat it with cautery and burning hot medicine according to what I have said before, but if it is not clean, then there is something inside that you should cut into, on the abscess where it should break open, and draw out all the moisture that is there until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and blackness, then take all the instruments that are here; this is called "aspre chief" (biting head), and it should be made of hard iron with one sharp point like a file as it appears in this form:
And place the instrument on the decayed bone, then turn it between your two hands and press down a little until you know that all of the corruption has been removed; do this several times, then return to the application of drying medicines.
If the wound closes up and flesh appears, and the body of the bone is sound, and remains like this for forty days without any renewal or formation of an abscess, nor does bad chance occur, know that it is healed. If not, then there is no other remedy but to bring back the fistula to its original opening according to this form: namely, uncover the bone a second time with iron and hot medicines, and when it has been uncovered take one awl like this shape, and let the iron shank have three angles, and let the wood be tapered to the tip as you see here
Then place the awl on the bone near the opening of the fistula, and hold your hand away from the eye about one inch, then turn the whole awl until it pierces the bone and you can feel it with your hand near your nose. Then return to the application of drying medicines as I have taught you, and when the flesh appears and the wound becomes firm, then the matter will go towards the nostril; thus it is easier for the patient.
Regarding the issue from the eye
When the eye is completely open and there is no disturbance to the nostril or diminution of sight, then you must bind up the patient; then cleanse it and put cupping glasses on without cauterizing to suck out the humour. Then place a liniment made of aloes, acacia, incense, and storax on the eye and compress it, and cover it with bandages and cloths. The manner of applying the cloths is that you should take soft cloths and fold each one four times, then place them on top of each other according to how much the eye needs; then bind them on firmly with a hard bandage, and recommence the cupping glasses without cauterizing to suck out the humour. Then remove the cupping glasses and leave the eye bound day and night, and if the liniment becomes moist, then you must change it often. Then remove the liniment after one day and night, and if you see that the eye is healing, that is good; but if not, then recommence the emplastering and bandages and liniment and cupping glasses until it is healed.
Regarding the bursting of a blood vessel in the eye
When a rupture occurs in the tissue of the eye and opens up, and paper-like substances come forth like grains of resin, and it is frightening to see, then if you wish to heal it, do as follows: take a needle and insert it into the root of the lower part until it reaches the upper part; then take another needle with a double thread from the side of the nostril, and let it pierce through there. Then tie one end of the thread around one part of the uvea, and compress it well, then remove the needle and place linen moistened in egg yolk on the eye. Leave it until the blood coagulates with the uvea, then dress the wound with comforting substances until it is healed. And sometimes the wound is restricted by the uvea on every side with a circle of cloth until it is healed.
And if the eye has a large opening, then pierce it with a thin spatha (needle) which comes from deep within the eye, and draw out the moist albuginous humour which descends into the eye. Then withdraw it until it is healed.
Regarding the bowing of the eye
This disease called "alcunnati" is nothing but a bowing of the eye which appears like water descending, and this is not water. And the manner of appearance of the operation is as follows: make the patient sit on a prepared and straight chair, then take their head between your two hands and move it until you see the bow rising above your eyes. Then insert a needle into it and do not let it descend or be disarranged by light, and let the patient see things as they used to. And if it does not descend below, know that it is watery, and if the descent of the bow is not as we have said, then make the patient sit between your hands and take a thin needle and pierce it into the corneal tissue about one inch along the continuation of the conjunctiva with the corneal tissue and the cornea until the bow comes out. And when it has come out, distill hot water mixed with honey or fennel water boiled with honey into the eye, then dress it with other ointments until it is healed.
Regarding the waters of the eye
We have the likenesses of needles for piercing in the division; so do according to health. It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your crossed hands, far from sunlight, and let them hold their healthy eye tightly closed; then place the paper of the eye in your left hand if the eye is left, or in your right hand if it is right; then take in your right hand, if the eye is left, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand if the eye is right; then place the point of the instrument near the corner by the thickness of a thread at that part below the little eyelid; then gently push the instrument called "almagda" until it pierces into the eyelid and you feel it reach the empty space; and the measure of the way of almagda must be to the depth of the measure from the tip of the prune to the end of the blackness; that is the corner of the eye; then you will see the bone through the clarity of the horned paper, and then place the instrument until it reaches where the needle is, then express it through one vein after another. If the needles come out now, then the patient sees before them and the instrument in their eye.
After resting a little while, and once the water rises through the second vein, insert the thread with the instrument; when it is well inserted and no longer rises, gently withdraw almagda by turning your hand bit by bit; then add a drop of rosewater to the eye, and wipe away any excess from around the eye. Then place a wad of cotton or linen soaked in rosewater and egg white on top of the eye, and bind it with the healthy eye. Now, we and those of our time apply common brocade with egg yolk.
And if almagda cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, because there are certain people who have very hard eyes, then you must take the instrument called "alberit", of which this is the shape:
And then pierce the conjunctiva only, and do not go too deep, but make one subtle point, then insert the almagda as we have said; and at the completion of the work prepare for the patient one comfortable couch where he can sleep on his back in two dark rooms; and may he be deprived of all movements, and eat light foods, and not move his head to either side, and let him lie bound according to his position until the third day; then untie him in that same dark house, and examine his vision, and when you make him see certain things, and then bind him again up to the seventh day. And it is not necessary that you do this during the operation or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you perform it because water rises hastily.
If inflammation occurs, then untie the eye before the seventh day, and apply that which allays inflammation; and when it has been alleviated, then uncover the vision and put upon his face one bandage to cover for a few days, and remain always in that dark house. And then gradually leave the house little by little, and return to his dwelling; and know that none of his disciples should interfere with this case.
And there came to us one from the East who told us that in some lands people perform almagda piercing, from which they suck out water, but nevertheless I have never seen any of them in our land, nor have I ever read about it in the books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
And these are the likenesses of the forms of almagda, so that those who do not know them may see them; and let them be made of pure gold:
And their heads should be of this same subtlety, and the back in three sharp angles.
Of the flesh over the nails
No comment
And if any remains that cannot be scraped off, then open it with one of the thin and light instruments so that nothing remains; and if you get tired or feel faintness or heat, then wash it cleanly with cold water, as is necessary; and if they are malignant ulcers, hurry and cauterize them until the inflammation is reduced and all the flesh has been removed, then apply honey and wine.
If the nail opens and moisture reaches the palate, know that it is healed; and if moisture does not penetrate as it should, know that there is dead flesh in the bone above, therefore the instrument does not come to cut: then you must insert one thread of thick linen, dipped in warm water and sprinkled with a bit of salt or less on both ends; and have the patient place the threaded end into their nail with some force and draw it inward through the nose until it reaches the mouth; many times children at school do this, and it is easy for those who wish to perform it. Then hold one end of the thread that comes out of the nose in one hand, and the other end that comes out of the mouth in the other hand, and gently pull each side in turn until you feel both ends with your fingers. Do this until you know that the threads have corrupted all the dead flesh, then remove the threads, wipe away the blood, dip them in Egyptian ointment, and replace them in the nail as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointment has corroded all remaining flesh. Then place a poultice of warm bran on it for some days until it is healed, and if there is need of drying medicines, use them. This is the form of the instrument for purging the head, through which oils and medicines are distilled into the nail:
And let it be made of silver or brass, like an open lamp or a tube, and the funnel should also be made like this; and if you want to, make one with a closed tube, so that the instrument is full for purging the head. And let there be many holes at the top to hold it while heating the oil or any other liquid.
Here are some ways to treat flesh growing on the nail:
"Frequently at the head, there occurs an illness called 'telul', which grows and becomes large enough to be seen; therefore, you must cut it off at its beginning, and remove all of its fur, then place on it a cautery or burning medicine. But if you delay cutting it until it is large, take care if it is hard, of dark color, with poor sensation: do not touch it with iron for it is an enchanted boil. For when it is cut, great evil comes upon the patient. But if the boil is soft to the touch, not of dark color, and you see that it can be completely cut out, then the patient empties and is cut without fear, and the wound is cured with drying and constricting things."
"When the boil is cut and closed"
"Know that when suppuration comes to one of these affected cartilage, it profits little for some people. Therefore, when this happens to anyone, look if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then join the two lips together in a stitch, then heal it until it is healthy. But if the lips are already separated on both sides, you must scrape away all the parts of their core until they are clean, then bring the two lips together in a stitch, tighten them, and sprinkle powder of dragon's blood and crushed incense; place over the powders a piece of strong or other adhesive plaster, and let it heal by itself, then heal with ointment until it is healthy."
"The method of stitching is as follows: either by needles, as we have said in the case of abdominal suturing; or by thread, as I have shown you."
"boils on the lips"
Many men suffer within the lips an abscess hard as grains of wheat, some smaller and others larger; therefore, you must turn back the lips, cut on each knot, grasp it with forceps and cut in every part. Then apply powdered vitriol to the wound after incision until the blood is staunched; then apply a poultice, and dress the place with dry things until it is clean.
of the flesh of the gums
Many times there arises on the gums attached flesh which the ancients call "albulus"; therefore you must hold it with forceps and cut at its root, and let flow the bow or blood. Then apply powdered vitriol or other restrictive and drying powders to the wound; and if that flesh returns after the incision, which often happens, then cut it a second time and cauterize it: for it will not return after the cautery. These are the forms of instruments for cutting.
of boils
Sometimes there are gathered together at the head of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, scales which are ugly and harsh. And sometimes the teeth are black and yellowish-green and worms so that corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth stink. Therefore you must make the sick person sit between your hands, with their chin in your lap, and raise the teeth where the scales appear until there is nothing left; and thus do for the blackness and greenness, and yellowness and other stains, until they are clean; and if you remove what is at the first cause, it is good. If not, then begin again on the second day and the third until you have everything cleaned out. Know that teeth require various forms of instruments to clean according to what the work shows, for the instruments used to clean between teeth have different shapes than those used to clean around them; and these shapes and others should be with you prepared.
When you are treating a toothache, you must delay extraction as long as possible, for it is not right to do otherwise; for this is a very high substance until one has no excuse for extracting. Therefore when the sick person is determined to have a tooth extracted, you must be certain of the aching tooth. Many times the pain leaves the sick person and they believe it to be in a healthy tooth, and have the good tooth extracted; but nevertheless the pain does not depart thereby, for we have already seen this happen too often. And when you are well certain of the aching tooth, then you must scratch around the tooth on all sides with a strong spatula to protect the gum from all parts. Then move it with your two fingers or with fine forceps little by little until it is well loosened, and firmly hold it with the forceps; and let the chin of the sick person rest in your lap between your knees, and hold it still so that it does not move.
Afterward extract the tooth directly without breaking it, and if it does not jump out, then take one of these instruments and insert it gently on each side and move it as you did first. And if the tooth is pierced and infected, then you must fill the hole with wads of cloth where the piercing is; and carefully grasp it with forceps so that it does not break while extracting; and it is very important to work skillfully around the gum to loosen the tooth.
And take good care that you do not break it, and if a part remains, it will cause the sick person greater pains from the evil of the root. And beware that you do not act like ignorant barbers who through their haste and boldness often break the jawbone, and do not accomplish what we have described; but sometimes they bring on great illness through neglecting this matter, either by leaving some roots behind or by breaking the jawbone, as we have often seen. And when the tooth is extracted, wash the place with wine or water and salt; and if there are flowings of blood which often happen, then fill the place with powdered vitriol; and if that does not help, then cauterize it.
The shapes of the instruments with which one first moves the teeth should be long-pointed and thick-handled, so that they do not bend when extracting a tooth; and these are the forms:
And let them be of large limbs so that they do not bend at all during traction, and let them be of iron well-made, and let them be toothed for holding movement.
Of the root of the teeth When the root remains at traction, then you must place on the empty socket moistened cotton with butter for one or two days until the socket is softened, then insert the forceps called "algefri", which resembles a bird's beak in appearance; and let them be made inside like a file, this is the shape:
"And if the roots do not wish to come out with all these pliers, then you must uncover the flesh all around the root, and place the instrument called 'althali', that is, the crowbar, of which this is the shape:"
"And let it be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the root pops out because of this, that is good. If not, then help yourself with all the tools, of which the shapes come hereafter:"
"And if one uses this tool that has two handles, of which this is the shape:"
"and other iron tools that are before in the reason of the teeth, and of this tool that resembles large pliers, of which this is the shape:"
"And let these tools be strong so that they cannot break, and know that there are many dental tools; and also other tools, which are not counted. And the wise master finds his own tool according to what his work and illness show him, for there are such illnesses where the ancient did not teach any tool due to the diversity of them. And if one breaks the cartilage or other bones where it could fit, then look for the tools that you need, which I have told you about, and help yourself with gestures, of which this is the shape:" "And let them be thick and hold well to hold the bone so that it does not slip away but can hold and remove it; and then restore it with appropriate medicine for that place. And if there is decay in the bone, and it is small, then scrape it out with all these tools:"
"When teeth appear not according to their natural position, and the shape is unsightly, especially in young girls, then you must know if the tooth is close behind the tooth, and not in its proper place, and it cannot be seen or filed. Then scrape it away. And if it is aired with the tooth, then take this tool of which this is the shape, resembling a small beak, made of iron sharpened at the end:"
"And tap the tooth lightly every day for several days to soften it and so that you do not move the others. And if it is apparent enough to be filed, then file it with such a file as this one has here its shape:"
"And it is also like the file used to make needles. And file the tooth lightly every day with this file so that it does not move too much until it falls out. Then plane the end with any smoother, and if the tooth is too sharp and cuts the tongue, then file down its sharpness enough so that it no longer cuts the tongue nor impairs speech."
"When teeth lock"
When teeth are misaligned,
"And when teeth fall out, if one replaces them in their place, gradually as we have said; and let not the foolish and impatient meddle with it. And sometimes they make the shape of a tooth from cow bone, and put it in the place where there is a gap, and hold it thus as we have said, and it remains and serves for a long time."
"To cure the tie of the tongue"
"Sometimes this tie occurs naturally beneath the tongue at birth; or as an accident from a healed wound. The procedure is as follows: you open the mouth of the patient and tilt their head back towards your chest, then raise the tongue. Next, cut the nerve tie from the side until the tongue is freed from its attachment. If there is any scarring or hardness due to a wound, use the tip of an instrument to cut away that portion on the side. Be careful not to cut too deeply so as not to harm the artery beneath it. Once you have finished, rinse the wound with rose water and sage, or cold water, then place a linen cloth underneath the tongue each night so that the wound cannot close until healed. If bleeding occurs, apply powdered vitriol to the area; if the bleeding continues, cauterize it using a lentiginous cautery iron, which is suitable for this purpose. Then treat it with another cure until it is completely healed."
"And if you see it as of a livid or black color or hard and the patient does not feel it, do not touch it at all, for it is a chancre. And if it tends towards blenching and there is moisture present, use an onion and a sharp, fine spatula to scratch it open on both sides; and if bleeding occurs from your procedure, apply powdered vitriol until it stops flowing, then return to your procedure until all the furuncle is treated. Then rinse with sage and celandine, and treat it with other remedies until it is completely healed."
Here is a translation of the text you provided about swollen glands in the neck:
"Sometimes boils called 'godath', properly called the two amygdalae, come into the throat. If you treat them as we have said in the division, but they are not healed, take care: if it is a hard abscess of small extent and dark color, do not touch it with iron. And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron either, especially for the flow of blood; but let it ripen, and then you will cut it open where it would break by itself; and if it is of pale color round, and the root is subtle, have ready the instrument to cauterize, but first make sure that the abscess lies calmly and is quiet. Then make the patient sit before the sun, with their head in your lap, and they open their mouth and take the servant between their hands, and press the tongue under the whole instrument, of which this is the form; and it should be made of silver or subtle brass like a knife:"
"And when you press the tongue with the whole instrument and see the abscess, then take the awl and drive it into the amygdala. Then twist it upward as far as you can; wipe some lint with it, then cauterize with the instrument, which is shaped like a pair of tongs; but the ends are curved inward toward each other and very sharp. It is made of iron or bronze:"
"And if you do not have this instrument at hand, cut it with pincers, which are shaped thus:"
"And it is sharp on one side and blunt on the other. And when you have cut one of the amygdalae, cut the other in the same manner, then after the incision, let the patient gargle with hot water and salt water, and if there is bleeding, let the patient gargle with water or decoctions of pomegranate peel or myrtle leaves, and similar things until the blood is stanched. Then treat it until it is healed. And sometimes other abscesses appear in the throat besides the two amygdalae, so cut them in the same way as the two amygdalae."
"And I treated a woman for an abscess that had grown inside her throat, namely one of small extent. It had closed almost all the throat so tightly that the woman could hardly breathe because the airway was blocked, and she could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she had remained like this for one or two days. The abscess was already so large that it had filled up two fingers in length inside her throat. So I hurried quickly, and inserted an awl into one of them, then twisted it upwards and drew out a great deal of pus; then I did the same on the other side of her throat, opened her mouth and pressed her tongue downwards. Then I inserted the awl into these abscesses and cut off part of them, but only a little blood came out. And so the airway in the woman's throat was opened, and she began to drink water and then wine. But I continued cutting away at this abscess for a long time; it kept growing back and filling up again with whatever I had cut away until it became very large. Then I incised it and cauterized it inside her throat: thus it remained without growing further. And I left these parts, and do not know what God did with her afterwards."
"de l'uve"
**When the humors descend to the eye, and it is inflamed and elongated, it is called "perpendicular";**
"And at the head there should be a hair, on which one puts the medicine, like the horse's tail of a spoonful, and places the instrument with all the medicine on the eye; and the patient should lie on their side so that saliva and mucus run from their mouth away from the medicine towards it, so that it does not reach the throat or the belly. Then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it onto the eye for about half an hour until you see it blackened and the biting of the medicine is calmed; and if you see fit, take cotton and wrap it around some instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and place the instrument with all the cotton in the cannus above until the cotton reaches the eye. And do this often until the cauterization is complete, then let it dry and falls off after four or five days. And if you need to restart the cautery of the medicine, then restart it, and afterwards wipe around the eye with cotton dipped in warm oil, and cleanse what is around the medicine; and be rinsed with cold water, and gargle until healed."
"This cure is safer than the incision or cauterization; if it is cured by fumigation in this manner, take calamus and hyssop and origanum and rue and camomile and mugwort and similar herbs, and combine them all or some of them in one pot, and put it on the fire to boil. And let the pot be well sealed with clay, and inside the pot there should be an instrument shaped like this:" "And it should be made of silver or brass, and one of the ends of the instruments should be placed in the mouth of the patient so that the vapor rises to the eye through the cannus until the eye is mortified. Then restart often until the eye dries out. And make sure not to do this at the beginning of the appearance of a hot aposteme, because many things can happen; and do not do it except when the aposteme is declining in heat. And if this instrument is not present, then take a cannus and put an egg shell on top so that the mouth of the patient does not get too hot; for the egg shell does not let the vapor burden the mouth, and this is good treatment together with health."
"Many times a bone from the throat or spine of a fish, or any other thing, gets stuck in the throat; therefore you must draw out what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument so that you see it move. And what you cannot see and is stuck in the throat, you must make the patient vomit before the meat is cooked in the stomach; perhaps the thing will come out through vomiting. Or the patient may swallow a piece of sponge, or a piece of flax, or a root of lettuce, or a small piece of dry bread; and tie a thread to the sponge, and then swallow it; and when it reaches the place, it will be seen, and then pull it out. And if it does not come out from what we have said, then take an instrument of lead made in this shape:"
"And let the instrument be curved at the head so that it can enter the throat more easily, and have the head raised high. And make sure not to touch the epiglottis, lest the whole thing come loose, nor push the bone in; but rather let the patient put in the instrument themselves, for they will know where the thing is stuck. Then draw it out straight along the entire length of the instrument until it comes out completely."
Here's a possible translation for "de la sansue de la gorge":
**Original Text:**
"And if it does not fall as we have said, then fumigate the patient with asafetida, using the instrument I mentioned in the fumigation of the eye. Do this many times, for it will surely fall out. And the manner of the fumigation is that you take one pot which has live coals inside, and its opening should be covered by a cloth pierced in the middle, and into that hole place the head of the instrument; then add your fumigation, and the patient puts the end of the tube in their mouth and closes their mouth tightly so no smoke escapes but reaches deep within; and the stone will now fall out, and if it does not, repeat the fumigation many times; and let the patient feel thirsty, and eat salty foods and herbs, and do not drink water; and then it will be necessary for it to pass out through this treatment."
"And the shape of the instrument with which to treat the stone is like this: when it can be seen, it resembles curved forceps used for entering the throat; it should resemble the bill of a goose and have sharpness like that of a lime so that what it grasps, it cannot let go. See here its form:"
Chapter on Abscesses
"There are many kinds of abscesses, according to what is remembered here from one and another in this book, and they differ in perforation and incision; and there are two ways in which some are similar in appearance but differ in what they contain. And the second manner is for those that are on the body, for abscesses of the head are different from those of the fundament, and abscesses of a fatty location are different from those that appear at joints, and each has its own judgment in this work."
"And there are abscesses that should not be pierced until they have fully ripened and burst on their own. And there are those that must be pierced when they are hard, even if they do not fully ripen, such as abscesses near joints. For when an abscess appears near a joint, if it is left alone until it is completely surrounded by inflammation, the ligaments and nerves of the joint may become corrupted, which can cause contraction in that limb. Or if the abscess is near the main limb, waiting too long to perform the incision will harm the main limb. But if the abscess is near the fundament, it should be incised before it bursts; and one should not incise a hard abscess without proper digestion being completed, except for those near the fundament that might otherwise become deeply embedded and form a fistula, which could take a long time to heal."
"And you should know the time for performing an incision on an abscess that has fully ripened and burst: it is when pain eases, fever subsides, inflammation and redness diminish, and when the apex of the abscess becomes soft and pointed; and other signs. And it is necessary to perform the incision where the abscess hangs down most, or where it opens most; and the incision should be long, along the length of the body. If the abscess is on the hands or feet, or in joints near nerves and arteries, and in all smooth places without wrinkles."
"And in those that are folded, according to the shape of that limb. And when an abscess is in fatty tissue, it is better to wait until it has completed its digestion before performing the incision, as we have said. For if you incise it beforehand, the body of the pus will be spilled out and full of much filth; and the edges and depth may become hardened. And there are some abscesses that should be incised according to the width of the body, depending on what the limb requires. And small abscesses require small incisions, while large ones require large incisions and many slits according to the size of the abscess. And there are some abscesses where you should press down with your hand and cover them when they have become as large as a fist and softened, like how one treats boils: And there are those that are split into three angles, and others that resemble the leaf of a myrtle, like armpit abscesses; and there are some where you make a round incision, and other incisions with similar cuts."
Those without a head, such as superficial soft abscesses, should be incised flatly. When the abscess is large and has swollen greatly, and you perform the incision, do not evacuate all the pus at once, but only part of it; then seal the abscess until the following day, then evacuate some more; repeat this process gradually several times until all the pus is expelled, especially if the patient is weak or a woman in childbirth, or young children, or elderly debilitated men. For sometimes the heart may suddenly stop beating with the expulsion of the pus, and perhaps the patient will die, and you would not be aware of it. Therefore, proceed with great caution, and after incising your abscess, examine the wound to see if the opening is small; if it is a clean incision, then apply linen or old cotton dressings; but if it is a large abscess with many slits, you should place a dressing in each one so that they come together. And if you have excised a piece of skin from the abscess and sewn it back down, you must fill it with dry lint or linen cloth without moisture, and leave it until the third day; then remove it and treat with ointment until healed.
And if bleeding occurs from your incision, apply cold water and a cloth moistened with water to the area many times. And if the bleeding persists, provide care and treatment according to what is written in this book regarding powders for such cases, especially during wintertime when the limb where the abscess is located is very nervous; you should place moistened dressings and cloths warmed in wine and oil on top until the third day. But if it occurs during summer and the area is fleshy, then apply moistened dressings made of water and oil, or cold wine and oil, for three days as mentioned earlier; then remove the dressing, cleanse the wound, and treat it according to what is necessary until it heals.
"And this one should universally know in the treatment of abscesses": I have told you how one should proceed with the treatment of abscesses, and here is that chapter.
Here are some key points about boils (soros):
Where kernels of the head come small abscesses,
"And the cutting into an abscess that is pierced and moist is easier, for they are of little blood. And there are some of these abscesses at the head where there is no moisture, and such as I counted on the head of an old woman; and I found the abscess like a hard, rough, and white stone, and it could not be broken; and if one had struck it with a knife, it would have made a wound like from a stone. In other abscesses coming to the head, except those which come at the heads of children and at the roots of the ears, the opening should always be at the lowest point, so that the bowels may exit; and they cure as it is necessary."
"of scrofulas"
"Many times these abscesses occur on the neck, and below the buttocks, and in the armpits, and sometimes they come elsewhere on the body, and there are many of them, and they are interconnected with each other. And each scrofula is properly within its own skin, like the knot and the abscess on the head, as we have said; and the appearances of these scrofulas are many. There are some that contain moisture, and there are also those that are malignant and do not want to submit to treatment. Therefore, in one that you see has good disposition for touching, and is like the color of the skin, and moves from each side and is not hard near the nerves of the neck or the artery or the channel, and is not deep; then it should be cut through above, and scraped on both sides, and if there are any two lips of the heart at the corners, you can use them as we have said in abscesses of the head. And treat little by little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or the vein, and the knife should not slip from your hand, nor dig too deep, so that you do not cut what you should not."
"And if you cut the vein or the artery, and it does not let you work, then put ground vitriol or some powders that stop bleeding into the wound, and compress the wound; and leave it until the abscess is calmed down and the wound begins to rot. And when the blood is stopped, then return to your task until you complete it; then examine with your little finger if there are any small scrofulas remaining, cut them out and clean them up. And if there is a large vein at the root of the scrofula, then it should not be cut in its root, but tie it with a strong double thread and let it fall by itself without harm; then fill the wound with cotton wool soaked in Egyptian ointment, then cure it."
"And if you cut the entire scrofula, then you must bring together the two lips of the wound and sew them up now, provided that there is no remaining superfluity due to the size of the scrofula. Then you must proceed to cut the root of it and draw out matter, and sew it up as we have said. Those scrofulas that contain superfluity should be opened where it appears most swollen; and open it in the same way as the one mentioned before, depending on it, then bring tents with ointment and similar things so that it rots what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, cure it with ointment for a long time until it is healed."
de squinance could refer to "squinance" in Old French, which means "a kind of skin disease, scrofula".
"This is what the ancients said and spoke about the incision of the throat; but I have never seen it done in our land, and this is the record of their words."
For those who have strangulation, the epiglottis, which is called "epiglotte", must be avoided; and do not attempt aid through this method, for all the veins and the membrane of the patient are hot in the mouth or throat or in both. When the illness is in the channel of the membrane, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid strangulation.
It is necessary, therefore, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, that we cut it below three circles or four, a small slit across between two circles or according to the quantity of the slit of the soft palate, not in the cartilage.
Moreover, this area is so close to the epiglottis that there is no flesh there, and the vessels are long and thin.
And if the master is fearful, he must stretch the skin of the throat all the way to the chin, then cut into the flesh until it reaches the bone; avoid the blood vessels if you see any, and then cut the soft palate as we have said.
This is demonstrated by the cut in the bone of the chin that jumps forward if it has been broken, and by the loss of voice.
and leave the wound open for a time
And when the critical hour has passed during which strangulation might occur, then bring together the two lips of the wound in the flesh and stitch it up without including the cartilage; afterward administer medicines that promote healing until it is whole again.
Albucasis says that this procedure should not be done unless the patient's throat is completely blocked and they are judged to be near death, otherwise there will be damage. Therefore, cut the epiglottis for those patients who cannot breathe through their mouth and are breathing through the wound in order to prevent death.
Therefore, the ancients advised leaving the wound open until the worst of the illness has passed, which usually takes three or four days. And then they commanded that the wound be stitched up and dressed until it was healed
and I will tell you what I saw I saw a young woman take a knife and stab it into her throat, cutting some of the arteries in her neck
and I was called to treat her, but found her already dead
I examined the wound and saw that blood had come out of it, and I knew that she had not cut her veins or arteries except for those in her throat, from which the windpipe was protruding through the wound.
I hurried to stitch up the wound and dress it until it healed
and after that, the young woman was hoarse for some time but eventually recovered her voice
Therefore, I say that in cutting the epiglottis there should be no fear
of a large throat
This type of hernia is called "pharyngeal hernia" and appears as a large, dark purple swelling that mainly affects women
and there are two types of these hernias: natural and acquired. The natural type does not have an opening
And the acquired type can manifest in two ways: one resembling fatty tissue and the other resembling a hernia that comes from an arterial source and one should not be afraid to operate on this condition, especially when it is small. One should prove and search for it throughout the entire throat area if you find it resembling a fatty lump and not connected to any vein, cut it like you would a fatty tumor, and remove all of it if possible and search carefully around the entire area and dress it properly until it is perfectly healed
fatty tumors
There are many types of fatty tumors, which I will describe in detail__
and now I must tell all the difference that is between dislocation and injury
I say that dislocation is heat and fever lasting until the ebullition has passed, and corruption is completed; then fever and heat cease.
With dislocation there is no heat or fever or pain, and it contains a synapse which is its own sack and is the same color as the body's skin, and begins like a joint and becomes swollen
and they are of two similar kinds, either dry or moist, and many colors are as I have said in the division
When you come to treat dislocation, first examine and inquire about all the instruments called "intromittent" according to how their forms come in the chapter that follows.
And the manner of examining dislocation is that you take the softest part you find in it and twist your fingers little by little until you know that the instrument has pierced the heart, then proceed according to the size of the dislocation
then remove the intromittent and beware lest anything spring forth
If moist corruption runs, what ever its color may be, then cut it as I have said for other dislocations
and if after the intromittent no moisture comes, know that it is dry, then cut it crosswise and take it with pincers, and lightly scrape each side of it and watch the skin where it lies so you can draw it out whole with the dislocation
and if you cannot draw it out whole, then draw it out in pieces until nothing remains
For if anything remains, the dislocation will return many times
and if a bit remains and your skin grieves you, then apply to the wound some sharp waters or powders, and strain the wound, and place on it things that soothe inflammation and hot dislocations, and treat with other treatments until it is whole
And if the dislocation is large, then cut the two lips of the wound and treat those that enter into flesh.
And if the vein beating is against you or another thing hastens itself and applies the powder of ground vitriol to the place, let it lie for two or three days until the wound purges itself and rests from ebullition of blood; then return to cut out what remains of the dislocation.
Here are the shapes of the intromittent instruments, and they come in three sizes: large, medium, and small. There are four square ones called "albarets," and one called "breb." There are also three kinds to encircle fistulas:
"And likewise like needles used to stitch wounds, they are made of yellow brass or iron, or silver. Those that are gold-colored are considered more valuable, and black lead is preferred for encircling fistulas."
"And they come in three sizes: large, medium, and small, according to the width of the hole's diameter."
"The shapes of onchines are mostly similar to what you see here: large, medium, and small; there are also onchines with two curves in three different sizes."
"And there are onchines with three curves and they also come in three sizes; likewise those with two curves and those with only one curve, all of which are necessary for their purpose."
"The tips of these are cutting and there are some that cut only from one side, used for scraping bones without damaging the vein or nerve."
"And among these instruments are alemelles that fit into the hand so that the patient does not feel them when opening boils."
"And they come in three sizes: large, small, and medium, as you see."
"And one only uses them with caution, such as on legs, arms, breasts, armpits, and similar locations."
"And sometimes another small instrument resembling a file is used, shaped like this, with which one squeezes out blood:"
"And it is sometimes placed at the site where there is danger of cutting veins or arteries, and some are made in this large size:"
"Sometimes men's breasts swell up when they begin to be corrupted, so that they appear like those of a woman."
"and remain ugly and swollen; whoever wants to cure them must follow this form from line B to G:" "then scrape away the fat, dress the wound with healing ointment and join the two lips of the wound together to suture them, and cure it until it is healed."
"If the breast hangs down and is soft due to its size, like those of women, then one makes two incisions above it, resembling two creases:" "So that one incision is contiguous with the other at their ends, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from line B to G:" "Then scrape off the skin between the two lips, remove the fat, and apply what we have said about suturing and powders, and whatever else is necessary for the cure until it is healed."
"And if it is not healing, or the incision is not complete because the patient does not want to rest, or due to bleeding, then you must fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment." "And leave it until it consumes the remaining flesh and fat, then cure it until it is healed."
"Boils in the armpits"
"These boils that appear under the arms are hard, with knots, and some contain moisture."
"Therefore those that contain moisture must be incised according to this form, from line B to G:" "And when all the matter inside the boil has been emptied out, then fill the wound with cotton wool and leave it until the following day, then remove all the cotton wool and dress it with an appropriate ointment until it is healed."
"If the boil resembles a scrofula, then incise it as we have said for scrofula incisions, and if the wound discharges matter, then apply a cautery as we have said before."
"Surgical procedure for arterial bleeding"
"When an artery is cut and the skin above it is burnt shut, boils often form, and the same happens with an enlarged vein that becomes inflamed."
"And if one recognizes this when it occurs due to an artery, then the boil will be long and deep:" "And when you feel it with your fingers, there is one pulsation felt; but when it occurs due to a vein, no external pulse can be felt."
"And it is foolish to cut this boil, especially when it appears under the arms or armpits, around the angles of the jaw, around the neck, and in many other locations where it is very large." "It is therefore necessary to avoid cauterization with iron, and one should also avoid it if the patient is feverish. In case of arterial inflammation, make an incision through the skin along its length:"
"It is therefore necessary to avoid cauterization with iron, and one should also avoid it if the patient is feverish. In case of arterial inflammation, make an incision through the skin along its length:" "then open the wound and carefully separate the artery from the tissues until it is exposed:"
"then insert a needle underneath one side of the artery and push it through to the other side, then tie the artery with a doubled thread in two places according to what I have taught you regarding the extraction of the two temporal arteries:"
"then insert a probe between the two ligatures to locate the bleeding point and remove any remaining blood from the boil."
"then dress it with healing ointment until all matter has discharged, then remove the ligature:" "then dress it with appropriate ointment until it is healed."
"If the boil occurs due to an incision of the vein, then you must remove all the affected skin around the boil using your hand:" "then insert a needle underneath the area you are holding with your hand and push it through to the other side, using a doubled thread to pull it out:" "then ligate the boil as I have taught you, tying one end of the thread to each side of the boil:"
"And if you suspect that the thread might break, then insert another needle through all the boil along the same incision as the first needle, and tie the threads in four places:"
"then cut off the boil until no more matter comes out, then cut away the remaining dead flesh and leave what has been ligated in place:"
"then place a cloth moistened with wine and oil over it, then apply dressings and ointments as needed until it is healed."
"Boils on the nerves"
"So boils can also occur on nerves when they are struck or from too much physical exertion and similar causes."
"And this happens most often at the shoulders and hips, and in all places where there are joints, and it is one kind of abscess; its color seems like the color of the body, and it appears in many conditions without pain."
"And when pressed strongly, the patient feels pain, but it is not deep inside the body, but beneath the heart;"
And remains unmoved on all sides,
"And those who are at the head or forehead, cut the skin with a scalpel." If the abscess is small, use forceps to grasp it and cut off its root.
If the abscess is large, suspend it with tweezers and scrape it off, then clean it and stitch up the wound. Take care of it until it heals completely.
"hanging pouches" Sometimes it happens in bellies and nowhere else, except there. It is a disease called "fungus" because of its resemblance to it. Its roots are thin and its stool is large; some are small and others very large.
And I saw one man who had two on his belly that resembled fungi more than anything else, and there was no difference between them, and they were white, and had a fine root, and were slightly split open, and moisture flowed from them continually.
I weighed them and found that one was eighteen ounces heavy, and the other six, and the result of the incision is such that you can see if the patient is moist; the color of the cartilage is white and moist with a fine root.
If the cut is wide, and you are present, have the cautery ready for use. For when cutting, there often comes too much blood flow, and if the blood gushes forth, then hasten to apply the cauterizer.
"And if you see the patient frightened and fearful of the iron incision, then take one well-made thread of tow, and tie the joint as we have said, leaving it for two days."
"Then press it, and do not stop pulling the thread of tow until it covers the joint completely, and cut through it without effort. And if the roots are large, then there is fear in cutting itself for the belly, but you can safely cut halfway."
"Then cauterize it so that it does not return; then treat the wound, and ensure that you do not cut the tendon which is of dark color and poor sensation and produces milk."
For this is an enchanted aposteme, and I will come to the cure of cancer hereafter.
When the boil has burst
If the appearance of the boil comes from cautery of wound or split of anus, and is on the belly and in some cases of the buttocks, as it happens with other fistulas, or from blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what has been said before, or from vents;
And if it is by the fistula of the anus and the outlet of the bowel, then the color of the aposteme appears like the color of flesh, and is light without pain, and opens with various outlets. And if it is for the outlet of the intestines, then it is more diverse. And when you press it with your fingers, it rises up and then returns. And sometimes it is seized, and greatly enlarged at the entrance of the anus and by violent effort.
And if it is for moisture, it is easy and opens well when you press it with your hand, without constraining. And if it is for blood, then the aposteme appears large and hard, fixed according to quantity.
And if it is for vents, it is soft to the touch, and its appearance shows whether it is for arterial blood, venous blood, or vents. Then you must leave it alone. For there is doubt and fear about it, as I have told you in the chapter on apostumes, concerning the artery and vein.
And if the appearance is for the intestine or bowel, then you must command the patient to tie his linen girdle and stretch out all his body lengthwise, then press from without around the boil. Then place him on his side between your hands, Then go around the place you have marked with all the spatula. Then press on half of the boil above with great pressure;
Then open half of the boil and stretch it over the joint, then insert your index finger to find the intestine. If you find it trapped by the joint, untangle it and insert the intestine back into the abdomen
And if you find the boil, take it with tweezers, and cut away any excess
And if an artery or vein is against you, carefully go around it, then return to your work and take two needles, thread them with two strong threads, and sew the wound crosswise where you pierced it
Then squeeze the boil in four places above the needles, and if you see fit, remove the needles and leave it alone until it heals on its own, and cut away any dead flesh. Or you can cut it when it becomes subtle and ready, then treat it as necessary, and remove the boil as we have said
Or you can cut it when it becomes subtle and ready, then treat it as necessary, and remove the boil as we have said And drain any blood or fluid you find, then dress the wound as needed, and sew it shut.
chancre
We have discussed in the division the appearances of a chancre and how one should operate with medicines, and how to avoid surgical cure. And we speak of an enlarging chancre in the marrow, and great caution is required in its treatment, and the ancients said that when chancres are in a place where they can be scraped away like those on the breast or hip, and similar places, one should remove it all at the beginning; but when it is large and old, one should not approach it, for I have never seen any healed nor has anyone before me.
And the operation, when it is in a place where it can be removed, as we have said, is to purge the sick person with black colic several times; then make him sweat if there is visible swelling; then prepare the sick person one good day for the operation. Then grasp your tweezers or scalpel and cut around the chancre on all sides, and remove it completely without leaving any behind. And let the blood flow freely, then squeeze the wound with your hand or some other thing, and if bleeding from the incision of an artery or vein opposes you, cauterize it until the bleeding stops; then treat it with other dressings until it is healed.
Regarding dropsy We have already spoken in the division about the appearances of dropsy, how the gathering of water is made, and the signs of each appearance, and the treatment done with medicines and that done with iron: only "eclites" is mentioned here; and one should not touch it with iron in these two appearances: namely tympanites and hydropsarcina, for they are deadly things. Therefore, when you treat this dropsy appearance called "eclites" with medicines and the cure does not help, look to see if the patient is weak or if they have another illness besides dropsy, such as asthma or diarrhea and similar things; do not touch it with iron, for there is doubt. And if you see that the patient is strong and has no other illness but dropsy alone, and is not too young nor too old, then you should operate thus: Take the patient and place them upright in your hands, and the assistant presses the abdomen pushing the water to the lowest part of the chest. Then take the spatula-shaped trocar according to this shape: Let it be cutting on both sides with a point, but not so sharp that it can reach the intestines when inserted, nor cause bleeding;
"Then examine if dropsy has entered the intestines: if so, you must cut three fingers' width directly below and above the navel; and if dropsy is due to liver disease, make the incision three fingers to the left of the navel; and if it's from mucus, make it on the right side, ensuring that the patient does not lie on the incision so excess fluids do not flow into this weak area."
"Then pierce the skin with the instrument and insert it, lifting your hand through the skin to the sinew between the skin and muscle as in flaying, about the width of a nail or some distance around. Then pierce the muscle until the sinew reaches the empty space, which is the location of the water. Then remove the instrument, which has this form: It resembles a slender silver tube, made of brass or light aluminum, with one small hole at its base and three holes on one side and two on another side. Its edges are cut like a feather, and this is the shape of the incision that writers use to cut feathers."
"At the top is the alembic, so that when the instrument reaches the water, it falls into the alembic. Then empty out about half or a third of it, for if you empty too much at that moment, the patient might die from the release of their spirit due to the weapon, they may faint, or they may approach death."
"But empty according to the amount of his strength and according to what the disposition of the patient's strength indicates about their pulse. Then remove the instrument and retain the water, which is now retained by the heart closing the hole that was made in the muscle earlier. Then begin again with the instrument on another day if you see the patient enduring it, and draw out a small amount of water."
"Do this on several days, but be careful not to draw out too much water at once. And if you suspect the patient of having an excess of humors, leave some water behind and have them undergo a hot bath or sweat treatment in a warm room with plenty of sun exposure. Then treat them with drying medications until they are healthy again, and cauterize their stomach, liver, and spleen after removing the water, as I have said before."
"Regarding the obstruction of the instrument" "No child is born without a hole in the penis, or if there is one it is small or not in its proper place. If this happens, it must be pierced with a very fine spatula according to this method: Then place a thin, delicate plug of lead in the hole and tie it securely for three or four days. When he wants to urinate, remove the plug and allow him to do so, then replace it afterwards. But sometimes there is no need for this, as urine that comes forth does not leave it closed." "Those whose hole is small are treated with a lead plug, as we have said, and it will widen. Those who do not have the hole in its proper place are cursed, for some are born with the hole at the tip of the penis, so they cannot urinate until they lift their penis upwards; nor can they enter due to the fact that matter cannot reach the mouth of the womb, and this is a serious condition."
"And the manner of performing this operation is that the patient lies on their back, then extend the tip of the penis and cut it like the tail of a feather so that the hole falls in the middle as it should. And be careful not to cause bleeding, which happens frequently, and if it does happen, stop the bleeding with whatever stops bleeding, and treat the wound until it is healed."
"Regarding the pustules of the penis:" "Many times these swellings appear on the penis, which is an ugly appearance of flesh. There are some that are malignant and others that are not. You must take them with a sharp needle and cut them out and clean them all, then place moistened cotton in Egyptian ointment on them; then treat them with diafinicon ointment until they are healed." "And if the swelling is malignant, of putrid color and foul-smelling, you must cauterize it. When you have cut it out, and if the swelling is at the tip of the penis, and part of it is inside the skin and part is outside, you must remove the part that is inside first; and when it is solid, then treat what is outside. For if you treat them together, the opening of the penis may not be secure, and blackness and corruption will come into its interior and the coition, so you must cut out everything that is black and corrupt, then tie on the plaster made of honey and flour mixed with the rind of pomegranates and figs; then treat it with other remedies until it is healed."
"And if bleeding occurs, apply the lunar cautery according to this method: The cautery helps with two conditions at once: namely, bleeding and corruption. And if the opening of the penis is corrupted and retracted, you must insert a lead tube into the urethra and have the patient urinate through it; and when the skin at the tip of the penis that needs to be circumcised, or it happens due to wound or aposteme, then you must burn it with a sharp instrument until the ligaments are released, and deliver the opening of the penis from all sides;"
"And if it is difficult to separate these things, you must burn it with a fine spatula at the junction of the penis and skin; then gently dissect between them, and place a thin linen cloth moistened in cold water so that it does not adhere again."
"Regarding circumcision:"
"Circumcision is not the removal of continuity like other wounds; however, when we perform this operation by choice and especially on children, it is necessary that we do our best to make it the best and easiest operation for healing."
"I say that the ancients did not mention the circumcision of their children because they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience."
"For I have wanted the majority of masters and surgeons who perform circumcision to use a single clasp, and forceps, and a novacula; thus it was easy for the heart because there are two layers, and sometimes one cuts the top one and leaves the bottom one."
"Or the circumcision is double pain, and at the cleansing of the glans the point of the member is not secure; and in the cleansing of the foreskin sometimes the iron slips away and mars the work, and many times it happens that they do not need cleansing and I have seen this."
"Regarding the cleansing that is done with forceps along the entire length of the thread, I have found through experience that it is good because forceps cut equally well above and below."
"For when you press your hand, you cut evenly in one single stretch of time; but the thread must be wrapped tightly around the skin; and the manner of performing the first operation is to make the child think, if he understands, that you are only tying a thread around his penis, and then reassure him in every way you can;" "Then make him stand upright between your hands, and hold the weights either under your feet so the child does not see them or any instruments. Then place your hand on the shaft and blow near the heart, and pull it upwards until the head of the shaft is inside. Then clean it well from the filth that has gathered there. Then tie the original position with a double thread, then tie it below one knot to another; hold it at two fingers by the second knot between the pouch and the index finger, and cut between the two knots, then quickly lift up the heart and pull out the head of the shaft."
"Then make him stand upright between your hands, and hold the weights either under your feet so the child does not see them or any instruments. Then place your hand on the shaft and blow near the heart, and pull it upwards until the head of the shaft is inside. Then clean it well from the filth that has gathered there. Then tie the original position with a double thread, then tie it below one knot to another; hold it at two fingers by the second knot between the pouch and the index finger, and cut between the two knots, then quickly lift up the heart and pull out the head of the shaft." "Then let the blood flow freely until it flows no more; this is the mother's part. Then sprinkle powder on top of it and cover it with a cloth soaked in a mixture of cooked egg white untempered with rosewater, confected with good fresh rose oil. Leave it on overnight and clean it again until it is completely healed."
"The shape of the weights for purification should be this: the two heads should be thin and sharp; they should also be as large as a hazelnut each."
"The error of purification is when the heart within slips during incision; therefore, you must extend it with your finger before the wound becomes inflamed; and cut it evenly, and if you cannot hold it with your finger, use tongs to do so."
"And if it takes three days and what is under the shaft is swollen, then leave it until the inflammation has subsided, and lightly scrape away the scab; cut as much as you can move without hurting yourself, but be careful not to damage the part of the shaft, for it will not harm him at all."
"So treat the wound with healing powder as we have said when speaking of powders. If you cut too much and it goes upwards, it will not harm him. Treat it as we have said until it is completely healed."
"On the retention of urine"
The retention of urine is caused by obstruction from stone, or coagulated blood, or bowel, or flesh born, or similar things, which we have mentioned in the division.
If the urine is not released and you see that it is retained due to a stone lodged in or near the neck of the bladder, then the patient should be bent over on their knees. They should place their feet on their back and extend their belly from the part above the back. The patient should strain as much as they can; this will force the neck of the bladder to open upwards so that the urine can be released.
"And if it does not come as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer extraction using all the instruments called 'syringes,' of which this is the form: let it be made of fine, light silver like a bird's feather; and let its tube be one and a half palms long, and let it be fine at the tip."
"And the manner of issuing urine is this: you take one doubled thread, and tie at its head a small bag of wool or cotton, and put the thread's head inside the syringe; and cut off any excess of the wool and insert it up to the tip of the syringe, then grease the syringe with oil or butter mixed with egg yolk, and have the patient sit on a chair, and raise his bladder and penis with warm olive oil and cold water."
"Then gently insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches the root of the penis, then double the penis upwards towards the belly; then push the syringe forward until it reaches the bladder, and the patient feels it touch his empty vessel. And if this is not done according to this order, it is because the tube through which it goes is twisted. Then pull on the thread with all the wool bag, and let the urine follow the wool, then remove it, and let the urine flow."
"And continue using the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and let the patient be eased."
Here are some examples of what "des maladies de la vessie" might mean in English:
When the skin is peeled off and blood flows into the bladder, or putrefaction has gathered there, and you see that water and medications are being distilled from it, then use all the instruments called "clepsydra," and this is its form:
It is closed, and has three holes: two on one side and one on the other, as you can see. The high places are so that the medication can fit tightly around the penis without additional help, so that moisture can be drawn out and inserted when necessary;
"When you see your medicines thrown into the bladder, place the tip of the cautery in the moisture, and draw out what is inside. So drawing out the moisture with the cautery, then forcefully push back the cautery in; thus will the moisture enter in, and reach the bladder now, so that the patient feels it."
"This is the form of the thin enema used to perform an enema on the bladder: thus it is here:"
"And it is made of silver or brass, and the tube is higher up; below, there is one sieve or linen filter; then take a sheep's bladder and put into it the moisture you want to use for the enema on the bladder, then tie it between the two sieves with a good doubled thread, and heat this moisture in a pot over the fire. Then insert the tip of the enema into the penis, then press your hand on the bladder until all the moisture has reached it, so that the patient feels that the moisture has arrived at the bladder."
"And if you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment and make a circle from it, and pierce it roundly all around. Then insert a strong thread into these holes, then join the circle like joining a bell, and put inside what you want of oil and moisture and water, and tie it in the instrument. And do as you did with the bladder, pressing your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder."
"de la pierre"
"We have already said in the section on stones and their extraction together with medicines; and we have explained the difference between stones engrained in the kidneys and all the signs, and in which stones one should operate by cutting; and in the bladder and in the penis; and I will tell you this clearly and briefly."
"I say that stones engrained in the bladder happen more often to children, and this is a sign that water flows from the bladder like water in its subtlety. And they perceive sand there, and the patient grasps his penis, and he feels many times, and then it hardens; and many times these are the foundation of pain. And the cure for children is easy until they are four years old, and it is very difficult for the elderly, and it is average for young people, those who are between youth and old age. And the cure is easier for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones."
"And when we come to the cure, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient with an enema, in order to remove all the feces that are in the intestines. For sometimes they hinder searching for the stone."
"Then take the patient by the feet and lay him down and move him below, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes it comes out from above. Then make him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands should be under his thighs, so that the bladder is entirely inclined downward; then seek and touch it inside."
"If you feel the stone in its space, then hurry now to cut on the stone. And if it does not fall out when touched all around, then moisten your left index finger with oil if the patient is a child, or your middle finger if the patient is a mature young person; and insert it into the bottom of the bladder and seek the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, guide it to the neck of the bladder. Then press on your finger, and push the stone out there where you want to cut."
"And command the assistant to press the bladder with his hand, and tell him to stretch his right hand up towards the scrotum, and with his left hand remove the skin that is under the scrotum in the part where the incision is made. Then insert the spatula shaped like this:"
"And cut between what is between the scrotum and the buttocks, not in the middle but on the left side of the groin. And let it be right over the stone, and your two fingers should always be at the bottom, and the incision should be made across so that it is wide from before and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large."
"Sometimes the pressure from your two fingers at the bottom causes the stone to come out without labor. Know that there are stones that have angles and edges: these are difficult to remove. And there are some that are smooth like a glass bead, round, whose exit is easy."
"Therefore, for those that have angles and edges, make the incision larger. And if it does not come out, then you must remove it with forceps which are also like a chisel at the end to grasp and remove the stone so that it does not escape. Or insert a thin curved instrument under it. And if you cannot grasp it this way, then widen one hole and if the sinew tears, then stitch it with pitch."
"And if there are more than one stone, then first bring out the largest one to the neck of the bladder, then cut above it, then pull it out, and afterwards remove the smaller ones if there are any. And if they are very large, then it must be, and make a larger incision. For two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or urine comes constantly from where the wound cannot be closed. But nevertheless, try to remove it, or crush it with forceps, as much as you can until you remove it in pieces."
"And when you have finished your work, then fill the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and stitch it up, and put on top a cloth moistened in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water to soothe the hot inflammation. Then bind the patient around his neck, and do not untie the bandage until the third day."
"And when you untie it, then wash the area very well with oil and water, then dress it with diapheconointment and basilicon ointment until it is healed."
"And if hot inflamed wounds and corrosions come in the wound, and congealed blood is retained in the bladder, which is known by this manner that it does not come out with urine: then insert your finger into the wound and remove that blood, for if it remains there, it will corrupt the bladder, and harm it."
"Then wash the wound with water and honey and salt, and help him in all ways that you know until he is healed. And it is necessary that every time you dress his wounds, you tie his two thighs together and gather the medications on the area."
"And if the stone is small and it is in the urethra stuck inside, and urine cannot come out: then treat him as I said earlier, that you cut him many times, or excuse him from the incision with this treatment. I have already proven this."
"Take one iron rod according to this shape and let it be forked at three ends stuck into one stick:"
"Then take one thread and tie it around the urethra below the stone so that it cannot go back into the bladder. Then insert the iron rod into the urethra gently until it reaches the stone. Then turn the rod in your hand against the stone bit by bit, until you can pierce the stone from the other side. Then urine will come out quickly, then press your hand on what remains of the stone that is inside the urethra. Soon it will be broken and come out with the urine, and the patient will be healed."
"and if you cannot do this because of some obstacle, then tie one string under the stone and another above, then insert the rod against the stone between the two strings, then extract it forcefully, and untie the string, and cleanse the wound from any congealed blood that is in it; and treat it until it heals."
"from the stone of women"
"It happens rarely that a stone becomes lodged in women, and if it does happen, its treatment is difficult, and it is forbidden for three reasons: the first is that perhaps the woman is virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman well-versed who reveals herself to doctors, especially when she is chaste."
"And the third reason is that perhaps one cannot find a woman skilled in this art of hands; and the fourth reason is that the stone of the woman is more deeply embedded than the stone of the man, for which reason one must make a deeper incision, and there is great fear involved."
"And if it becomes necessary for you to do so, then you must take a woman who is very skilled, and if you cannot find one, then seek out a chaste, subtle male doctor, and present him with a wise woman experienced in the lives of women, or a woman who knows some part of the art, and command her to perform whatever you command regarding the examination of the stone."
"and carefully examine if the woman is virgin: then you must place your thumb on her fundament and search for the stone; and if you find it, then press it down with your thumb, and command her to insert her thumb into her vagina, and she should squeeze and press her left hand strongly against her bladder."
"If she finds it, then she must move it gradually from the entrance of the bladder until it reaches the root of the thigh; then cut against the stone at the root of the thigh near the middle of the vagina, where it is more accessible to be felt; and do not move your thumb above or below the stone, and let the first incision be small."
"then insert the blade into the incision, if you feel that the stone is close enough to the wound so that it can come out, and know that there are many kinds of stones: namely small ones and large ones, sharp and smooth ones, long ones and round ones, and those with tails. Know their shapes in order to recognize them."
"And if the wound bleeds too much, then place powdered vitriol on it, and let it stay there for an hour until the bleeding stops. Then return to your task until the stone is out, and have ready the instruments that I mentioned earlier in removing stones from men, so that they may help you with your work."
"And if the wound bleeds too much and it is from the artery that was cut, then place powder on the wound and bind it tightly with bandages, and do not attempt this again, and leave the stone where it is without trying to remove it, because by chance the patient might die. Then dress the wound."
"And when the heat of the blood has subsided and the wound is healed, then return to your task until the stone is out."
"Of hernia of flesh"
"Pus ouse n'est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l'uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l'uef, si c'on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c'est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nous avons dit; et ceu n'avient se poc non."
"And the generation of this hernia is from weakness that comes to the intestines, and this matter is spread out."
"And sometimes it comes from blows to the intestines, and this moisture has many colors: either it leans towards jaundice in color, or it is without redness, or black, or white, watery, and there are more."
"And these are the signs to know this assembly: if it is in the white syfac that we have mentioned, then the abscess is round, about the size of an egg, and the intestines do not open because it has moisture all around."
"And if there is moisture in the proper skin, then the abscess is round with a part of the egg, and because of this one thinks that it is another egg;"
"And if the moisture is between the skin of the intestines and the white syfac, it can be felt well; therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, press all around with the quadrangular probe, as shown in the figure before." "So according to what comes after the probe, judge what is inside."
"So according to what comes after the probe, judge what is inside." "And when we operate with iron, it is necessary that the patient be as strong as possible and his body well-nourished; then he should lie on his back on something a little high, and many cloths should be placed under him;"
"then sit on his left side, and command the assistant to sit on the right side, and extend the probe towards one of the two flanks of the intestines;"
"then take the spatula and cut the skin of the intestines along its length until near the anus, and make the incision straight, dividing the skin of the intestines up to the white syfac, and carefully cut according to your ability;"
"then pierce the syfac with a large puncture needle and draw out all the water, then place your ligatures and stretch the syfac upwards; and do not touch the intestines themselves, but only the syfac itself; cut carefully along its length, either whole or in pieces, so that if you do not cut sharply enough, the water will return;"
"And if the egg jumps away from your work, put it back in its place when you have finished working on the syfac; then suture the two leaves of the intestines together with one stitch, and heal it as other wounds, until it is healed."
"And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, it is necessary to ligate the vessels that are suspended there, preventing bleeding; then cut the intestines along their entire length and remove the egg, and heal it as we have said."
"And if water is collected in two places together, know that these are two branches; cut the other branch just like you did the first one evenly, then wipe away the blood and place a linen cloth moistened with rose oil in the wound;"
"and place another linen cloth moistened in wine and oil on top of the two intestines, then cover it with doubled cloths and bind it along the entire length according to this figure:"
"Then take two cloths, stuff them with wool padding according to this shape and sew them together at the waistband of the breeches; one of the cloths should be placed on the buttocks up to the back, and the other at the anus; and the other two ends should be placed over the two angles, and all the restraint should be gathered together in the loop of the breeches;"
"And sometimes this branch is treated with a cautery instead of iron surgery, and it should be done by taking one small cautery needle, cutting the skin of the intestines, and heating it as we have said, so that the white syfac containing the water is exposed;"
"then take the cautery in this way and pierce one of these syfaces with ligatures, and burn it carefully with this hot cautery;"
"And cut in all ways that you can until you have removed everything; and take care that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this work is safer; and be careful of bleeding, and keep away from the intestines."
"And if anything goes wrong for you, such as heat rash or bleeding or other things, heal whatever is causing the problem according to what has been said before."
"And if the patient is fearful and cannot wait for this operation because of its unpleasantness, then perform a perforation as I will tell you, that is to say, when you are certain through the signs we have mentioned that the watery branch is present,"
"have the patient sit on a raised seat; then pierce the boil at its lowest point with the broad spatula and insert the perforation tube into the length of the body; make the puncture large enough for all the water to flow out;"
"then place cotton on the site and bind it, and let the remaining water drain out, then heal it until the wound is healed;"
"And if the linen cloth does not allow the water to flow out of the mouth of the wound, it is necessary to insert a pen or the instrument used to treat water from hydrocele patients, of which the shape is shown above; and enlarge one hole in the wound, and know that the water will return, and it will gather again after six months or so, and when it gathers as before, the patient will pass his days."
"Of the boil on the intestines"
"Know that in the section of this branch there are many variations, which is why it seems to me that it is better left alone;"
"And I will tell you the operation and the appearances of the boil."
"I say therefore that many boils come on the body, and especially on the intestines; and this happens in many cases."
"This is to say by sour, acrid, or watery fluid that has spread to the intestines, or from impact;"
"and the color of the boil is according to the color of the body; and there is no pain, but it is a severe boil;"
"and sometimes there are serious, fearful and piercing boils with foul color, which may come from an artery or from swelling of a vein."
"When it is from an artery, it is known by the appearance of a hot boil when you press it with your fingers;" "And it should not be touched."
"That which is caused by swelling of a vein is known by its appearance when touched with the fingers,"
"and one can make an incision on this boil and on others." "And it is that you cut the cord of the intestines, then lift up the egg-shaped boil, and let out the white fluid from it, and deliver the suspensiony ligament from all around the boil."
If the egg is already solid with these new feathers, then you must pluck the egg, and the cock.
And if it is air in the syringe or inside those in the vials, then you must remove all of that, and roundly pluck the cock.
And if the origin of the flesh is at the back, you must cut it all away, and extract the egg, as we have said.
And when your operations are complete, apply linen soaked in rose oil and wine to the wound, then dress it with other dressings until it is healed.
of the boil on the buttocks
This is a boil enclosed in an envelope resembling a blister, with softening of the buttocks and the patient complains bitterly when they walk;
And the treatment of this disease is almost as fearful as what has come before.
However, we will tell you about it according to what the ancients did.
You must have the patient sit on one elevated seat, then apply the suspensory bandage for the groin down to your thighs. Apply the entire basin that is close to the groin area, and the master holds it while stretching it firmly;
then cut with a sharp, wide scalpel across the vessels until they are uncovered
and then scrape each side, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples
then I stick an needle with one doubled thread and tie it to the first place where the nerve has come and then tie it again to the other end then cut them midway straight along the length of the body, and remove the corrupted membranes
then treat the wound like other open wounds so that no vessels flow into it to nourish one of the bones
for by this means there comes no harm, and if the bone is completely severed in all its vessels then it should be treated for all the vessels so that the bone does not lose its nourishment due to the incision of the vessels and they dry up and cannot help each other
of the fracture of the nose The outcome of this injury is that the section comes to the face or extends up onto the abdomen in the region of the angles, causing the intestines to descend from that fracture towards one of the bones;
and this dislocation occurs in the thigh or its extension, and these two types come from many causes: either by impact, jumping, carrying a heavy load, or similar actions
and the sign when it is an extension of the thigh is that it happens gradually over a long time and does not come suddenly and the inflammation extends as far as the interior because the thigh presses on the intestines
And the sign when it is a cut in the thigh is that it causes sudden pain at the beginning, and there are various visible swellings under the skin, which is due to the leakage of intestines and blood from the wound in the thigh
Sometimes the rings are torn along with the intestines, which are retained inside and cause great suffering for the sick person, especially when they are pressed upon
And in these cases of iron wounds, it is necessary to avoid them
and the way to treat it is that you tell the sick person to push back their intestines with their hand inside the wound if they can reach them then have him lie on his back between your hands and lift up his thighs
then raise the heart above it and cut away all the skin from the length of the thigh bone; Then place into the incisions of the flank nails according to what you need for opening the wound, and let them be such that the bone may exit.
Then strip off the skin below the coat of the thighs until the entire white thigh flesh is exposed.
Then insert your two index fingers into what leads to the thigh, that which is between the white flesh under the skin of the egg, and between the second flesh
and separate what is behind the egg and between the second flesh; then move your right hand into the thigh's heart and stretch the white flesh upwards with your left hand, and lift the egg together with all the flesh towards the flank. And command the assistant to extend the testicle upwards, and release what is behind the ligament
Then search with both hands if there is any intestines wrapped or hard white flesh and if you find anything like that, push it back into the belly cavity
Then take a needle with one thick thread made of ten threads and insert it into the rear part of the flesh that is behind the thigh skin, then cut the threads that appear from the needle until there are four left Then gather them together in a cross-like manner and tie the flesh that we spoke of earlier (the one under the skin of the thighs) with a strong stitch of two parts Then wrap the threads of the needle and tie them tightly with two parts so that none of the vessels that nourish it can enter inside, so that no pus can come in Then place the second stitch along the first one two fingers away from it and after these two stitches leave some flesh that is under the heart of the thighs hanging by a finger's width
And then follow the roundness that the egg carries, then cut in the part that is under the skin of the thighs until the sinew appears and the bowels as we said earlier
Then bring moistened wool in oil and place it on wounds, and bring the stitch that we spoke of And sometimes cauterize the white flesh that we have mentioned after the incision, for fear of bleeding
For this happened many times and leave the stitch until it falls by itself; and if it takes too long to fall, then rise with warm water, and place what we have said on top of it until it falls
Then heal the wound with other cures until it is perfectly healed
Hernia carnosum
In this branch, I never saw anyone daring to perform the cure by iron
And the ancients said that it is performed like the branch that is nearby, in such a way that you tie the vessels after the cut above lightly below;
Then cut into it, and treat the abscess of those who operate, until the vessels pour out; and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
No rupture ever occurs among the intestines, as we have said, and the place opens up. And no part of the intestines descends to the incision, except a little, which is soon repaired.
And if it remains too long at this point, the wound will heal over or close up so that the intestines descend
and this happens due to the expansion of the sinews which are around the intestines, as we have said, for they become stretched out, softened and swollen, opening up the place
and this is treated with a hot iron, as we have said before. And it is never cured by surgery in this way:
and then let the patient lie on his back with his hands between your knees, and cut the opening of the rupture from above downwards to the depth of three fingers
then extract the sinew that is underneath the skin, then take a thread and tie it over the exposed surface of the sinew
and press it firmly at the bottom of the abdomen, then sew up the two openings of the sinew over the top of the thread, sewing one and then the other
then remove the top of the thread, and do not cut into the sinew nor stretch the wound any further, as I have told you in the treatment of the rupture of the intestines
then treat it according to the treatment for wounds. And when you have sewn up the incision, wash it and dress the wound until it is healed.
The sinew is contracted and has no appearance in the rupture, and the cautery is more effective at this point and closer to safety.
Regarding the softening of the skin around the anus
Many times the skin around the anus in some men becomes softened due to the softening of the flesh that is inside, and it is unpleasant to see. And when one wants to treat it, let the patient lie on his back, and cut away the softened skin from the natural skin. Then join the two lips together with a single stitch, and if you wish, sew up the excess softened skin with three or four firm stitches. Then cut between the stitches and treat it like other wounds until it is healed, and remove the threads.
Regarding castration
Know that castration is condemned in our law, and therefore I would like not to speak of it in this book. However, there are two reasons why it may be necessary: one is for the physician to know how to respond when asked about it and its treatment, and the other is because we often have need to castrate certain animals to help us, such as goats, sheep, cats, and others. I therefore say that castration is done in two ways: either by traction or by incision. In the method that we use traction, we make the animal sit in warm water until the testicles are softened and hanging. Then we take them in our hand until they relax and we can no longer feel them. For castration with an incision, we first tie the animal down, press the skin of the scrotum with our left hand, then make two incisions on each testicle after having skinned them well. We leave a small piece of the cord and the subtile testicle that is above the vessels. This method is milder than traction because sometimes some remains of the testicles may be left behind during traction, which could cause the animal to desire lust. Then treat the wound until it heals.
Regarding hermaphrodites
Hermaphroditism occurs in two ways among men: one way is that between the two testicles opens also like the figure of a woman's nature, with hair and sometimes urine comes out. The other way is in women who have on their mons pubis both a penis and two testicles. The treatment for both men and women is to cut away all the excess flesh and treat it like other wounds. In the second manner, for men whose urine flows through the skin of the scrotum, there is no cure.
Regarding hemorrhoids：
**Line-by-line translation:**
Of the erratic
**Erratic:** Erratic is when the nature of woman is not pierced, or the opening is small; and it is either natural at birth, or accidental due to illness that has occurred, or caused by excess flesh adhering inside, whether thin or thick, and located deep in the womb, on the sides, below, or wherever it may be; and it prevents conception, childbirth, and sometimes menstruation; and its recognition is made through the inspection of the vulva. If the obstruction appears close to the vagina, then approach carefully with two fingers or a probe. If it is thin flesh adhering inside, then proceed quickly, and thus: place your two fingers together, and have the woman lie on her back with her legs spread; then stretch the two fingers apart until the thin flesh is rounded, and lies over the obstruction; then take flaxseed, and moisten it in oil, and apply it to the area, and let the woman lie on her back each day so that it does not adhere. And if the obstruction is thick and rough, then you must cut with a scalpel similar to the shape of a bay leaf. If the obstruction is born from flesh, then suspend it on an onion and cut it; and have ready medicines that stop bleeding, such as achillea, dragon’s blood, incense, mixed with egg yolk; then prepare a wide bandage of linen so that the wound does not adhere; and thus let it be for a long time, and apply dry linen compresses; then treat with other treatments until it is healed. And when flesh comes loose in the womb, then it must be cut according to this manner, unless it is an enchanted aposteme. For an enchanted aposteme that is in the womb, one should not dare touch it.
**Hemorrhoids:** Hemorrhoids are varicose veins inside or outside the anus; they appear as small lumps like bunches of grapes; some are internal and invisible from without, while others are external; they cause pain when defecating or sitting down; they can cause blood to flow freely during defecation or after, or only stain the toilet paper; sometimes they prolapse and come out at defecation; they are caused by constipation due to a bad diet, heavy lifting, or frequent diarrhea. The cure for them is to avoid their causes: eat healthy food that does not cause constipation, drink plenty of water, exercise regularly, do not lift heavy objects unnecessarily, and use ointments to relieve pain and inflammation. For internal hemorrhoids, surgery may be necessary if they are large or causing significant symptoms. Otherwise, rubber band ligation, sclerotherapy, or infrared coagulation can be used to treat them. For external hemorrhoids, warm sitz baths, witch hazel pads, and over-the-counter creams can provide relief. In severe cases, surgery may be necessary.
**Hemorrhoids:** Hemorrhoids are varicose veins that do not normally appear on the surface of the skin, and when they become old they become hard. We have already mentioned their appearance, signs, and now I will mention those that require treatment. I say that hemorrhoids and piles that are deeply embedded in the rectum and cannot be felt, there is no cure with iron; those that are at the mouth of the rectum can be felt are those that can be treated. Therefore, place the woman in a cold house, then hold the forceps with tweezers and cut at its root, then sprinkle medicines that stop bleeding such as achillea, dragon's blood, incense, and similar things; then put her feet against the wall for an hour, then place her in cold water; if there is bleeding, have her sit in a decoction of sumac, pomegranate bark, gall nuts, and similar things, and then make a plaster with barley flour, honey, and vinegar and apply it to her back. If it stops bleeding, that's good. If not, apply leeches on her back and breasts without cutting; then take linen and moisten it in plantain juice or buckthorn juice with old wine, and apply it to the wound. And when the boil is calm, treat the wound with ointment until it heals; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles a sharp head, so it must be cut as I have said for piles; then treat it until it heals.
**Abscesses of the Rectum:** Abscesses of the rectum are localized collections of pus that can develop due to infection or injury to the tissues of the anorectal area. Symptoms may include pain, swelling, redness, warmth, and fever. Treatment typically involves incision and drainage of the abscess under local anesthesia to relieve pressure and allow the pus to drain out. This procedure is usually performed by a surgeon or colorectal specialist. If the abscess is deep-seated or associated with significant inflammation, the patient may require intravenous antibiotics to fight infection and prevent it from spreading. In some cases, a seton (a loop of suture material) may be placed into the abscess cavity to allow for ongoing drainage over time. It's important to note that untreated abscesses can rupture spontaneously, causing severe pain and potentially leading to serious complications such as sepsis or fistula formation. Therefore, prompt medical attention is crucial for proper diagnosis and treatment.
**Hot Abscess of the Rectum:** A hot abscess of the rectum is characterized by intense pain, redness, heat, and fever at the onset. Here's how to treat it:
Of childbirth
The midwife's first task is to know the figure of natural childbirth, and the sign is when you see the woman hurry downwards and want to smell the air: then the child hurries to come out. Then you know that this birth is according to nature's figure, and the afterbirth is with its head, and the waters with it. And when you see these signs, then you must press her belly lightly so that the child comes out quickly; for when it descends upon its head, then is the afterbirth with it, and the mother's womb is cleansed of its superfluities by good cleansing. And he who comes otherwise does not come naturally. For sometimes he comes upon his feet, and comes forth backwards or forwards, or the hands, or he comes upon his belly, or sometimes, and is turned by chance upon his neck, and in other evil figures; so it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in these things, and guard herself from error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how one must help her.
If the child comes forth naturally upon its head and the woman gives birth with difficulty, and her strength is weak, then make her sit on a stool or let women hold her up; and raise her nature with oil of almonds or fennel cooked, and then place the midwife between her thighs the little spatula, whose form is as follows: And split the afterbirth and cut with your nail so that the waters inside come out; and press the woman's belly until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then you must give the woman a suppository of ground fenugreek with sesame oil. Then make her sneeze with condisiin and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: now the child will be born. And if the two hands come forth first, then you must push them back little by little; and if they cannot enter, then place the woman on a seat, and lift up her feet high; then overturn the seat upon the ground, and take care that the woman does not fall during the overturning; and if the hands cannot be pushed back, and the child dies, then cut the hands at the wrist that is marked here before, and extract the child, and push it back evenly.
If the child comes forth upon its feet: When a child comes onto its feet, then one must raise it up Then slowly turn it little by little until it is aligned;
Then take one of the feet and stretch it gently, bit by bit.
Can he jump up to his thighs? If so, have him command, "Take," and then cause him to sneeze. If fire cautery, God willing.
And if there is no cautery as we have said, then it should be turned little by little until it matches its natural shape Then it becomes easy
And if there is no cautery as we have said, take mastic from ancient plants, and oil of sesame seeds, and melted gum, grind all together in one mortar; "And put upon this woman the nature of the ointment within and without." "Then make her sit in cold water up to below her ribs;"
"And when she is moistened beneath, let her wear one collar of myrrh and place it underneath her, leaving it for an hour;" "Then make her sit on a seat, then make her sneeze and hold her mouth and nose, and lightly press her belly, for the child will now jump." "of the child's exit onto its knees" When the child comes in this manner, then let him place his hands softly and softly upon it;
"One hand comes out during the birth of the child" "I must engineer bringing back the hand:" "If it cannot be brought back, then raise the woman and go."
"If she cannot walk, lay her on one bed and push her legs wide apart."
"Then arrange the muscle tissue I described;"
"And if she does not give birth, seat her on a chair and then examine how to bring back the hand." "And pat-pat the child according to nature's form, make her sneeze, and tell her to hold on until the child comes out."
"At the moment of birth, with its hands spread wide, facing its mother's back." "I must have the baby seize her hand, then pat-pat gently and rock it lightly;"
"Once he is steady, apply the natural muscle tissue as oil we discussed earlier, then tell her to move gently."
"When you have done this, seat her on a chair and tell her to hold on; then make her sneeze." "This same manner is used for the afterbirth."
"This same manner is used for the afterbirth." "Once the afterbirth comes out this way, cut it with your nail until all the moisture is expelled;"
"And if the child's face and neck are pressed down, cut from the chin so that it does not stay stuck and the child dies;"
"Then put the baby inside until you have placed it correctly, and tell the woman to hold herself together from then on:"
"Regarding the birth of twins:" "It is well known that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or even four; this is not a strange thing and happens infrequently." "Two are rare and do not live long;"
"I know this: they multiply themselves and are cut by the sieve who divides them, which is tied to the chin."
"Sometimes they come out naturally like any other child, as we have described."
"And if they cry out loudly, care for them as we have said, and the baby should be gentle and do everything quickly and easily;" "Then act in whatever way is best for their health." "Regarding multiple births:"
"Regarding multiple births:" "It sometimes happens that they are formed in the mother's womb, one or two or three or four or five or six or seven or more, up to fifteen; and they are all perfectly formed like a child according to God's will."
"And the midwife should know about this, because such things can happen;" "So she should act accordingly."
Regarding a stillborn child:
When treating a woman for a dead child in her womb, as I have said in the section on this matter, and if no fluid comes out, then you are compelled to perform manual operations. Therefore, you must know whether the woman is of sound health, and if she does not have any complications or if she fears death,
If a woman must be supported on her back, with her shoulders tilted downwards, and her legs raised up.
and the minister will apply traction to two parts, or secure it to the bed so that it cannot move during childbirth
Then rub the mouth of the woman in labor with moist oil containing musk, fenugreek seeds, and flaxseed powder, then apply these oils and powders to the hands of the attendants. Then put your fingers gently into the woman's vagina, then seek one place where you can grasp the loops that are suitable for this purpose
and be careful that the child is facing downwards so it descends headfirst If you hook your fingers in his ears or neck or mouth or palate or under the beard or near the scrotum or close to the sides
and if delivery is on footing, then hook or grasp it by the middle of its sides
and it is necessary that he grasp the loop with his right hand, and place the hook between the fingers of his left hand, and insert his hand gently up to the wrist, and grasp the loop at one of these points we have mentioned, until the child emerges empty
Then insert another loop opposite the first one, or a third if necessary, so that the extraction is even
and then pull evenly in both directions, moving back and forth, so that the child may be born more easily, and the loops should be toothed to hold it firmly, as shown here
And if there is still a part remaining, then let the attendant anoint some of his fingers with oil and insert them into that part, and draw out the other part
and if there is still none remaining, then move this loop higher up and do so until the child is completely born.
And if one hand comes before the other and he cannot bring it back to perform the extraction then you must wrap a cloth around both hands so that they emerge together
Then grasp the baby at the heel joint or the knee, and do likewise with the other hand, using both hands
And if the hips of the child are large and it is stuck in the outlet or has an acute head coming together, It is necessary for you to place the spine-like spatula between your two hands, then press it firmly and draw out the water. or you can roll it with the instrument called "almidach," from which its form comes along with the tools or chapter that follows this one.
And do likewise if the child has a naturally large head. "And then grasp the bones with tongs,"
"If the hip joint protrudes and is restrained by forceps, it should be cracked open until all moisture in the bone marrow has been expelled;"
"And if it cannot come out, then cut it into pieces with a saw where you are able to."
"If it is swollen in the abdomen or under the ribs, it should be punctured until the moisture flows out."
"And if the child is on its feet, traction will be light, and the alignment of the mouth of the marrow will be easy."
"And if it is tight in the abdomen or on the bone, then extract it using one cloth wrapped around the hand." "Open the abdomen or the bone until the moisture flows out;"
"And if the other limbs are dislocated and the hip joint remains in place," "then insert his hand deep into the marrow and draw it up to the mouth of the marrow;" "then place one or two fingers inside, and draw it out."
"And if the mouth of the marrow is constricted due to a hot boil that has formed there, then one should not attempt to manipulate it," "but rather apply moist and fatty substances;" "And use poultices, and make compresses with softened and moistening herbs."
"And if the child is on its side and you are able to place it flat, then apply what we have said for a living child;"
"But if one does not have the strength to do so, then draw out the hip joint in pieces and leave no part of the afterbirth behind."
"And once you have done this, if any hot boils appear on the marrow, apply what we have said for treating them;"
"But if bleeding occurs, it should be placed in cold water to restrict it, and other treatments applied."
"I saw a woman whose child had been bitten in the abdomen by one mouse, then another mouse came and bit the other." "After many days, an abscess formed on her cheekbone and swelled so much that it opened up, causing great pain."
"I was called to treat her, but after thinking about it for some time, I could not heal the wound."
"I applied a poultice with strong drawing power and out came one bone, then after a few days another." "I was greatly amazed at this because the abdomen has no bones."
"So I thought it must be the bones of a dead fetus."
"I cleaned the wound and drew out many more bones until the woman began to improve;" "and the woman lived for a long time in this way, with a little blood oozing from the wound sometimes;"
"And I am recording this chapter here only so that when the master encounters something unusual, he may know how to treat it."
"on bringing the hip joint back into place"
Hereafter comes the form of the pressure bandage, with which one wraps the books; and at two turns around the two heads of the two ribs. Moreover, let the horns be more subtle in the restraint, and let them be made of ebony or boxwood;
"And let the mouth of the bellows be two fingers wide, and the edges of the blades one finger wide, and long one and a half palms." "And between the two limbs there should be two joints of this same wood, which close in one and open in the other, half a palm long or a little more."
"And these two joints are inserted into the mouth of the bellows to open it when one turns the two corners."
"A more refined and lighter form is made of ebony or boxwood, resembling the shape of tongs;" "and at both ends it has two joints, each one a palm long and two fingers wide;"
"And when you see the bellows open completely with the instrument, have the woman sit on one bed, her feet hanging down and her legs open," "then insert the two joints together into the bellows, and hold the end of the instrument under her thighs;" "then open your hand on the whole instrument, just like with tongs, according to the amount you see opening the mouth of the bellows, until the ball is done."
"These instruments are all mounted and have multiple similar forms. And when the master has prepared them, he who operates is faster in his work, and higher in esteem among men for his skill."
"Therefore do not disregard the instrument until you have prepared it, for its usefulness is not negligible."
"When the midwife is assisting at childbirth, you must command the mother to hold her breath, and then make her sneeze with camphor, and keep your hands over her mouth and nose;" "And if she faints because of this, so much the better."
"If not, take one pot, make a hole in the lid, and put herbs inside that can open the mouth of the bellows, such as calamint, rue, anise, chamomile, celery seed, and cumin;"
"all these herbs, or some of them, should be cooked in the pot with water over the fire. Then put one end of a tube into the hole in the pot and the other end into the mouth of the bellows;"
"and hold it there until the vapor comes inside the bellows. Then make her sneeze, as we have said." "If the midwife acts quickly," "And if the midwife remains afterwards and is not satisfied, command the woman to moisten her left hand with oil of sesame or with white wax, and then put it into the vagina,"
"and search for the baby. And when she has found it, take hold of it and stretch it out little by little straight, so that the bellows does not slip out;" "but she must move it gently to the right and left, and then pull it. It will come and be delivered."
"And if the mouth of the bellows is too narrow, we have described the treatment of sneezing and the fumigation with herbs;"
"and if she is not helped by any of these things, make sure you do not pull too hard;"
"but the one who is at the mouth of the bellows should tie it to the woman's hip, and then administer an enema with tetrapharmakon oil;"
"This will allow her to push and deliver the baby. However, when she pushes, bad odors may come from her stomach and head, causing discomfort for the woman."
"Therefore, appropriate fumigations should be applied at this time. Many of the ancients have tried fumigations with watercress and dried figs."
"The shape of the instrument used for fumigation of the woman during childbirth and delivery is as follows:"
"And it resembles a tube made of glass. The narrow end is placed in the vagina, and the wide ends are held over the fire;"
"and the fumigation should be done with charcoal. Hold it there until it is exhausted, then start another one."
"to pierce the anus"
"Many children are born whose anus has not been pierced, but rather obstructed by a subtle membrane;" "therefore the woman should pierce this membrane with her thumb, without touching it with any sharp instrument, and she must take care not to touch it;"
"then apply a compress moistened in wine and oil, and continue the treatment until it is healed."
"And if you suspect that it has not healed, insert a silver tube into the hole and leave it there for several days. It should be removed when the child is ready to go to its room."
"Sometimes this obstruction can be caused by a sudden eruption or boil. In such cases, the eruption should be opened and treated as described for the silver tube."
"of a fistula of the anus" "Fistulas that come from under the anus are usually nodular and grow larger than those that come beside the anus or in the space between the two buttocks;"
"if there is one fistula or more, and when the nodular fistula is old, it opens on its own. However, if it does not open on its own, use a sharp needle or fine knife to incise it;"
"and sometimes these fistulas are persistent. They can be recognized by the fact that there is a discharge of pus or wind when the person has a bowel movement, and occasionally a worm may emerge;"
"And there are fistulas that penetrate all the way to the bladder and halfway up the penis. Some reach as far as the hip joint, and others reach as far as the thighbone."
"Thus one can recognize a persistent fistula of the anus that is not persistent;" "and it is necessary to insert your index finger into the anus and then insert a fine needle made of brass or iron into the fistula when there is no curvature;"
"And if there is curvature, insert a fine silver probe or a horsehair until you feel it with your finger;"
"and if you do not feel it and there is no discharge of pus, wind, or worm coming from the opening, as we have described;" "know that it does not penetrate. Be quick to treat it."
"And when a fistula extends all the way to the bladder or the urethra, urine flows out of it and cannot be stopped with medications."
"If it has penetrated as far as the hip joint, the probe will reach there;" "if there is no curvature and there is inflammation around it, then it has always been present, and there is no need for medication or cauterization;"
"and in these persistent fistulas, there is no other remedy than hard work, and the vain boasting of foolish physicians who meddle with them."
"In one that is not persistent or old, there is hope for healing by means of iron, as I have experienced;"
"And the person should lie face down in your hands, with their legs raised up to the hips and the hips tilted towards the abdomen;" "then insert an iron probe or silver if there is curvature, until you know where it emerges."
If the patient feels it around their fundament, then you must place your two index fingers there.
Next, feel if the tendon has pierced through; and whether it is exposed or you can feel between your fingers skin or flesh, then know that it has pierced. If one does not work on it, one cannot heal it.
It is always said that some can be healed well, but this happens rarely;
"and the aid that is done there, if it is done, then heat the cautery thinly according to the width of the fistula, as it is said before." "And push it all hot into the fistula until it reaches the fundament; and do this two or three times, until you know that these broken veins have been burned, which resemble an eagle's feather."
"And then, the dressing of wet cloths is applied until that broken vein comes out; then the application of ointment between flesh and skin."
"If it is thus healed, that's good. But if not, there is no other way to heal it:"
"And if the tent enters and does not reach to the thumb which is at the fundament, and between your two fingers there is a thick covering of flesh or skin, and you see the fistula coming out from under this covering near the heart:" "then cut through the beginning of the fistula, and push the tent forward again, and then apply the cautery until it reaches the tip of the tent."
"And thus the tent will be delivered and fall away; then burn those broken veins which resemble an eagle's feather, and nothing will remain."
"If the skin becomes inflamed, and cracks between you and the wound, then cauterize it with fire or strong medicine."
"For the cautery of fire accomplishes two things: namely, it burns those broken veins together and stops the flow of blood and dries up the moisture."
"then apply dressings moistened with hot water or crushed herbs until the place becomes soft and the burned vein comes out from the flesh;"
"then dress the wound with healing ointments that are applied between hard flesh, and these are dried medicines."
"For when it is thus restored, it will be healed and not return again."
"And if the fistula comes right up from the fundament but is distant from the body, push your thumb into the fundament and feel with it."
"If you feel the tent with your thumb and there are two layers between it – skin or flesh – where it is about to burst, then there should be no fear of danger or despair, for there are three ways to manage this:"
"either you cauterize it as we have described, or cut through it completely until it reaches the bottom, or if you can push a tent into it and dress it as before."
"but do not go too deep lest you cut the tissue that supports the fundament, so that evacuations can pass without difficulty;" "then dress it as we have described;"
"then dress it as we have described;" "perhaps it will then be healed, or you can remove that covering and clean it after it has been cut near the fundament with a tent or another pointed instrument;" "then burn the broken veins in the wound as much as possible;"
"then endeavor to restore the wound and keep the fistula away from the fundament: this will be easier for the patient."
"And there are sometimes fistulas of this kind: when you push the tent into the fistula and it is located on the side of the fundament near the skin above;" "then take a tent with a hole at its tip like this:" "And thread two turns of thread onto it, then insert the tent all the way down to its tip into the fistula."
"If it passes through the margin of the fundament inside, then pull out the thread from that hole so that you can insert your thumb into the fundament;"
"then pull on the end of the thread and draw the two holes together, tying them tightly to each other, and leave it in place for one or two days;"
"and tie it again if necessary until the thread cuts through those veins that are between them and they close up;"
"then dress the wound until it is healed."
"If the fistula does not open on its own, then make an incision in any way that you can, if it is not too deep."
"For one should not cut too deeply for the sake of making a hole and then dress it as we have described until it is healed."
"The shape of the spinal comb used to open a fistula is most often pointed and cutting;" "and on the other hand, it should not be wide so that one does not cut what ought not to be cut, as you can see here:"
"There are two kinds of hemorrhoids: those that are inside the fundament, like grains of resin, and there can be small or large ones. Sometimes they bleed outside;" "and there is one or more of them, and they are located outside the fundament at its tip. But those that are outside have less moisture;"
"and they are usually covered with a little yellow mucus or blood, and they have the color of skin;"
"The treatment for those who have hemorrhoids inside the fundament is to tell the patient to strain while going to the privy until the fundament protrudes and the veins are emptied;" "then act quickly, take hold of it with forceps or your fingernail, then cut through its root;"
"And if the nails cannot hold them due to their moisture, then take them with a cloth or cotton or a piece of linen;" "then pull them out with your thumbs, cut them off and apply some warm powders instead of cauterizing;" "or cauterize them as is described in the chapter on cautery, then treat them with other remedies until they are healed."
"And if the fundament cannot protrude, then administer a strong and sharp enema to wash out what is inside the fundament so that it can come out openly;"
"when the patient strains, if the veins are protruding from the fundament, then treatment will be easy;" "And it is necessary to take hold of them with your fingernail or forceps and cut them off, then treat them as we have described until they are healed, and the patient fears being cut by a knife."
"The stitch must be made in this way: take a thread and pass it through a needle, then pull the thread upwards and pierce the needle from below, and turn both ends of the thread down under the needle;" "and tie it tightly, then knot the thread and remove the needle, and do the same for all the others, leaving one loose to drain any excess blood;"
"then place a warm cloth moistened with rose oil or wax on the fundament and tell the patient to rest;"
"And then leave it alone until they fall out, and when they do, treat them with ointment and other remedies until they are healed."
"on the drying of fistulas in the fundament" "Sometimes there is a drying up of fistulas in the intestines due to constriction of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine no longer helps;"
"It is necessary that you scrape off with the tip of a scalpel or your fingernail the skin above it which might otherwise become moist;" "then treat it until it is dry as needed;"
"And if it cannot be dried up, then scrape more vigorously until it heals completely and is scraped raw;" then heal until he is well
fever An ant is a small animal that lives near the body and moves very quickly;
And sometimes it finds the bone, and one feels it like death from shivering, and it comes throughout the body, but more in the hands than elsewhere.
And the cure for this is that you take a goose feather quill or a strong turkey feather quill, and place it on the shivering until the circle around it encloses the entire shivering. Then turn your hand around the quill so that you encircle the entire shivering and drive it deep in, and crush its roots.
"And if you see this, do so with a cane of brass or iron according to this form, and let it be thin underneath and pointed above:"
"However, do not pierce too deeply to hold the two together and apply pressure. And if you see this, cauterize the trembling, as it is said in front or in the chapter on cautery."
"of the form of the enema" "No one ever makes an enema of silver or copper, or melted brass or lead; and no one ever makes them of these small and large instruments, according to which they are ordered."
"Therefore, those that should be used in the treatment of children and those who are weak and painful are small."
"The form of the small and large enema is as follows, where the belly is tied according to this manner:"
"And there should be an opening where the belly is tied, as you see here, and the feces inside should be pierced; and it should have two holes on one side and one on the other."
"And let the belly where one puts the medications be a beast's bladder or parchment, and let it be pierced all around with small holes,"
"And let there be between each hole one grain of spice, then put in these holes one strong thread of thick twisted cotton around ten or eleven times, and fasten the belly like a goat." "And when the medication is inside, tie it to the instrument before with a strong thread, then perform the enema; and this is the form of the circle:"
"And let the medication not be too hot nor too cold, and grease the head of the enema with oil or dough made from an egg white, or something similar, then put it in gently."
"Then the minister squeezes it with both hands together until it is all squeezed out, then remove the enema and have the patient raise their legs at the edge of the bed,"
"and if the medication wants to come out, then tie it as much as you can; and if he sleeps all night like that, it is more helpful."
"And if you perform an enema on someone with diarrhea and the medication comes out quickly, then start it again until it is finished."
"And if the hemorrhoids are in the fundament or have an ulcer, let the enema be as subtle as for a one-year-old child;"
"and this is the form of the subtle enema on which the skin should be strained:"
"wounds."
"We have already spoken in the division about the treatment of wounds; now we will tell you about the treatments for hands and medications, according to their completion."
"I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to where the wounds are made, and what they are made from."
"The things by which wounds are made are: blows with stones, cuts with swords and knives or lances, clubs, sticks, or similar objects;"
"or those that are made according to the locations on the body, such as wounds that fall on the neck, head, face, belly, liver, and similar members;"
"And I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, for the memory will come in its chapter."
"I say that when a simple wound comes to the head and the bone is not broken, take care if it was caused by a blow with stones or similar objects, and if the skin is completely torn and the wound is large," "and quickly clean the hot ulcer: do it gently with the cephalic balm even if there is a little blood coming from the wound, and let the ointment be applied on the opposite side of the wounded part;"
"and keep the patient from overeating wine and fatty foods."
"And if it does not want to be cleaned, then soften its flesh, and do not let it drink wine or eat meat;"
"and put on the wound, if hot ulcers come, cotton soaked in rose oil only, or in styptic wine;"
"And if there are no hot ulcers, put on the wound powder that I will tell you about later, if it is fresh with all its blood and has not been moved by the air."
"And if the air has moved it, put on some ointments until it is healed."
"And if the wound is large, like a cut from a sword or similar objects, and the lips cannot be brought together by force, then bring them together by stitching, as I will tell you about in the treatment of abdominal wounds."
"If the wound is open to the bone and hangs down and only holds on by a little bit, then cut it off. Then treat the wound with medication and replace hard flesh in place of skin." "and order the patient to eat fatty foods, such as testicles and cooked wheat, as well as poultry and similar things."
"And if you find rottenness in the skin but not to the bone, then cut out all the rotting flesh and throw it away, then treat the wound;"
"And if there is an artery in the wound that bleeds without clotting and it cannot be stopped with medications, then tie off the artery. And if you find it dislocated, then secure it with a thread." "And if that does not help, then cauterize it."
"And if these wounds are small and simple, the treatment is easy: you should put in this powder that welds before the air has moved it."
"And the way to make the powder is: take incense in one part; dragon's blood, two parts; quicklime, three parts, and grind it finely;" "and fill the wound with it, and bind it tightly until it is well aired and joined together with all its blood;"
"then tie it up well, and do not untie it if it does not swell, because the medication should not be removed until the wound is healed."
"Sometimes this can also be done with quicklime alone when incense and dragon's blood are not available, but only if the air has not moved the wound."
"And if the air has moved the wound, especially in summer, do not put this powder on it at all;"
"but put on digested ointments or poultices made from barley flour and water and honey until it sweats." "Then treat it with other treatments until it is healed."
"And if there is a bone fracture along with the wound and it is small, then extract it with fine forceps;"
"I will tell you about fractures of the head later on."
"Of the wound on the neck"
"If a wound comes to the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and one on the head, except when the nerve of the neck or an artery is cut."
"If it's a nerve, there is no other remedy than to leave it alone and not put anything constricting on it because that harms the nerves and makes them retreat;" "and do not put anything cold on the wound because nerve tissue is cold and their continuity is with the brain, which is the highest member;"
"but let the medication be warm, like hot water mixed with sweet oil and honey, also washed in hot water;" "and other mines of stone according to this manner, and moist anointments."
"And if the wound is large, then stitch it up with thread and bind it with bandages until it heals."
"And if the wounds are deep and full of infection and bowels, then pierce them below or further down,"
"and if the artery is cut and there is a flow of blood coming out, then tie it off, ligate it, and cauterize it if necessary;"
"And if the spine or heart is cut and the vessels are preserved so that the flesh remains alive," "then stitch up the heart along the side of the neck, without touching the throat but putting it back into its natural shape." "and then bind it tightly and leave it for a few days before curing it with drying ointments until it heals."
"And if the wound has caused an impression on the bone, remove it;" "and if there are pieces of bone, draw out those that you can easily reach; those that you cannot have removed, leave them alone until the wound becomes gangrenous," "and remove and ligate any discharge;"
"And if the wound is fresh, then sprinkle on it the powder that I have mentioned." "And if there are bones in the wound and there is a fistula, cure it as I have said in its chapter."
"Regarding wounds from spears or daggers,"
"If it's a wound from a spear or dagger and the wound is deep, observe whether there are any signs of wind escaping from the wound where the patient breathes: then know that the wound is mortal."
"But if it's not deep and the wound is fresh with all its blood, don't put any powder on it or tie it at first hour so that the blood doesn't sink in too deep," "and let it flow towards the heart, causing death to the patient;" "But apply an attracting ointment and tie it twice a day;"
"And if you don't have any ointment, put some old cotton in the wound to suck out the moisture."
"And make the patient lie on their side for 3 days or 4 days or more;" "So that there will be no spasm, nor trembling of the heart, nor coughing." "And when you see these good signs, know that the wound is saved." "So cure it then with dressings and other treatments until it heals;"
"And if it cannot heal and opens up again, know that there is a fistula present; so treat it as it should be treated."
"And if the wound is an incision from a sword or dagger, whether it's simple, deep, or on the back, treat it as those that are on the front;"
"If it's large, stitch it up; if it's small, sprinkle powder on it. And if it's close to the bone and has cut off pieces of flesh, remove the wound and draw out any discharge if they are visible;" "And if they are not visible, let the wound gangrene and then ligate the drainage."
"And the treatment for wounds on other limbs is judged in the same way as we have said."
"Regarding rupture of the abdomen"
"The ruptures of the abdomen are large, medium, and small;"
"A large rupture can sometimes cause the intestines or the nerves of the intestines to protrude through it;"
"And stitching is more difficult, and sometimes a small rupture is worse than a large one,"
Because when one resets it more often, the intestines are put back in place little by little; Because the intestines swell up so much that they feel cold, so they cannot be reset.
And therefore it is necessary to move the wounded flesh, so that one may reset the intestines to their place like the others.
And you should know that intestinal rupture occurs in four ways
The two common sutures occur in the abdominal suture,
"And the stitching of other wounds of the body, two other stitches are common for other wounds;".
"However, they are more appropriate with abdominal suturing, and I will mention each one and explain."
"I say that when the wound is small and no part of the intestine has come out," "and if it is necessary to replace it, this is done in one of two ways:" "or because the wound is small, as we have said," "or because the intestine is swollen with cold."
"And when it is cold, heat it in this manner:" "Soak a sponge or one piece of cloth in hot water only," "or cook it in boiling water with vinegar and cumin," "and raise the intestine until the swelling has gone away;"
"And sometimes this wine astringent is made, and it is useful to use for desswelling."
"And when you see the swelling diminish, then mix the intestine with water or with salt water in which herbs have been cooked," "because by this method the entrance to the wound is almost closed;"
"And if it cannot enter, then open the wound a little with an instrument used for cutting hemorrhoids;"
"and the first treatment is useful to make the cut;" "That no one should cut without great necessity being present;"
"And this is the instrument for splitting it open:"
"So cut into the curve and do not go too deep, and here is its shape:"
"And when the wound has become enlarged and the intestine has come out," "then put it back in place according to its natural form in its proper place," "If you are able to do so, for this is most useful."
"When the wound is large and it is located below the belly," "It is necessary that you make the sick person lie on his back," "And put his legs higher than his head;" "And if it is located below the belly,"
"And also, if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts," "then take care that the injured part is higher than the other;"
"And thus it is necessary to arrange what I say in large and moderate wounds."
"In small wounds, put what you are equipped with,"
"then have between your hands one gentle minister who will pull all the rupture with his hand," "And join the lips;" "This is the common manner of stitching."
"This is the common manner of stitching." "And it is necessary that you take one needle or several, according to the quantity of the width of the wound," Then leave at the head of the wound two threads of spice, and insert a needle with one good strong thread attached. And pierce the two holes in the skin with the two holes in the syringe,
"Then tie a doubled thread around the needle on both sides," "Then join the two heads of the wound together,"
"And then leave one finger's width, and stick in another needle;" "then tie the thread like you did for the first needle," "And continue doing this according to how many needles you need." Until the entire wound is closed.
"And let the needles be of medium size, neither too fine nor too coarse," For thin needles cut all the flesh, and thick ones cannot go in well enough:" Therefore they must be medium-sized.
And it is not necessary to put the needles too deep into the flesh and skin,"
for they would cut and open up the wound before stitching.
"Then clip the heads of the needles so that they do not prick the sick person while sleeping," "And you should put caps or cloths on the heads of the needles to prevent movement." "Leave them until the wound is healed,"
"And this method of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds," For it requires only one or two needles
The second suture is common, And you shall assemble the two bones of the skin and the two bones of the hip together with one needle having a medium strong thread. and when you have pierced all four of these bones together,
and when you have pierced all four of these bones together, "Then reset the needle at the point where you began, as one cuts cloth."
"And space each stitch the thickness of a middle finger;
"This seam seals the limb,"
"I sewed a wound that a man had in his belly,"
"who was wounded by a knife," "And the wound was more than a palm's breadth wide," "and it showed more than two palms' worth of intestines."
"The wound was in his belly." "I reset the intestine twenty-four hours after it had been dislocated,"
"And the wound healed up to fifteen days, and I treated it, and he recovered."
"And the physicians had judged that he would die, but this was a miracle;"
"and I did not treat him with ointments, for there were none available in the place where we were, nor any medicine." "I simply put on a little cotton twice a day and washed him with honey water until he healed."
"Now I will tell you the two proper methods of suturing:"
"Take the needle and pass it from the outside to the inside."
"When it has pierced through the heart straight on, then let go of the needle's end or the point where you inserted the needle,"
"and make it pierce again from inside to outside."
"And the purpose of this suturing method is that you stitch as skinners sew hides," "so that once you release the needle on one side, you pick it up again on the other, until the entire stitch is complete."
"The second method of suturing, which Galen describes correctly,"
"is to approximate the two parts naturally together," "and press one end of the needle against the other, like this:"
"insert a needle close by and pierce only that spot," "and leave both ends of the needles." "then turn the needle and pass it from outside to inside," "so that both ends of the needles are inside,"
"then pierce both sides from outside to inside in two other nearby spots that are opposite each other."
"And this is the second and most common method of suturing."
"Galen said this, and some confirm it,"
"That one should suture the belly with two needles, each having thread."
"And one must insert one needle on this side and the other on that side, like those who sew hides:"
"And know that when a wound is inside the belly," "the stitching is tighter than in other parts of the belly."
"The judgment of wounds is such as for other wounds:"
"And that when you find the wound fresh and full of blood before it has been moved," "then quickly remove the intestines and the cut, then apply powdered gum around the edges."
"then quickly remove the intestines and the cut, then apply powdered gum around the edges." "If it has been moved, then apply some ointment that is available until the wound closes." "And cut the thread and tie the needle ends and edges." "Then treat the wound as others, until it heals."
"And if you don't have medicines, then apply cotton wool immediately when it starts to close," "and change it twice a day until it heals."
"For in many cases where wounds are simple, you don't need any other medicine besides cotton wool."
"And if you suspect that the wound does not communicate with the main organs," "then it is necessary to moisten a light linen cloth in warm oil of wild thyme or rose oil," "and apply it around the angles and under the armpits;"
"And if there is pain or putrefaction in the bowels, which often happens," "then apply black wine enemas and especially if the putrefaction reaches the intestines."
"And pierce it inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one."
"The intestine called 'jejunum' cannot heal when it is wounded," "And this is because of the thinness of its walls and the delicacy of all the body and its proximity to the nerves."
"If the spleen jumps out of the wound, then put it back in as quickly as possible, while still fresh,"
"And if it is old and become black or full of worms, then tie the spot that is black so that no blood flows there," For there are veins and arteries;
Then cut what is between the ligaments, and put the two bones that are below the wound outwards until they fall on either side of the wound to facilitate extraction when the joint drops, and let the wound gape.
from dislocation of the eyeball
When the intestines are torn and the wound is small, can it be restored in any way?
for I have seen that a man was wounded in the belly with a lance;
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, And it was inflamed and became a fistula, and the evacuation and wind escaped through it.
I applied treatment according to what I could, and did not cease until he was healed, and the joints were sound.
And when I saw him healed, I doubted that the patient might still have an illness in his belly; and there was no harm, but it remained in better positions, eating and drinking;
and some experts said that when there is a small wound in the intestines, it should be tied in this manner: Take fresh large testicles, then gather the edges of the wound, "When the tremor has opened its mouth, place it over the two lips."
"Then puts another bandage afterwards in the same manner as before until the wound is entirely covered;"
"And sew up the wound." "This head enters into the intestines and causes no harm to the patient,"
"and one can tie the intestine with a fine thread which has been cut from an animal's intestine,"
"in this manner:" "Take the head of this intestinal thread that is very skinned," "And then tie to the head of this thread a fine twisted linen thread," "then pass the thread through the needle and sew up the intestine and draw it back into its opening;"
"And this manner of sewing with bandages is not foreign to those who seek confidence and hope."
"But if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the main intestines, there is no device nor remedy except for subtlety."
"of fistula wherever it may be" "Know that every wound or abscess, when it grows old, is universally called a 'fistula'," "And especially when it is healed and returns inside."
"A fistula is, according to its true nature, a hard and white knot or node, where no pain is felt," "And its head is as sharp as a bird's feather;"
"Sometimes it jumps clear and straight; other times it is thick;" "Sometimes soft, sometimes sufficient;"
"I have spoken of this in the section on wounds, that any wound which is not clean and lacks flesh," "is only so by one of the eight causes:"
"That is to say, due to the smallness of blood or body;" "or because of its wickedness;" "or because there is hard flesh within and on the lips, which prevents flesh from growing;" "or if there is too much bow;" "or if the wound is closed up, and the material is of poor quality;" "or if the medicine used for treatment was not good;" "or because the corruption is a matter of pestilence;" "or because the property in that region has delayed digestion and healing, and it naturally tends towards inflammation." "or if there are veins or bones present;"
"I have already shown all these causes, signs, and medicinal treatments in the relevant section."
"Now I must tell you about the treatment of fistula which is done by manual work."
"You should know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body;" "for there are fistulas which come from large veins and arteries and nerves," "or from the sinews, intestines, bladder, or ribs;" "or from the spine of the back, or any joint of the hands or feet."
"All such fistulas are difficult to heal, and there is only labor involved in their treatment, along with ignorance;"
"And if there is any fistula that does not reach the places I have mentioned, you can be confident about its treatment," "And you will recognize it; so take an awl of iron or bronze, and if the fistula is straight, bore into it;"
"and if the fistula is curved, search for it with a thin lead probe." "because lead will bend more easily around the curvature;"
"And if the fistula has many perforations and you cannot search for it well with probes," "then irrigate it through one of the perforations."
"because moisture will flow from one perforation to another and cleanse them;"
"then probe gently so that you know if there is bone or nerve present, and how deep it goes."
"And ask the patient carefully about the pain they feel when your hand presses on them, and where they feel it."
"and once you know exactly where the fistula is located, and if it is far from a joint or nerve, artery, or vein," "then cut into it according to what I have told you."
"then cut into it according to what I have told you." "And remove the breach and corrupted tissue that is inside;" "And then treat it until it is healed;"
"If the fistula is very deep in its direct course, you must cut deeply into it as far as you can," "then insert moistened probes dipped in hot medicine and push them up to the head of the fistula;"
"then insert moistened probes dipped in hot medicine and push them up to the head of the fistula;" "until the medicine corrodes all the excess tissue that remains at the bottom."
"And then apply warm applications of clean, healing liniments until it is healed;"
"If it does not heal with these methods, cauterize it as we have said;"
"And if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, cut into it." "If a vein or nerve troubles you in the main members, as we have said,"
"And if bone is exposed and there is corruption and blackness, scrape it away until all the corruption is removed;" "then treat it with warm applications of clean, healing liniments until it is healed."
"If it does not heal and again becomes inflamed as before," "know that you have not yet reached the bottom:"
"So uncover and probe until you reach the bottom;" "And remove all the corruption, then dress it properly."
"and if it is healed in this way, that's good." "But if not, know that the corruption is too deep for you to reach;" "So there is no other remedy than leaving it alone to nature:"
"And if there is a small piece of corrupted bone that you can grasp with forceps," "remove it with an appropriate instrument;"
"And if there are many pieces of bone, crush them all finely and leave not one behind;"
"If moisture opposes you, and there is no mistake or fear," "then cut through flesh, moisture, and bone, and free the bones."
"And if you cannot remove them at once, apply a warm poultice to absorb corruption;" "and leave it until the surrounding area is softened;"
"then they will be easier to remove."
"And if it is a large bone, such as in the thigh or leg," "scrape off only the corruption until all blackness is removed;" "then dress the wound."
"And if there is much corrupted flesh reaching up to the bone," "It must be scraped down to the corruption and then treated until it is solid;"
"I will tell you about a fistula that occurred in one man's leg," So that you may take example and aid from this in your work.
There was a young man around thirty years old who had pain in his leg caused by something that entered his body.
Until the matter came to the leg,
"But physicians through their folly operated so much upon him that they opened up the abscesses." "and as they scraped away many materials, it turned into a fistula, and there came many openings that all poured out bowels and moisture from the body."
"And for about two years many physicians treated him, but there was no skilled surgeon among them,"
"So I was called in, and saw his leg and the medications they were treating him with," "And what ran through the openings was great corruption." "And the young man's skin became red, and he had a lemon-colored hue."
"I applied a poultice to one of these openings, and then searched for all the openings,"
"and found that they were connected to each other throughout the whole leg."
"I therefore hurried and cut into one of the openings until I discovered a portion of the bone," "and found it rotten and penetrated by corruption which had reached the bone inside."
"I removed what appeared to me of the rotted bone, and believed that there was no other corruption besides what I had taken out,"
"And began to dress the wound with dry medicines for a long time, but could not heal it."
"Then I reopened and again discovered the bone as before,"
"And found that the corruption had continued into the bone, and scraped it away and removed it, and then tried to heal the wound."
"But I could not do so until I cut around about a palm's width of bone and completely removed it." "Then I dressed it with medicines, and he was soon healed and soundly."
"And there was no need to reopen the work except for the weakness of the patient, who could not tolerate," "and because of my fear that he might die." "For after the evacuation of blood he often swooned, but nevertheless he was entirely healed,"
"For after the evacuation of blood he often swooned, but nevertheless he was entirely healed," "And in the place of the bone there grew hard flesh, and he was in good condition and suffered neither harm nor disadvantage at any time thereafter."
"And stretch out the head so that you can pull out the rotted flesh underneath," "And uncover the flesh where you want to see it, so that the bone does not blanch the flesh." "And put a hot ember or a red-hot iron under the bone to burn away the rotted flesh;" "And this must be done until one can see and feel that the rottenness is gone, and it must still be repeated."
"If the bone itself is rotten and does not open up, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part," "then uncover all the flesh; then put a hot ember underneath,"
"and then scrape away the corruption from one part to the other with an iron that is as long as the corruption itself, as we have said;"
"And if the corruption is in a joint, cut away the rotted joint and scrape the bone that it contains from the other side,"
"If the corruption is in the continuity of two joints, then there is no other choice but to cut it away."
"And if the corruption is at the palm of the hand or the sole of the foot, that is very serious indeed," "But nonetheless you must inquire how this corruption opens up," "And clean it in every way that you can, but make sure that the veins or nerves do not get in your way;"
"and know that there are many types of incisions and irons for cutting these bones according to their position and appearance," "according to their thickness and thinness, and their size and smallness, and their hardness;" "And therefore it is necessary to equip each type of bone with its appropriate instrument."
"And know that this work will show you the instrument that you will need according to your knowledge of this art," "and the testimony of the ways in which diseases occur;" "So consider the instrument that you need according to what is appropriate for it."
"from fire" "The flesh decays either due to an internal cause or due to a lack of something."
"And when you have treated that corruption with medicinal cures and they do not help," "then it is necessary to cut off that member until the place where the corruption begins," "So that the sick person escapes from death through this means, or at least avoids the greater harm of losing a limb."
"So that the sick person escapes from death through this means, or at least avoids the greater harm of losing a limb." "And the sign is that the limb becomes black, as if it had been burnt by fire," "and after this blackness comes corruption of limb after limb," "And spreads throughout the body; so hurry to cut it off,"
"If it is due to the sting of some venomous creatures such as scorpions, vipers and similar ones,"
"if the corruption is at the top of the thigh, cut it off, without letting it come close to the hand."
"And if it comes as far as the hand, then cut it off at the joint so that the corruption does not reach the arm;"
"And if it reaches the arm, cut it off at the elbow; and if it goes beyond the elbow, that is death." "There are no remedies that can help other than those of great power;"
"And the same applies when corruption reaches the foot: if it reaches the first joint, cut it off after the next joint;"
"And if it comes to the ankle, cut off the whole foot." "And if it reaches the leg, cut off at the knee joint;"
"And if it goes above the knee, there is no other option but to let the sick person die."
"The manner of cutting off or sewing up the member is that you tie it above and below," "And extend some assistants one towards the lower tie, and others towards the upper one," "And cut open the flesh between the two ties with a wide spatula until the bone is exposed;"
"then cut it off or sew it up, and place on each side a linen cloth so that the suture does not touch the healthy area," "And come to the sick person's other wounds and ulcers."
"And if bleeding occurs while you are operating, cauterize it immediately," "or put on some constricting powders. Then return to your treatment until it is completed."
"Then tie the wounded member with a suitable bandage and treat it until it heals;"
"And I will tell you what happened to one man in sumpter:"
"He had a blackness that seemed like being burnt by fire,"
"And this corruption first appeared on his foot's big toe and spread to affect the whole foot;"
"But when the man saw the corruption, he quickly cut off his foot and was healed."
"And some time later the corruption returned to the big toe of his hand, and he came to me,"
"I put on things that reflected heat after cleansing his body, but the corruption could not be stopped;"
"But he wanted me to cut off his hand, and I refused because I hoped to drive back the material;" "And I also doubted that if I cut off his hand, he would die." "because the man's strength was weak; and he became completely discouraged and returned home," "And he quickly cut off his hand and was healed."
"And I have told you this story only so that others may learn from it what to do if they are ever in need."
"Sometimes an ulcer appears in a fleshy area and lasts so long that it attracts many flies;" "And then it becomes round and hollows out, and the flies jump into it and leave the area empty like a vessel." "And the skin that is above it is as thin as delicate silk;" "But it does not go down to the bone or nerve, and such a disease is called 'healthy.'"
"But if it extends so far that it reaches the bone inside, then it is called a fistula;"
"And the skin is such that you must cut all around it, especially if it is thin like silk;" "And do not be afraid of its corruption."
"But if you think that the skin is dangerous and the corruption is not deep," And the hide is thick with flesh; thus treat it with an enema:
Look if the breast is large and the bowel that comes out has a foul odor Then apply an Egyptian suppository made thus: Take equal parts of senna, oil, and litharge, and put them in a vessel on the fire until the medicine is red and becomes as thick as honey;
Then take some according to your need, and mix it with water and honey and insert the suppository into the anus, and close the opening. Let the medicine remain there for two hours, then remove it by squeezing it out
Do this as many times as necessary until the breast is softened and the foul odor is gone
and once anointed with water containing ashes When this medicine is not present and you take ashes from vine wood and pour water over them
then strain it and apply it as an enema until you know that the breast is well cleansed.
And if the patient cannot tolerate this or if the Egyptian suppository or water containing ashes Then use an enema of water and honey with a little crushed litharge in it Or you may use an enema made from melted honey and wine that has the property to cleanse and wash and the wine makes the wound dry.
And when you have done this and are confident that the breast is well cleansed then apply an enema made from those things which cause flesh to form in it
Take diaphoretic plaster and make a poultice with rose oil and wine or use other medicines and oils of which I have spoken their properties when treating oils
And if the opening of the breast is small and the tube for the enema cannot be inserted then dilate it slightly with an iron and insert a tampon soaked in Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it is widened.
And if the wound is too wide, then apply a stitch and leave it only for one hour so that the enema can be inserted
And if the opening that secretes milk is above, then make an incision somewhat lower than where it is. For when the breast is deep, do not let flesh grow in it And if you cannot close the wound underneath as you see it then prepare it in such a way that the breast is directed towards the lowest point where it is.
And if you cannot close up underneath as you see it then prepare it in such a way that the breast slopes slightly downward and do not leave any part of the breast protruding Take medicines that strengthen to apply on the breast
and lay over it one cloth made of linen which covers the whole breast. Then close up tightly around the opening of the breast, about a little larger than the first one Then apply soft ointment on another cloth according to the size of the opening and place it over the opening of the breast to support the breast and do not remove the large cloth outside until after many days once
And the one on the opening of the breast is removed often in order to remove the milk. Know what comes out of the breast, whether it is venom or little or enough, whether digested or undigested
Take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not.
And when your treatment has extended in this way and you see that the milk begins to flow from the opening of the breast then know that the breast is beginning to heal and the health is approaching.
And then remove it in the morning or on the third day, and when you remove the wound then change another cloth and renew the ointment.
And if after many days the breast continues to secrete undigested milk, know that the breast is not healing. And if subtle poisons come out after a long time, do not despair of the health
For health is approaching. For there are men for whom it takes a long time for flesh to grow in their wounds and others who have the opposite condition.
And if undigested milk flows from the breast after many days, know that the breast is not healing.
And if the breast takes a long time to heal and is prolapsed, apply drying medicines in substance and in power. such as diaphoretic ointment, for there is a large part of vitriol in it, and this is the last medicine.
Take diaphoretic ointment, made with rose oil, and rise it with old wine equal in substance
then cook it and use it; and this is better cooked until thickened. When diaphoretic ointments are not available
or take myrrh and aloe and incense, grind them, and powder them onto the honey while it is on the fire; And then apply a cloth, one draught, to it, and stretch it over the breast; sometimes an astrologer long is administered there and roots of celestial lily, which is also like wheat flour and oatmeal
and roots of celestial lily, which is also like wheat flour and oatmeal And in the case of simple or composite herbs: grind them up, make them into powder, and apply honey as mentioned above And if the cure is prolonged, and not cured by this treatment
And if the cure is prolonged, and not cured by this treatment Then know that the corruption has penetrated deeply, causing pressure on the bone, or in hard members, or in joints If it is a fistula cure, as we said earlier.
of the boil of the toe
Panarice is a boil that arises under the nail of the thumb of the hand or sometimes it appears on other toes
And when it is neglected and not taken care of, a large boil forms there and they run and spread so much that they reach the root of the nail, sometimes even entirely consuming it
And the corruption reaches the bone, causing a foul-smelling pain; the skin of the toe is swollen and reddened in color.
When you treat it as we have described in that section, but the treatment does not help Then you must cut off about a third of the nail with iron tongs, removing all the excess Then cauterize the wound afterwards The cautery is greatly beneficial if the bone and the nail are healthy
and if the nail presses on the flesh and starts to throb and become inflamed then you must put the root of the plantain under the nail where the flesh is pointing and bring it upwards, and cut off that tender and delicate flesh gently and apply burning and corrosive medications to the remaining flesh to remove all of it
And if the corruption has reached the bone, cut it out and cauterize the wound, for as long as the bone remains corrupted, it cannot heal.
And if you see that the toe is rotting, then cut it off with iron tongs as described earlier then treat it until it is healed
And if it becomes gangrenous and putrid, causing great pain, then you must first cleanse it Then cut the nail of the big toe with the sharp edge of the scissors across the top
and be careful that the cut does not reach the flesh beneath the nail, for the patient would feel great pain
And if it happens, apply something to ease the pain
Some men have toes that are very fatty in their hands and sometimes there is bone or even nail present
and some of them grow at the root of the joint or on one of the toes. He who is born with a knot of the two does not move and he who is born at the joint of the two sometimes moves
The waist of one who is fleshly is light in this way waist to its root by a wide spatula.
He who is born at the root of the joint is difficult to cure, so he should hold onto the cover
In one who is born or has a knot in the hind part of the joint, it is necessary to first cut around the flesh up to the bone then cut the bone with a suitable saw, then cure it until it is sound.
The sinews that come together at the two joints come by birth, or by the union of a wound, or by burning with fire, or by similar things.
It is necessary to cut this union so that the limbs return according to their natural shapes; "Then place between two tents or cloths moistened with rosewater oil, so they do not adhere." Or you place between two pieces of thin lead until the joint is well seated, as it should be.
If swelling occurs on either side with the palm, scrape away this scurf as needed.
Of wounds
Wounds are swollen, large blisters filled with melancholic excess matter that come from many parts of the body.
And they happen more often in legs of those who walk and work and carry things than in others
Therefore you should administer to him a laxative for the colon, and then the holy water of the basilica.
The cure with iron is done in two ways: one is to cut it and draw out the black blood from the wound; And the other way is to lift the blister and draw out all its contents.
The cauterization should be done in this manner: first, raise the leg with hot water very strongly, until the large blood is subtilized; then strap the sick leg from above the hip down to below the knee joint; Then cut the blister in one place or two or three with a wide cauterization tool;
Then remove and draw out the black blood with your hand, from one end to the other, until as much blood comes out as the patient's virtue can bear.
And then wash it off, and command that they bind him tightly with flesh-colored bandages around his blackened neck;
and begin again the evacuation and cleansing when the vessels are full, for it harms the patient.
The elevation of the limb is done in this manner: raise the leg of the patient, if there is much hair then place it in a bath and pour hot water over the leg until it turns red and swells the vessels;
And if you have no bath, then heat it by the fire, and then wrap it around near the vessel of the long bone at the top of the knee or below at the ankle;
then open the skin with an awl and strip back the vessel from each side until it becomes apparent when touched.
and when you see it red and black, and when it enters the skin it looks like a white thread.
then push the probe underneath until it raises the vessel from the skin, and then pierce it lightly with an awl
Then place a second compress three fingers away from the first one, then strip back the skin over the vessel until it becomes visible then raise it with your finger, just as you did before, and pierce it with another awl in the same manner
Then place another compress or several if needed, then raise it again and secure it at the two ends of the foot
then traction and elevation until you reach the second compress, then extract it compress by compress until it comes out entirely, then secure it.
And if you cannot traction and elevate it, then insert a strong doubled thread needle into the vessel and tie it off and traction it, and place your finger underneath, turning your hand back and forth until it comes out entirely. And be sure that it does not slip away because if it does slip away then you cannot traction or elevate it and harm will come to the patient.
And once you have completely extracted it, then place on the wound area wool moistened with wine and rose oil, and let it soak until it is clean.
And if the vessel is contracted, twisted, and coiled together, and not straight as we have said, It is necessary that you cut it incorrectly, but do not cover it; and draw it as we have previously said.
It is necessary that you cut it incorrectly, but do not cover it; and draw it as we have previously said. The shape of the iron with which one covers the screw is curved, and it does not cut, so that it covers the thread.
"If it were thin, it would block the vein, but let it be thick as we have said; this is the form:"
Of civil war
This vein is inserted into legs, warm regions where no herbs or trees grow, and in land with no moisture.
And sometimes it appears elsewhere than in the legs, which happens due to rot that originates beneath the skin
like when it enters the body like serpents and worms, inserted between skin and flesh.
And the sign that this vein has begun is that there is a very great inflammation in the leg then the location changes and the vein begins to emerge from its hiding place, like a plant's root.
When the flesh opens, you must wrap around it a piece of linen two and a half fingers wide up to two fingers, and knot
and leave the linen hanging on the leg; whenever blood flows out again, wrap the linen around it and tie it. And if it's too long, cut off part of it, wrap the remaining piece around it, but do not cut its root until it has all emerged. For if you cut it, it will retreat into the flesh and cause an abscess and rot at that location, leading to a bad illness
Therefore, it must be treated gradually until its head appears and none remains in the body
And sometimes this vein is as long as five palms or ten and a man once came to me whose vein was twenty palms long; when you cut it, it will gush out one quart or more, and pierce all the way through to its depth
until all of it comes out; then empty the matter inside and apply medicine at that location to prevent rot for a few days before treating it like an abscess.
And sometimes this vein has many branches, especially when it opens in the ankle of the foot or on the foot itself and there are many holes from which blood flows; therefore treat it as we have said before.
Concerning worms that arise between skin and flesh
This disease is called in our land "cattle sickness," because it often occurs among oxen,
"And there exists a small worm which is born between skin and flesh, traveling up and down throughout the body," "and it can be felt well as it travels from limb to limb, until it reaches the skin where it goes away;
"And it is caused by putrefaction of certain humours, such as come worms and serpents, and tapeworms, and roundworms in the belly;
"And its harmfulness is doubted, for when it travels through the body and ascends to the head, it reaches the eye," "perhaps it enters and destroys the eye; this happens many times."
"When you see one being cleaned and drawn out, then one can only perceive it when it moves:"
"So it is necessary that you tie the wound above and below with a strong thread, very tightly,"
"then cut on top of it and draw it out, and if the worm has burrowed deeply into the flesh and you do not find it," "then cauterize it with fire until it dies;"
"And the greatest harm that it causes is that it blinds the eye, as we have said;"
"But if you see it coming near the head close to the eye, press down on the eyebrow tightly below it, then cut above and draw it out;"
"And it is necessary to use the remedy of purification of the body with dissolving medicines for putrid humours,"
"and beware of eating decaying meats."
On the Pain That Comes from Flatulence "This disease is called in our land 'wakiir' and is a pain that occurs in certain limbs," "and then it moves from limb to limb; and I have seen what I tell you."
"I was summoned to see an ill woman, and when I examined her arm, I saw a small swelling in the armpit;"
"And shortly afterward, she saw something like a worm rising to the shoulder," "more quickly than anything else, as if it were quicksilver moving from one place to another;"
"The pain moved away from that spot and lodged itself in the shoulder,"
"and then shortly thereafter it spread throughout her body until it reached the other arm;"
"then she told me that she was continually turning around her body as I saw."
"I was greatly amazed at how she moved from limb to limb in this way, for I had never seen this disease manifest itself like this before." "Nevertheless, I had often seen pain move from one place to another," "But I had never seen it like this before, as I saw in this woman;"
"And I thought that perhaps this was because the woman had a dry body and exposed armpits," "and therefore this constrained wind appeared;"
"And it is not seen in those who are delicate and have moist bodies and concealed armpits."
"And when you see this disease being cured, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears as we have described," "if the skin above and below rises quickly, and then suddenly contracts so much that the constrained wind breaks out at that spot;" "And cauterize the spot; if you don’t see it with your own eyes,"
"then treat it as one would treat windy conditions, such as with fetid pills, pills of saffron, and similar remedies."
"Regarding hiccups:"
"The causes of hiccups are varied according to their appearances and the parts of the body where they occur."
"There are various kinds of hiccups: some have sharp points, others have small ones, some are hairy, and some are smooth;" "and there are those with two angles, those with tongues, and those with fragments;" "And hiccups that occur in any limb do so in one of two ways: either they come from the main limb,"
"such as the head, heart, liver, lung, kidney, intestines, bladder, and similar limbs." "When hiccups occur in any part of these limbs, and you see the signs of death that I will tell you about later:" "you must beware of extracting this hiccup, for death often follows in many cases;" "And when this bad sign is not apparent and the hiccup is not deep, then treat it and heal the wound."
"The sign of hiccups occurring in the head is when they pierce the bone and cause the fontanelle above the brain to bulge out;" "and when there is darkness and dizziness and vertigo and redness in the eyes, inflammation of the tongue and its redness, spasm and confusion of the mind, and vomiting of bile." "And sometimes there is fluid from the nose or ears; sometimes speech and voice are lost;" "and there suddenly appears moist white flesh resembling that of chickens, and also burning like raw flesh;"
"And if this sign is apparent to you, then beware of treating it; extract the hiccup only if it is not inside."
"The signs that hiccups occur in the heart are when they are close to the left nipple and feel as if they were stuck in something hard, not empty;" "And sometimes hiccups move like those of chickens, and there is black blood; coldness and cold sweat come on, and syncope occurs;" "then know for certain that death is near."
"The sign of hiccups that occur near the lung is when foamless sputum suddenly comes from the wound; the throat swells up and the patient changes color, sighs loudly, and seeks cold air."
"And if hiccups occur in the covering of the stomach, near the ribs, they cause much belching and great pain with sighing; all the members of the shoulders move."
"And if hiccups occur in the stomach, sometimes undigested meat comes out from the wound."
"And if hiccups occur in the belly and blood flows through the intestines suddenly, there is no hope of recovery or extraction of the hiccup."
"And if hiccups occur in the bladder and urine suddenly comes out with blood, and the patient feels strong pain, know that the wound is mortal."
"Other limbs, such as the face, neck, throat, shoulder, auxiliary muscles, spinal column, buttocks, thighs, and legs, etc., are safe according to many conditions." "When hiccups occur in a nerve or artery and are not venomous, as I will tell you happened to me so that you may do the same."
"It happened to one man that hiccups struck him in the arm at the root of his nose;" "I probed it and extracted it on the other side beneath the ear's fat, without causing any harm."
"And I extracted one hiccup that struck in the fat of the eye under its membrane," "and the hiccup was embedded, and I could hardly touch it except for its tip facing towards the wood;" "And the hiccup was as large as an archer's bowstring, easily extracted without causing any pain or harm to the eye; the man recovered and had no bad consequences."
"I extracted a hiccup from a Christian's throat; it was large like an Arabian's ear;"
"After shaving his beard, I probed carefully and extracted the hiccup; the Christian recovered."
"I extracted a hiccup from one man who had it in his belly; I thought he was going to die;"
"but after thirty days passed, his condition did not change;" "I cut into the hiccup, extracted it with forceps, and there were no bad consequences."
"And once I saw a man whom hiccups struck in the back; the wound had healed on top;"
"but the hiccup remained inside him and did not change his natural condition;" "He found no harm in any of his natural works."
"I saw another man whom hiccups struck on the face; the wound had healed;"
"and it remained inside without causing him great pain; there were many similar cases."
"I extracted one hiccup from a man of the king's household who had it in his nose;" "And it was somewhat inclined towards the right side, and the hiccup was completely embedded;"
"I was called to treat him three days after he was struck; I found the wound very narrow."
"I probed it carefully with a delicate probe but could not feel it;" "And he felt pain and discomfort under his right ear." "I thought that it was due to the tip of the hiccup;"
"So I applied an attracting plaster on the spot so that the wound would not swell;" "And then the hiccup's head appeared."
"And then the hiccup's head appeared." "I applied the plaster for several days until the wound healed again; the sick man remained thus for a long time;"
Until he feels the arrowhead for one day inside his flesh; and he tells you this I applied hot corrosive medication to the wound several times until it healed completely
and I felt around and found the tip of the arrowhead sticking out; then I applied this hot medication to the wound opening until the tip of the arrowhead was clearly visible
and the healing continued well for four months
but then I tore open the wound so that I could insert forceps and pull from both sides, but it would not come out
so then I kept experimenting with different methods using various tools until finally, one day, I grabbed it successfully with well-made forceps according to what is described at the end of this chapter, so that I could pull it out and close the wound
And the physicians judged that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: so I closed it up again, and the wound healed completely, and the patient was entirely cured
I have told you about the extraction of some arrowheads, "Therefore you should rely on what I do not mention, as books cannot cover everything."
"But wise teachers compare a few things carefully, including what is present and missing." True work, and nine instruments are needed for the extraction of foreign bodies occurring in this art.
I say that splinters exit from the limbs where they are inserted only in two ways either through the place where they entered,
"and that which jumps out where it enters is an arrow entering flesh, and sometimes jumps out now."
"And if it does not jump out now, let it remain until the wound around it closes up, then the joint will be released."
"And if it is stuck in the bone and cannot come out, let it remain like this for a few days, moving it each day."
"and then it will jump out; and if it does not jump out, bore all around with a fine needle until the place is widened, then pull it."
"And if the arrowhead is buried in the flesh so that one cannot see it, search for it by touch all around;" "and if you feel it, pull it out with some suitable instrument."
"And if you cannot because of the narrowness of the wound and the depth of the arrowhead," "then cut until the wound is large enough." "And pull out the arrowhead if you can, and if there are barbs on it that hold it in place,"
"And pull out the arrowhead if you can, and if there are barbs on it that hold it in place," "then cut off the flesh that is stuck into it from two sides as much as you can," "and then break or bend the barbs of the arrowhead so that you can pull it out."
"and then break or bend the barbs of the arrowhead so that you can pull it out." "And be careful not to break the arrowhead while pulling it out, so as not to cause more pain."
"And if you cannot do it all at once, leave the arrowhead until the wound around it is healed, then pull it out, for extraction will be easier." "And if bleeding makes you faint, apply the treatments that we have described in our chapter on wounds."
"and beware of cutting into nerves and veins, and devise how you can pull out the arrowhead without danger."
"Soon or late, firmly or gently; place the patient according to the position he was in when the arrow struck him," "for that is the greatest help there is, and if you cannot do it, place him according to the signs that indicate to you how."
"The arrowhead that sticks out on the other side and shows through can be pulled out easily,"
Cut then until the forceps can grasp it, and then pull it out; if now it is burning.
And if it is stuck in the bone, twist your hand round until it enters the bone and widen the bone, then pull it out.
And if it cannot come out, leave it for now and then resume traction until it comes out completely;
and if the pin of the splint is there, remove the splint from the entire bone
and if the bone falls and you see that reduction must be applied, then apply one traction device so that the point of the splint enters into the socket of the traction device; and then pull it out
and if the splint is stuck in place, insert one pointed traction device inside to aid with traction
And if the splint has been cut, then you must cut all the flesh around where the veins are, if you can then dress the wound as it should be dressed.
And if the splint falls on or near the bladder or the belly or the ribs and it is close by and you can cut it off, then do so
and be careful not to cut the vein or the nerve, then pull it out and then sew up the wound if necessary. and care for it until it is healed
The shape of the forceps used to treat splints is similar to a bird's beak, and here is the form:
And there are many types of them: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
of the veins of the common flesh The veins that drain are 31, from which there are 16 at the head,
It is to know: two bat-like structures located after the ears, called the temples "herbich". and the two arteries that are in the two visible temples. and two veins located on either side of each eye called "aspirates". and the vein that runs across the forehead; and the vein at the top of the nose. and the two tendons located on the neck and the two veins that are above the upper lip of the mouth, which are called "augeherich". And there are two veins beneath the tongue
The common veins in each arm are five in number
One of these is the cephalic vein, which runs along the right side of the chest and is commonly called "the vein of the head" by laypeople and the median vein is called "fasta", composed of the cephalic and basilica veins and it is commonly called "the heart vein" by laypeople, while the basilica runs along the left side and they call it the abdominal vein, which is above the forearm bone It is also called the anterior interosseous vein, which is clearly visible in the forearm.
The savatella vein is located between the little finger and the ring finger on both sides
In the leg and foot, there are three veins: And the second sphenoid bone, which is at the ankle of the right side; and the vein called "nesse", which is in the ankle of the other side.
And there are three veins underneath those on the other leg
The sacredness of the veins that are behind the ears helps against old catarrhs and migraine. And the qualities of the sanctity, as I told you, are such that you should raise the head of the patient
And the qualities of the sanctity, as I told you, are such that you should raise the head of the patient Then rub the place where the veins are with a rough cloth; then strap the patient's neck with a vise until the two veins appear behind the ears in two dependent places on the head Then grasp them with your two fingers and where you feel the pulse beneath your fingers, then squeeze firmly
Then take the lancet, and thrust it under the vein up to the bone; then lift your hand all along the upstream vein and cut through skin and vein well with two fingers across, and let out blood until you see it
Then bind and tie it, until it is stanched
And I have already said about the incision and cauterization in the first book.
The sanctity of the two arteries that are in the two temples is good against old migraines and soda, and customary ophthalmia, and to the course of tears gone astray in the eyes
And the qualities of the sanctity are such as I have said: And it is that the patient straps their neck so that the two veins appear clearly and feel the pulse beneath your fingers and then squeeze firmly
Then lift the skin upwards on the vein with your index finger, and thrust the lancet underneath and lift up the vein and cut it, just as you did with the other two veins, and let out blood according to your necessity
then untie the patient, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on it
And then tie it firmly and leave it until it is stanched. And we have already spoken about their cutting and extracting in the beginning of the book.
The sanctity of the frontal vein is just as valuable as that of the cephalic vein for old diseases of the face, migraines, and redness
And its qualities are such that the patient twists their neck until the veins appear Then take the instrument called "the fossor," of which this is the shape:
And place the point on the vein, and press down with your hand or something else, and let out blood according to the quantity that you see. Then untie the patient's neck, and tie the vein until it is stanched, sometimes with a wide flame
Nevertheless, it is not necessary for the bandages to be too tight; and tie them diagonally, because the bone is nearby, and by chance the bandage may break if it is too thin.
The sanctity of the two veins that are in the two eyelids helps with the eyes and with dizziness, redness, inflammation of the eye, and diseases of the face
And its qualities are such that the patient twists their neck with any kind of tie, as before
then sanctify it and make the sanctity diagonal, somewhat long and somewhat wide, because there is no flesh.
And if the bandage is too thin, it may break. Then let out blood according to your necessity and then tie on cotton, tying it tightly
The sanctity of the nasal vein is beneficial for ague, frenzied soda, and diseases of the face especially for migraines and redness that come in the face, particularly when they are old.
And its qualities are such that the patient twists their neck and then holds their nose with your left hand and take a thin long bandage and insert it between the two nostrils in the space that is between them because the vein does not appear well here, and blood will begin to flow now
and do not go too deep, and let out blood according to your necessity, then tie it for one night because it is very quickly restored
The sanctity of the two large veins helps with the stretching of the small intestine, the beginning of worms, and many diseases, and with eczema, corrosion, herpetic infections, and eruptions
And its qualities are such that the patient twists their neck on both sides, as we have said and let the master be standing on the head of the patient and the patient sit on a chair
then sanctify the vein lengthwise somewhat widely and then let out blood temperately or according to necessity
then repeat on the other vein and untie the tie and press gently between the veins so that the patient does not strangle themselves. Leave it until morning when the wound is healed.
On the sanctity of the lips The sanctity of the veins above the lips helps with coughing in the mouth and with gum corrosion, lip fissures, nosebleeds, and around the nostrils
And its qualities are such that you make the patient sit in front of you and twist their neck as I have said then turn the lip and look for two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the leftlip and recognize them by their black color and by the small dark veins around them then sanctify both of them if you cannot recognize them or if you are unsure
then sanctify both of them if you cannot recognize them or if you are unsure "Cut off the thickest one from each side,
Of the healing beneath the tongue The healing of the veins that are beneath the tongue helps after the cephalic vein, and it is at the narrowing of the throat, and with diseases of the eye, and with diseases of the mouth
and the characteristics of the veins are that the patient should raise his hands before the sun, and lift the tongue, and look beneath on each side for a black vein
Then heal one and the other, but do not go too deep, because below are the arteries
The veins of the arm which are commonly treated are healed in two ways
either by pricking with one flame of myrtle or olive oil subtly as with a narrow sword, and it is called "aneasile" and are wide or thin according to the width and narrowing of the veins The form of the myrtle flame is very well-known, and it is wide as you see
And it is necessary to open the veins that are smooth and full of thick blood in order to release thick and turbid blood and this is the form of the olive flame
and it is more finely pointed and is for healing thin veins that contain clear yellow blood
The healing of the basilica vein, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are beneath the throat, neck, cheek, and belly
and it is necessary for the physician to heal it carefully, and to beware of the artery that lies below it. And if he cuts the artery, and blood begins to flow copiously, then he should press upon it as I have said and the flame should not be pointed but cutting like a knife.
And if the basilica does not open up clearly, then it is necessary for you to draw it out and change to another one or any vein that you want from it, or you heal in its place the vein in the arm: it opens up clearly and cut with the flame called "anesile" as we have said.
And if you wish to know the place for healing, then it is also necessary that you draw out the arm and touch the place until you feel the pulse then mark the place with incense and then bind the arm and cut the vein with the flame called "anesile"
and beware that you do not wound the artery when you see the place swell up, for it is of the artery: avoid it therefore.
And if you see something come out above like urine from a child, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is blood from the artery then quickly place your finger on top for a long time, then remove your finger if the bleeding stops, which happens many times
if you bind the arm and leave it thus, and do not move it yourself nor let the sick person move it until they are healed.
And if the blood is not stopped and you faint, and there is no physician present, then cut the artery if it is open for the sake of the head; and stop the bleeding.
And take a fig leaf, slit it open, and take one half and bind it well until the next day
if the bleeding has stopped, that is good; if not, then heal it as we have said with powders that stop bleeding
and stopping the bleeding is not important in many cases for a small wound and the strength of the binding on the arm.
The healing of the vein in the middle helps to draw blood from the head above and the body below, Because it is composed of basilica and cephalic parts, as we have said;
and the surgeon must warn himself about the nerve that is underneath, and if it is not too deep, he finds the nerve and he inflates [the joint] and the patient suffers injury, and perhaps cannot recover
This nerve opens up very often, and if it does not open in some people due to its subtlety, then you must heal it with the anesthesia tool; and follow the nerve as much as possible.
And if there is space between the two nerves, make an incision along it
The surgery of the cephalic [bone] helps to draw blood from the head, and aids healing as well
and one must operate by gripping the olive-shaped or mirt-shaped flame, for that is the safest of all the spaces because it does not have any nerve or artery underneath.
Nevertheless, one should try to find the easiest place [to operate], and do not harm anything if one fails at first; then one can begin again and perhaps the site may swell in some people when it is operated upon incorrectly at first, but it does no harm The quality of the surgery depends on your skill.
The first thing you should know about surgery is that it was invented only to preserve health
and to avoid future illnesses and let surgery be done in one of the three spaces that are found there: namely, the cephalic, the fastigium, and the basilar and one should operate at the beginning of springtime, and in autumn and winter after meals, when the sign ofpletion appears
and one should operate on the first or third day, after two or three hours from dawn.
The surgery that is performed for illnesses has no fixed time; but when there is need of it, it can be done at any hour and at all times
and one should not operate on children under fourteen years old, nor on women during the first four months of pregnancy up to seven months Nor should one operate on the elderly who have passed sixty years of age
And when someone wants to undergo surgery in any way, they should cleanse their bowels with a light suppository if there is much feces retained, so that the veins do not draw the impurities from the intestines to harm the main members
nor should one operate on those who are too fond of meat, nor those who are drunk at that time, nor dropsical people
and one should avoid operating after a bout of colic, vomiting, diarrhea, menstruation in women, hard labor, excessive vigilance or fasting, and those who are completely without virtue, or who have been struck by a weapon or disease
then refine the humors if the blood is thick, with foods and drinks and medications, if you are able to do so
then take a bath if nothing prevents it, to refine the blood
and operate in the space around the third rib on the side of the chest, as we have said
and on that day avoid work, food, and sexual intercourse, etc.;
and be calm and cheerful, and let the surgeon be taller than the patient, and let them wipe their hands twice or three times;
Then strain the linen moderately above, for when it is too tight or short, blood cannot flow.
And then rub the joint with both hands until you can feel the veins swell under them.
Then let him moisten the flame of a small piece of old oil with water, then place his left hand's thumb on that vein below where he wishes to cauterize. Ensure that the vein does not bulge or swell when cauterizing. Because there are veins that flee like cords to the sinew, and there are some that are full of windiness. Therefore, when one places heat on it, it retreats from the heat and cannot open the vein; thus are some of those.
But if it opens the vein, then the wound is too narrow, therefore the surgeon must be skilled in such matters.
And if the vein opens on the first try, that is good; but if not, then restart a little lower or higher, as long as the area is not inflamed.
And if the area is inflamed and the patient is afraid, let it be for one or two days without tying the arm: for perhaps some swelling will come about; do not enter into a bath, then restart the surgery if he wishes.
And if the opening is small or the skin covers it finely and you doubt that there is not much blood issuing from it, then apply all the heat directly to that opening itself;
and open it quickly before the area becomes inflamed; for this happens many times when the wound is small.
If you see the area becoming inflamed, do not restart the surgery and apply a little oil mixed with lye, for it lightens the body's blood and is gentle in this place.
And thus administer the oil-and-lye mixture in every surgery that you perform on veins to stop the flow of blood.
And this same remedy makes thrice and bowels of those who place it on the area; for it subtly draws out the blood and disperses it when it is too abundant.
And if a large swelling comes about, which happens often, especially when the vein is not opened far enough during that first attempt where the opening of the vein was small, then hurry and apply a sponge moistened in warm water mixed with salt to the area, and leave it on for an hour;
and you must do this after the blood has issued from the vein, and if there remains afterward some blackness or greenness on the area for a few days, it will not harm. And if you see that there is still something remaining, apply something of aloe or myrrh mixed in juice of calamint, mastich, or similar.
And often there is swelling and appearance of inflammation at the time of surgery like that of the basilisk: therefore place your hand upon it, and if you find the area soft under the pressure of your hand, then that appearance is bad. Therefore be sure not to apply any of the remedies we have mentioned, for perhaps blood would flow from the artery; but instead make one dry dressing to harden the area, then treat it with another remedy until it is healed.
And draw off blood according to its quantity and according to its color.
For if the blood is black, let it flow until it becomes red; and if it is thick, let it flow until it becomes thinned; and if it is too hot, let it cool.
And he who is full and fat, and has need of bloodletting, should have a larger wound made for him, and the opening should be wide;
and he who is weak should have the opposite done to him: let him be bled but little and often, and he must be bled in cutting across, not in pricking.
And this manner of bloodletting saves from loss of blood and injury to nerves, and is better than that done with a long or wide incision.
And to him whose body fails during bloodletting, it is necessary to give bread moistened in juice of pomegranates; if he is overheated, let him have blood drawn three or four times
And if he is of cold temperament, let him eat before bloodletting bread moistened in musk syrup or in spiced honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chicory, and a well-scented syrup.
And if he faints during bloodletting after much blood has flowed, it is necessary that he inhale broth of meat and a subtle, fragrant syrup
and use the other remedies that we have mentioned in the chapter on syncope for the evacuation of veins.
And if he wishes to empty the arm vein and be bled again later, it is necessary that when he is weakened by much bloodletting, he be bled little by little according to his continuous virtue.
And whoever wishes to empty the arm vein after the first bloodletting and has a strong body, should be bled seven hours after the first bleeding or after the ninth hour.
And whoever wishes to have blood drawn from another vein should be bled on the second day or the third day.
For there is much blood in the body that has already been heated and causes fever; therefore it is necessary to draw off a great quantity of it and widen the opening so that it flows freely. Then when you have completed all the conditions for bloodletting and placed your hand on the pulse while bleeding, make sure that the mouth does not come in place of the opening and this happens often if the bloodletter is careless.
And do not do this when you see that the arm has been untied and blood is flowing for the second time, and if the opening is closed, then press strongly upon it. nor if it is curved, let him straighten his arm quickly, for that would be bad
but let it flow until he bleeds the second time; or prick at the point of the opening until the frozen blood from the vein's mouth flows out. And apply a little salt mixed with water and press gently upon it.
And if the vein is swollen, let it be and do not squeeze it until the inflammation has subsided.
And if there is a necessity to draw blood a second time, do so in the same vein or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The veins in the arm are bled in place of the head vein because they are connected.
And the manner of bloodletting is that the patient puts his hand into warm water until the veins become red;
then let it be tied moderately so that the veins appear well, then bleed now across, not widely or deeply;
and let the opening be wide, and bleed well near the joint of the hand; and if blood cannot flow out, put the hand back into warm water and let the blood flow into the water until you have enough.
And if it is in summer, do not put the hand back into warm water, for one puts it there more often in winter than in summer.
And bloodletting from this vein is safer than from any other veins, because neither artery nor nerve is present there.
Bloodletting from the vein of the little finger of the right hand is beneficial for all diseases of the liver, and this is how it should be done:
Stretch out the hand, and put it into warm water until the vein becomes swollen so that one can see it; and bleed across, and if you cut all around it, nothing will be harmed.
And do not go too deep, because the nerves are located underneath all the flesh
"Then immerse the hand in warm water if the blood is congealed in the wound, so that it may flow out."
"And once you have cleaned off as much blood as necessary, then place a bandage of oil and flax to quickly bind the wound, and do this for each wound."
"The swelling in the left hand is attributed to mouse disease, so perform the same treatment as I have instructed for the right hand."
"The application of heat cautery is beneficial for all illnesses located beneath the body." "such as diseases of the uterus, retention of urine, disease of the spine, and old diseases of the thighs and legs, and similar illnesses."
"And the quality of its cautery is that the patient puts their foot in warm water, and rubs the wound until it reddens," "and then places it on the ankle joint; and the wound is located at the ankle, and many veins run from there up into the foot;"
"therefore cauterize either the larger vein or at the ankle, whichever is more beneficial."
"And if you cauterize on the foot, beware of the nerves beneath it, and make the cautery like a cut; and let the flame be gentle."
"And if the blood cannot flow out, then put the foot back in the water and allow the vein to drain well."
"And if cauterization does not succeed on the first try, begin again a little higher up the second time, for the place is tender;" "do not fear damaging nerves, as we have said, and do likewise for the other foot if necessary."
"The location of the sciatic vein is at the outer ankle joint, and its cauterization benefits sciatica pain when it is due to hot blood."
"And the method of its cauterization is that the patient enters a bath and then applies four cautery marks on the outer ankle while twisting;"
"for otherwise the vein will not open; and if it opens, then cauterize in any way you can, even by cutting across it." "And it is better that you cut it, for the location is safe and the vein is very common in many people."
"And it is better that you cut it, for the location is safe and the vein is very common in many people." "And if you cannot find it, then cauterize any vein that opens on the back of the foot near the little toe, but beware of nerves."
"And keep bleeding until you see blood flowing, then untie the bandage, and apply cotton and tie it securely; now it is cauterized."
"On cupping (ventouse)"
"Cupping vessels are made of horn, or earthenware, or glass; and cupping is performed in two ways: either by pricking to attract blood, or without pricking."
"And this cupping without pricking is done in two ways: either with fire (heated cups) or without fire (cold cups)."
"And two others are located on each side of the neck; and the cupping vessel under the chin." "And cupping vessels are placed on the shoulders and over the ribs." "And cups are placed on both arms, and on both legs." "And the cupping glasses of two cheeks; and cupping does not draw blood, except from small veins scattered throughout the flesh."
"Therefore it does not weaken anyone, as is done with bleeding from veins; "And it should not be administered, neither in all cases nor without fire and without heat, in any disease that arises from excess, until the whole body is emptied."
"And if it becomes necessary to cup due to illness or by custom, we will administer it each hour at the beginning of the month or at the end, and in-between and at all times."
"For there are people who, when they need to be cupped, have heavy heads;"
"And others find that they suffer from excess and redness in their face, head, neck, and darkness before the eyes;
"And those who find a drop of blood in their mouth, have an enlarged tongue, and cough up blood;" "And there are some who dream, seeing much blood and wounds and dead people, and things of that nature."
"And when we see these signs, especially if they occur during the month, we order cupping to be performed after three hours of the day."
"The bleeding of the temple helps against headache ... that afflicts them, but it should not be done after evacuation of the whole body."
"And this cupping is in lieu of bloodletting from the temple,"
"and those of cold temperament or with phlegm should not use it, for it harms them greatly;"
"And therefore old people and those who have cold conditions in their heads should not use it."
"And those who often bleed themselves become forgetful, so one must place the cupping vessel a little lower down to avoid forgetfulness."
"Cupping on the neck is in lieu of bloodletting from the head and nape of the neck, and therefore it is especially beneficial for throat inflammation;" "And it helps with breaking up the phlegm channel, cough, and excess;"
"and it should not be placed too tightly, for if it holds too firmly it can cause forgetfulness or harm to the stomach or heart."
"Cupping on both sides of the neck is beneficial for headaches, optic pain, migraines, strangulation, and toothache;"
"and it is in lieu of bloodletting from the nape of the neck; and you should tell the practitioner to press gently when placing it, so that he does not cut the artery or cause profuse bleeding."
"Cupping under the chin is beneficial for mouth diseases, gum inflammation, and similar conditions that are in the mouth; it is in lieu of bloodletting from both lips."
"Cupping on the shoulders is beneficial for illnesses that come from heat and excess;"
"Cupping on the ribs is as effective as cupping with three hollows of the arm;" "for it attracts blood from these large vessels;"
"And tell the practitioner not to place it too deeply, for the area is thin and has nerves and arteries underneath."
"A cupping vessel placed on the buttock is beneficial for hemorrhoids and lower abdomen diseases. The vessel should be large and made of brass to draw well; if it were too thin, it might break and cause large wounds."
"Cupping on the legs draws openly, for it attracts blood from the whole body and is beneficial for old back pains, sciatica, bladder inflammation, and it strengthens the flesh. It is in lieu of the two sophenes (groin muscles) and the two ankles, but it can also weaken the body with prolonged use and cause edema in various conditions."
"The method of applying the cupping vessel is as follows: first place it empty and suck gently but steadily. Then apply it quickly and move it evenly until you see the area turn red and swollen, and the skin becomes flushed. Then remove it and replace the vessels. Be cautious about the condition of the body, for some people have thin flesh and clear pores; in this case, one should strike only once and make wide but not too deep wounds. Suck gently."
"If the blood is thick, then one must strike twice: the first time to refine the path of the thick blood."
"And if the blood is very dense, one must strike a third time. But if we wish to draw only a little blood, once will suffice."
"And if we wish to draw much blood, then strike repeatedly. If the blood is dense, strike deeply, and the endpoint is when the heart is pierced suddenly;"
"And those with thick and hard skin and narrow pores should oil the area of the cupping vessels with aperitive and solvent oil:" "If it is in summer, use violet oil, sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil;"
"And if it is winter, use watercress oil, lily oil, chamomile oil, or similar."
"And if the excess blood is thick and cold, use myrrh oil, balsam oil, fennel oil, or similar."
"And those with tender flesh and wide pores should not use any oil;"
"but they should wash the area after cupping with rosewater, cold water, blackberry juice, pumpkin juice, or other similar substances."
"And those with excessive moisture should rise using hyssop water, myrtle water, sumac water, or similar substances."
"And those with thick excesses should rise using old wine, vinegar water, fennel or chamomile decoction, or similar substances;"
"But do not perform cupping before bathing or in the bath. It should be done one or two hours after bathing, and one should not sleep immediately afterwards;"
"And one must ensure that they are warm when being cupped and have cupping performed." "Be cautious with those who are choleric and have thick, fiery blood;" "They should consume cold substances such as pomegranates, endive, lettuce with hyssop, and similar foods;"
"And eat chickpeas, castrated male lamb meat, and moist meats."
"And those with cold complexion should consume honey syrup and moderate aromatic wine that is between old and new. They should eat little, and consume chickpeas, small birds, and pigeons."
"On the day they are cupped, they should drink more than they eat;"
"And sometimes give men triacle or musk before or after cupping to strengthen the main organs;" "Thin out the blood, but those who are hot should not drink it."
"The cupping vessels placed without striking are those applied to the liver, spleen, stomach, podagra (gout), abdomen, back, and buttocks, as these areas do not tolerate being struck."
"And this is only done to attract blood from one area to another;" "for example, we place them on the breasts when there is milk congestion to draw out the viscosity from that area. Similarly, we apply cupping vessels to the abdomen and back to reduce the size of those areas."
"And relieves pain when there is retention or stone, so relieves by its attractive power perhaps the retention, or dislodges the stone from its place."
"And thus it does when placed on the liver and spleen when there is retained wind."
and these cups are administered empty for merely sucking; and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes full of warm water
like in the case of diseases of the pleura, and in such manner that one fills the cup with hot water alone, or with water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
The form of administering the cupping glass with fire is as follows:
And it should be two digits wide and half a palm deep, and have on its circumference around the middle one small hole, just like for putting in a needle
and let it be of earthenware, smooth beforehand so that it does not burn the patient when placed on the limb
and have in its middle a crossbar of earthenware or iron for placing an incense candle
and let them be both large and small according to the diseases and age of those who use them;
for the cups for children are different from those for adults, and those for thin people are different from those for fat ones.
And one must thus place this cup on the limb:
place the lit candle or one wick of flax into the cup through the crossbar that is inside the cup so that the flame is at the bottom of the cup and does not burn the patient
and then place it on the limb, with both hands over the hole that we have mentioned, so that when one wants to remove it, steam comes out and the cup is removed
and take away the wick as before, and repeat this often if necessary.
Therefore, in the cupping glass used for diseases of the pleura, there is no crossbar or hole, and it is not administered with fire except when it is full of water. It is placed on the limb alone.
And this is its form:
Suction cups are not applied except in limbs where it is impossible to place them due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar places. and in places devoid of flesh, like the knees or toes, and other similar places.
"and the qualities of urine are such that when you find it without sediment which are in clear sweet waters without corruption, then take it."
"And put them in fresh water until they become accustomed [to their surroundings], and have nothing in their bellies;" "Then let there be a letting of blood and cupping, then rub the limb until it is red, and apply warm compresses."
"And once they are full [with blood], if they fall out and it is a place where cupping can be applied, apply the cupping glass, for this is very helpful."
If not so, then raise the joint gently, then with water, very well, and then compress it.
If the joint swells too much after the body of the shoulder blade, then soak one linen cloth in cold water and apply it until the swelling is reduced.
If the swelling increases, apply ground vitriol or salt or similar substances until it subsides;
Alternatively, place half a handful of peeled fava beans on the joint and leave them there until they heat up; this will now stop the swelling.
And if you need more, take other shoulder blades.
If the shoulder blades do not stick, rub fresh blood on the joint and insert a needle there until the shoulder blade comes out. Then apply them, and as soon as they sense the blood, they will adhere.
And when you see that they are attached, sprinkle a little powder of ground aloe and salt or ash on them so that they will stick firmly.
Here begins the book of fractures
This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine and provides treatment for broken bones and dislocations.
Know, dear son, that foolish physicians neglect this chapter, having never seen any of the ancient books or read a single letter from them.
And for this reason, knowledge is lacking in our land, because I never found anyone skilled in it.
"And I know nothing except through the wisdom of old books which I have studied so much that I have treated their knowledge, and through experience, and through the habit of my life."
"And I have already described for you in this chapter what is contained therein, and have summarized it at the end, and have clearly shown the shapes of the tools that are arranged, as I did in these two preceding chapters."
"Therefore, we must say in the prologue of this book the sums of speech and chapters where the wise places his understanding, and remains on the truth, so that those who are tried may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others."
"I say that when a breakage or dislocation or torsion or fracture comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hasten to heal the sick on one side and the other, if nothing prevents you from doing so, such as weakness of body, or childhood, or old age."
"or if the time is not very warm or too cold; and avoid eating cold things, that is to say cold foods, and poultry and venison, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and do not fill oneself too much with foods that fill the veins with blood, until you have some doubt about an inflamed boil, or an expansion of matter in the limb; then the sick person should return to their usual regimen."
"And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that one nourishes the sick person with foods that promote growth and have viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, rice, testicles, pears, and veal, eggs, fresh fish, and similar things, and strong wine." "For with this nourishment the wound will close more quickly and completely."
"And know that the bones of old and decrepit people cannot be well restored nor healed according to their nature due to weakness of the limbs, nor those that are too soft, such as the bones of young children."
"But do not hesitate to bind around the broken bone a thick cloth that fits and joins the limb together until it becomes strong again; and do not remove the splint too soon, and for this reason it is necessary to nourish them with fatty foods as we have said."
"And know that breaks are diverse in many ways."
"For a break of the head is different from a break of the arm or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all the ways that bones can break." "For there are breaks that happen suddenly, and others that occur gradually, such as when cutting a feather to make a writing pen."
"For there are breaks that happen suddenly, and others that occur gradually, such as when cutting a feather to make a writing pen." "And there is also breakage with wounding, and breaking with just a small crack."
"And each type of break has its own method and appropriate tool for restoration, according to where the memory comes into play;"
"And a bone break is recognized by the twisted appearance of the site, and it is evident upon examination, and sounds hollow when pressed with the hand."
"And when there is no twisting or sound upon touching, and the sick person does not feel much pain, then there is no break."
"But it can still have twisting, cracking, or a small fracture." "So do not move the limb by hand, but apply the medications that come later and then gently immobilize it."
"And know that sudden breaks where the two parts are separated must be aligned equally before any inflammation appears;"
"and if inflammation does appear, allow it a few days to settle down until the inflammation is calmed;" "then align the limb gently and straight, and know that this restoration is easier than those where there are pieces missing; then immobilize it as explained later."
"And if the bone has pieces broken off, then extend it from two points, whether it is an arm or leg, or use your hand for smaller limbs, or use two cords or one cord and your hand;"
"and align the limb according to its natural shape so that when the broken parts are separated, carefully fit the pieces back together using all your skill without causing injury or pain to the sick person;"
"And join the two ends of the bone together in the best alignment."
"And you can feel with your hand whether it is well aligned or not: if not, realign it carefully and do not immobilize too tightly nor press in such a way that heat and stiffness are caused in the limb due to poor technique, as we have said many times before."
"And when the limb is in place, instruct the patient to keep it still while awake or asleep, turning or in any other way;" "and make sure that the limb is secured so that the patient feels no pain." "For if there is any pain, then it is not properly aligned, and the limb must be positioned differently so that there is no pain;"
"For if there is any pain, then it is not properly aligned, and the limb must be positioned differently so that there is no pain;" "And make sure that it is properly aligned so that no twisting occurs during healing."
"The quality of the bone fracture depends on what I have told you."
"Know that broken limbs are diverse in size, shape, and thickness."
"There are small members such as arms and legs and similar ones: they should be wrapped with soft and fine linen bandages;"
"And those that are thick, such as thighs and legs, should be wrapped with wide and strong linen; for wide linen embraces the whole limb equally and immobilizes it without causing any indentation."
"Then wrap it with light bandages, three or four turns according to the limb size, and tighten your hand a little around all the linen; then go above the fracture and tie less tightly so that the fracture can move a little;"
"and loosen the linen a bit and a bit until you grasp most of the healthy area; then take another bandage and wrap it again over the broken area;"
"then go back to the area below the fracture and tie it moderately, not too tightly nor too loosely, as we have said in the first section;"
"then place linen bandages or cloth between the layers of linen until it is all even; then tie everything together with one bandage from above, and then place your well-made splints on top if there is no inflammation or swelling."
"And if there is inflammation or heat, apply something cooling and anti-inflammatory, and let it be like that for a few days;"
"then immobilize your splints and make them half the width of a thick reed or use wood for fence posts or palm ribs, cut to this shape:"
"But the splint placed over the fracture should be slightly larger and wider than the others;"
"And it should also be long enough to suit the size of the limb."
"Then tie everything together again as you did in the first layer; then wrap it with thread in the same way as in the first layer over the fracture."
"Tie it tighter above and looser below; make sure that the thread is medium-sized, not too thick nor too thin, and made of soft linen;"
If the threads are thick, as I have seen in the works of foolish people who make their knots with twisted linen cords, this is a great error; for the knot cannot be even if it is too thin, and it should not have less than two inches between each stake.
If the patient is injured by the edges of the stakes after stretching in safe places, then place pads of linen or woolen gauze beneath them so that they do not blister.
When a wound is accompanied by fracture and the bone is broken, I will describe its treatment below.
And know that it is not advisable to stretch all broken limbs with stakes on the first day. Since limbs are large, do not place hot irons on them except after five or six days, or more according to your certainty of the heat of the inflammation occurring.
And here is the manner of the ancient plasters for restoring fractures, dislocations, and torsions: take flour that sticks to the walls of the mill, and mix it with plenty of eggs; place this mixture, neither too thin nor too thick, on the area where you will use it. This is the common way to make a plaster for restoring fractures in various conditions, especially for women and young children, because it is not too hot nor too cold.
Another way to make plaster for healing fractures and dislocations and torsions: Take bdellium, ladanum, lavender, asafetida, gum arabic, and mastic powder (each .x. ounces); myrrh and aloes (each .v. ounces); and aloe wood (.viiij. ounces). Grind these into a fine powder and mix it with plenty of eggs. If the person's constitution is hot, use this plaster because it has a good composition and quickly heals broken bones; useful for many people.
Another way to make plaster that is useful for sprains: Take mastic and vitriol (each .x. ounces); myrrh and aloes (each .viiij. ounces); gum acacia (.vi. ounces); and bolic armenic (.x. ounces). Grind these ingredients well, then mix with water or plenty of eggs, and apply the mixture.
Another way to make plaster for joints and bones dislocated from their sockets, to relieve pain and reduce swelling, and to heal fractures: Take new linen, moisten it in warm water mixed with hot oil, and place it on the affected area. This plaster does not restore, but it is good for relieving heat from inflammation and properly removes pains.
Another method to reset broken bones: Take dry fig leaves, and leaves of earth dock, grind together, make poultice.
Another method of poultice for the setting of broken bones and to facilitate the removal of bruises. Take root of mallow, camomile, violet flowers, wheat flour, each one part; grind and mix with wine, and if the limb is hot, mix with coriander water or water, and use it.
Another method of poultice stronger than the first one for setting broken bones with hard bruises. Take roots of mallow, linseed, almond, melilot, and comfrey, violet flowers and camomile flowers, each one part; grind and mix with salt water or fresh water or with wine according to the heat of the limb and its rest.
Hippocrates says in his book that one should not apply anything to the broken limb for setting besides wax and oil ointment, and nothing else more. He also says that it should be of medium consistency, neither too soft nor too hard.
And it seems that Galen believes that one should apply dry and slightly warm things to the broken limb for setting, such as myrrh, aloe, frankincense and similar substances, as we have said.
Another poultice recipe for wounds and pain: Take mugwort and chopped horsehair or chicken feathers, mallow, and grind them equally. Make a poultice with the resulting mixture and apply it.
Then remove the poultice after a while, being careful that the patient does not feel any pain and that the bone has not moved from its place. Do not remove it for too many days.
And if pain or itching comes to the place, with restlessness or swelling, be quick to remove the poultice and poultice remover. Take a light cloth, damp sea sponge, dip it in water and wipe the place until the itching stops and the pain is soothed. "Then allow the limb to rest for an hour, then place on it a dry linen cloth soaked in water or rose oil, and bind it tightly until you are sure of a hot abscess."
"And let the inflammation of the limb rest, and let the pain be relieved, then resume the gentle binding, adding a little poultice, but do not bind it as tightly as before; continue gently until it is healed."
"And if you see that the abscess is hot and red, and there is pain and swelling, then you must resume binding it with poultice, just as you did initially."
"And if the limb does not improve with what we have said, do not untie it until after three days or four, five, or seven days; sometimes leave it tied for twenty days, according to how one sees that the fracture has healed and that the union of flesh is approaching."
"Then bind it more tightly than before, and the flesh will grow thicker, as I said earlier. But if you see that the area is drying out excessively, know that healing cannot occur there." "Then apply warm water compresses every time you untie it, and do this every third day, loosening the bandage a little."
"Thus the healing of the limb is encouraged by this treatment, and quickly remedies what foolish physicians do, who reset a limb incorrectly. This is wicked, and such practices are weak; I see no other way than to leave it alone and operate correctly."
"Concerning the different kinds of fractures" "There are many ways that bones can be fractured, with diverse appearances, and their causes are distinct."
"Some fractures are caused by a blow from a sword, which cuts through the bone all the way to its marrow, like splitting wood. This type of fracture is called 'haichure'."
Where the sword strikes the bone without piercing it, that manner of fracture is called "absolute," and wounds from these two fractures are large or small.
"And if there is an embedded fracture, or a break from falling on stones, or from stones falling, or from similar causes."
"And if there is an open fracture that approaches the bone marrow, whether it is below or above the bone, this wound is either large or small."
"And if there is a wound that enters the bone as thin as a hair, and the fracture is small, it is called this type of break 'capillary'."
"And if the wound is made by striking with a stone or falling or similar actions and causes the bone fragment to move downward, like when smiths hammer metal on their anvil, then the stones get inside."
"And this occurs more frequently in those who have moist skull bones, such as children's heads;
"and occurs with all types of fractures where small fragments are disconnected like stars; I will speak about them in their place."
"And we recognize all kinds of fractures through direct examination and probing and by the corrupt flesh on top."
"The capillary appearance is recognized by this: when the bone is uncovered and rubbed with vinegar, the fracture becomes black."
"In treating a fracture, beware of accidents that may occur in illness. If you see no bad accident such as vomiting blood, loss of consciousness, extension and paleness, feverish chill, eyes protruding and turning red, and other similar dispositions in many ways, he cannot be cured without doubt."
"And if you see no frightening accident and you hope for recovery, then begin the treatment."
"And when the injured person first comes to you and it is wintertime, you must remove the bone before the fourteenth day of the moon that you can."
"And if it is in summer, hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day so that the flesh under the bone does not become corrupted and the accidents we mentioned do not occur."
"And if the fracture of the bone reaches to the skin that covers the brain, then you must cut open the broken part in this way: take hold of the head of the injured person and uncover as much of the bone as possible around the wound and on the figure of the wound gently."
"And if blood flows out when the bone is uncovered or there is a hot abscess, then apply whatever aid is necessary and fill the space with cloths moistened in rose oil." "And let the wound rest until the hot abscess is appeased and you are sure that there is no more bleeding; then begin to remove around the bone in two ways of working: one way is to cut narrowly ahead with a chisel, like this:"
"And then I place another chisel larger than the first."
"And the second way is to have many chisels of various sizes, some narrow and others wide, pointed and made of iron. Work lightly so that you do not wound the head."
"And if the bone is hard and strong, you must pierce around it before administering chisels with drills, making sure that they do not go too deep and stick out through the bone of the skull. The drill points should have a margin or circle on top to prevent them from sticking out through the bone. You should have many such drills so that each one fits in its proper place around the skull. Here are three ways of drilling:"
"The qualities for drilling around the broken bone are to place one drill on the bone and turn with both hands until you feel that the bone is pierced. Then move the drill a little further along and do this all around. Then cut away the space between the holes with chisels, doing so carefully and gently as we have said, until you can remove the bone by hand or with some tool such as forceps or tweezers. Be careful not to touch the brain or the spinal cord."
"And when you have drilled and removed the bone, then you must smooth down any roughness left by the bone using some tool that resembles a chisel but is thinner and more delicate than other chisels."
"And if any small bones or chips remain, remove them lightly with some tool. Then treat the wound with dressings and ointments as we have said."
"And another way of working is that which Galien describes, which is safer. He praises it greatly and says this:" "It is necessary first to uncover part of the bone where the fracture appears more. Then you will place beneath the head of this lenticular chisel, of which this is the shape:"
"And do not cut on one side only, but make the cutting edge acute on both sides so that the cutting is towards the bone. Then strike gently with a small hammer so that you cut the bone all around, taking care not to injure the flesh beneath."
"If it is close to the bone, then remove it gently, for it can be removed without harm and without fear."
"And if the fracture of the bone does not reach to the skin and the bone is cut only on top with small pieces, then smooth down that roughness and remove the chips with a fine razor, of which you should have many different sizes to use in each place according to the work and the shape of the fracture."
"So use larger razors first and then finer ones, continuing until it is all smooth."
"In each of the other kinds of hairline fractures and subtle breaks, you must use tools according to their direction. This is something that cannot be answered by someone who has not studied this art."
"And if the spinal cord is exposed, then take a piece of linen according to the size of the wound and moist it in rose oil, then place it on the wound." "Then take another piece of linen doubled over once or twice, moisten it in wine and rose oil, and place it on top of the first cloth. Do this gently so as not to injure the spinal cord, then apply another bandage on top without binding it too tightly."
"And leave it like this for one or two days until the inflammation has subsided. Then remove it and apply medicines such as lily roots, wheat flour, incense powder, aloe, and similar substances. Make a powder of these things and place it on the wound, then apply soft ointments without irritating them."
"And be sure that the wound is always clean, so that you do not leave any ointment or allow anything to stick to it. For when something sticks to the skin of the brain, it will rot and cause great harm to the patient, as anything placed on the spinal cord will necrose."
"So beware, then, if any bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, and be doubtful without doubting too much."
"And if blackening appears on the outside due to the medicine applied, then take one part honey and three parts rose oil and stick a piece of linen dipped in it onto the spinal cord." Then, apply the methods of treatment as needed until healing occurs.
Know that sometimes both parts of the nose above are broken or only one, because there are two bones; and the lower one is cartilage and does not break unless it is hit or twisted, and then heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, then you should place your little finger or the tip of your nose and put it on that break evenly with your index finger from outside so that the nose regains its natural shape. "And do this gently, ensuring the patient feels no pain from your work."
"If the fracture is in the upper part near the elbow and the forearm cannot return to its place, then you must align it with the head of a splint that is somewhat thick."
"And if the fracture is in two parts, do likewise and rush to reset it on the first day, if you can;"
If not [treatment by fire cautery], after the seventh or tenth day, when the swelling is appeased,
When you set one bone against another, if there is a fracture there; and let the splints be so thick that they fill the holes of the joint.
And some physicians say that one must grease the splints with butter and change them every day. It does not seem good to me, but it is necessary to grease them in a mixture of egg yolk and flour powder; then leave the splint until the bone is firm and the cartilage hardened.
And sometimes they place goose feathers in the place of tents, and with one soft cloth wrapped around it, if it breaks, then let the patient blow through it; now do as you see.
And if gangrene comes nearby while you are working on it, then put cerate or cotton moistened in rose oil, or a little bit of diacalcic on it.
And if gangrene does not come nearby, then place a poultice on it from the front, made of sesame flour and incense powder mixed with egg yolk, then place light dressings over it and do not bind tightly.
And if the dislocation of the hand is small and it is broken into little pieces, then extract with suitable instruments for this purpose, then stitch the break, and care for it like other joint injuries, applying appropriate poultices and ointments.
And if there is no wound inside the hand, then treat it as tents [i.e., immobilize it], and apply splints made of plaster until it is sound.
Mandible fracture
When the jawbone is broken from behind and there is no wound in front, and the break is only on one side without being broken into pieces internally, it can be easily recognized.
If the break is on the right side, you should put your left index finger in the patient's mouth; and if it is on the left jawbone, then put your right index finger in the patient's mouth, feel the break lightly with it, and support it from behind with your other hand, keeping it level.
And if the jawbone is broken into two pieces and dislocated from each other, then you should apply traction from both sides until it is even again.
And if there is movement of the teeth or fracture of them, then tie them together with a thread of gold, silver or silk, then place cerate on the broken jawbone and place over it two thicknesses of cloth; then place over the cloth a large well-made splint made of wood or a piece of leather cut to the size of the jawbone, and fasten it under the chin so that you can hold it. Command the patient to rest and eat soft foods.
And if you see that the face begins to swell up, then untie it on the third day, and then readjust what was loosened; then place a poultice over it made of flour with egg white or sesame flour mixed together, after you have removed the cerate; then place light linen over the poultice, and if the poultice becomes too hot, but the condition of the patient does not change, leave it on until it is healed. Many times it heals in three weeks.
And if inflammation comes with heat, then apply what we have said many times [i.e., treat the inflammation as previously described].
And if there is both fracture and wound together, make sure that no part of the bone has been taken out; then extract it with instruments suitable for this purpose.
And if the wound is narrow, then widen it with fire according to your necessity [i.e., cauterize it].
And when you have removed all the broken pieces and none remain, then sew up the wound if it is large, and place over it one of the poultices suitable for promoting granulation until it is healed.
Here is an entry from a medieval French medical manuscript about reducing fractures of the jawbone (mandible): The forceps breaks often before and around the shoulder, and there are three ways this break can occur: where it is broken but not dislocated in two places, with fragments present, which is the easiest to reset; or where there is breaking along with a wound.
And the treatment is as follows: when there is no wound accompanying the break, you should have two assistants. One will hold the forceps that has been broken; the other will extend the collar towards the part affected by the break. Then place both hands evenly on either side of the break so that its shape is restored correctly, with neither appearance nor depression present.
And if you need to extend further, place a round pad made of cloth or wool under the patient's shoulder, its size depending on your needs. Then stretch and lift the forceps, holding the pad in your hand so that you can evenly align the break as needed.
And if you are unable to grasp the head of the forceps at the front because it is too deep, then the patient should lie on their back with their shoulders supported by a pillow. Insert a medium-sized ear spoon under the shoulder, and have an assistant press down on the shoulder until the bone of the forceps lifts up.
And then align the fracture with your two hands, and if you find it displaced, then you must cut on it; and pull out the fragments gently, and if the bone cannot join due to any hindrance, then use one of the incisoires that you have; but place the forceps underneath this instrument, for support.
And it resembles a spoon, and is not raised, and should be as wide as necessary according to the size of the bone and the power of the work; and has two tines, as you see, one wide and the other narrow, like the width of the wound that you made when you pulled out the bones.
And once you are certain of hot inflammation, then close the wound, and if the opening is small or you doubt there is hot inflammation, then fill the wound with lint and bandages according to its quantity.
And if hot inflammation occurs, then soak one cloth in rose oil and vinegar and wine, and place it on top.
The dressing for the bone, when it is without wounds and without cutting, is that you place on top of the bone a compress made from powder of millstone and ground egg whites, and place light dressings on top, and place a splint underneath if necessary. Then take a very wide bandage about a palm's width, then place a folded cloth on top of the dressings and compress; then take a thin strip of linen three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around this bandage so that the ends of the bandage are hanging down. And place the strip on top of the fracture, and wrap the bandage around the neck and underneath the healthy shoulder and the injured shoulder; and the bend in each part, and when you see that the wrapping holds the fracture well, and you can clearly see that the strip does not move on top of the broken bone, then rewrap it every day, and when the wrappings loosen, then tighten them.
And make the patient lie on his back, and put a small pillow underneath his shoulder when he sleeps to lift up his injured arm; thus lighten the fracture of its weight by elevating the shoulder, or tie the arm to the neck, but do not untie it unless necessary for twenty days.
Then start the wrapping again if necessary, and tighten it and leave it like that until it is healed; and it heals in twenty-eight days at most, and sometimes sooner in some people.
Here ends the treatment for a broken shoulder.
It may happen that the shoulder bone breaks wide or in the middle and is not visible on the outside, and can only be felt by touch. So arrange it according to the shape of the fracture, and wrap it according to its natural form in every way you can; then place powder of millstone with ground egg whites and light dressings on top, and place a folded cloth on top; then place a wide and thin strip, a little wider than the shoulder, on top, and if there are any hollows under the strip in some parts of the shoulder, then fill those hollows with linen wadding so that the strip lies evenly; then wrap it firmly all around with a wide bandage so that the strip does not move from its place, and check the wrapping every day; and every time it loosens, tighten it, and if the strip has moved from its place, then put it back in its proper position, and make the patient lie on his side. And the shoulder bone heals in twenty days or twenty-five at most. And when this number of days is completed, then unwrap it, but be sure, for this is not a bone that easily becomes displaced lightly.
And if a piece of the bone sticks out and is not under the heart, then cut it off, and do what we have said in the treatment for a broken collarbone to calm the hot inflammation.
Here ends the treatment for a broken shoulder blade
The ribs are sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; however, they often break on the side. And when they are broken in the middle, they sag downwards and the patient feels great pain, shortness of breath, and dizziness, and sometimes vomits blood, and the hollows in the broken ribs can be felt clearly by touch.
"And the restoration is that the patient lies often on their back, and places one cushion between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders, and assembles the ribs of the two sides with your hands, and carefully puts them even in all ways that you can, until the figure of the bone is as it should be; then puts emplastes and compresses on top of the subtle salt bandage, or another light wood, and wraps it in one cloth, and ties it on the broken bone so that it does not move; and turns the tying roundly to the back, and tightens evenly, and loosens each hour the tie, and if it unravels, then tightens it; and if it is necessary to untie it, for corruption or for itch that comes to the place, or pain or abscess, then hurry, and unties it, and removes the emplaster, and addresses what has come of ways of treatments; then resets the emplaster, and tightens until it is sound."
"of the breaking of the ribs"
"You should know that the breaking of ribs only happens in large places after the back, and at the head within, and they do not bend unless because they are glarious; and you can feel it well with inspection of the two sides."
"And the restoration is that you put the break even as it should be. And then puts the emplaster on it, and tightens with a bandage, if you have need."
"And if the breaking of ribs is declining inward, then the patient feels very great pain and piercing, like pleurisy, because the bone pierces the tissue; and soon they have points, and coughs up a lot of blood, and it is a serious illness, and the ancients put much effort into it."
"And there are those who say that it should be administered foods that swell the belly, to push the break outwards."
"We do not do this, lest many boils come if they were not there before." "And if they have come, then heal them."
"And some say that one places cupping glasses on the spot to draw out forcibly, and this seems reasonable; nonetheless, there is doubt whether the cupping glass draws out excesses to the location due to its nature of weakness."
"And some say that one should cover the spot with damp wool soaked in hot oil, and place tents between the ribs to keep the bandage even around it, then treat with the pleurisy remedy of meat and medicine."
"And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot endure due to the bone protruding through the skin, then doubt arises in the patient whether it is necessary to cut above the spot of the broken rib and place an instrument underneath the chest wall; then one must trim the bone and draw it out gently, then sew up the two lips of the wound if it is large, and treat with dressings until it heals. And if red inflammation comes, one places moistened bandages in rose oil on the spot, and treats the place according to what pertains to inflammation; let them lie on their side where they should until they are healed."
"concerning the fracture of the neck"
Sometimes there is bone fracture of the neck, which often occurs when it bends; similarly with the spine of the back. And if this happens to someone and you want to know whether they will recover or not, take note if you see their hands softened, swollen and numb, and unable to move or stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it. Know that he is mortally injured in several ways, and if they move and feel it well when they are pressed and pricked, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured if treatment is applied.
And if such a thing happens to the spine of the back and you want to know whether he will recover or not, take note if the feet are softened, and if there is an accident in his hands, and wind escapes suddenly without intention on the back; and when he is turned onto his belly, wind escapes suddenly without intention. And when he is turned onto his back and wants to raise himself up, he cannot do so. Know that he is mortally injured: do not waste time with treatment.
And if these accidents do not occur, then the case is lighter.
And the treatment is that you should watch if there is any hot boil, and apply rose oil or oil of mulefoot chicken foot until it is soothed. Then apply one of the comforting and drying emplastes, bind it with a bandage, and order the patient to rest; and do not let him sleep on the part where he feels pain until he is healed. And if any bone is dislocated, it is necessary to apply something on the chest. Remove the bone and then sew up the two edges of the wound if it is large with a stitch. Then treat it with salve until it is healed. And if the joint of the bone is broken, which is called the "joint of the cow", put your left hand's fist into it and make it equal to the other hand at your power, then apply the emplastre and bind it if necessary; then tighten it, and if there are bones dislocated, remove them and treat the wound until it heals.
Regarding the fracture of the thighbone
It sometimes happens that the thighbone is broken, and if it does happen, there will be a slight diminution of sensation at the head. It opens on the long side, declines towards the partition, and comes to the patient with pain and piercing at the spot where it breaks; it swells up what has been broken.
"And the reduction is that you extend your hand upwards until you are above the fracture; and know what is the break and its shape; and if the break is at the head only, then set that break even until it is in natural shape."
"And if the fracture is long or slants inward, then make the patient lie on their stomach so that the reduction of that fracture may be convenient." "And once you have set it even, then put on a splint, then put on a stick or bone splint, and tighten the fracture so that it does not move; and support the place of the ribs until the joint is aligned."
"And command the patient to sleep on their healthy side, or on their back."
"And if an inflamed boil appears,
Of the breaking of the shoulder
The shoulder joint is that which is between the elbow and the head of the shoulder; if it is broken, one must reset it according to one of two methods: either by taking a piece of coarse wood shaped like this:
And tie two joints with two ropes and hang them up high, then have the patient sit on one seat; then break his arm against the wood until it reaches the elbow pit and is in between a wooden curve, then weigh it down with something heavy that the minister pulls down; then place the break evenly in your hands together so the break returns as it should.
And another method is to prop up the patient on their bed and have them hold their hand at their neck; then command two ministers such that one pulls the part above the break towards him while the other pulls the lower part downwards, each one stretching in his respective direction.
And if you see that the traction is too strong, then tighten one rope below and above the break and stretch each minister in their respective direction. And if the break is close to the shoulder joint, you must put one rope in the middle under the elbow pit and another towards the side, under the break; likewise, if the break is towards the side, you must gently place it without effort so that the break is even on its level and on the side; then place the break evenly as it should be and tighten it, provided no splints come loose.
And if splints come loose, do not tighten it up to 27 days and place moist linen on the elbow pit and rose oil so that the inflammation subsides; then tighten it, and the way to tighten it is as follows: put the bandage on the break, then assemble the arm on the support, and place your hand on the shoulder or breast; then place the cloth and tighten it on the support and on the arm so that the arm is in line with the stars, unless something prevents it or if the bone has moved.
And if you suspect that the bone is not setting properly, use stars and place a larger and stronger star on the break with two spaces between each star; each star should be large enough to extend three fingers beyond the break on either side. Then tighten it onto the stars as I described at the beginning of this chapter for the break, tightening more firmly but without stretching out too much.
And if you see the position of the stars and the tightening as we have said when you reset the broken limb, and you suspect inflammation, leave it tied for up to seven days as we have said; then look at the bandage every three days to ensure that there is no itching or swelling or numbness in the limb due to the bandage being too tight. Then remove it as we have said.
And if no such accidents occur, do not remove the bandage until after three days or more; let the patient sleep on their back with their hands on their stomach. Place a cushion filled with wool evenly underneath the support and watch every hour of the day or night to ensure that the position of the broken limb does not move or that the bandages are not loosening. Remove it by the virtue of medicine as we have said before, and give them food in such a way that at first it is subtle, then later more substantial. And it is customary for the support and the leg to be removed after 40 days; then you should remove the bandage and apply baths and ointments to help healing. And if the stiffness is severe or contracted, it may take up to ten days or two months to remove it.
Here is an English translation of the French text about the treatment of a broken arm:
The arm is composed of two bones, called the "fossicles," one of which is small, that guides the thumb; the other is large, located below it near the little finger. Sometimes only the large fossicle breaks, or sometimes only the small one does, but occasionally both break together.
When the small splints are broken, restoration is easy, and so is healing; but when the large ones are broken, healing is difficult and more painful than when they break together. If only the small splint is broken, it should be extended a little and made even.
But if it is the large splint that is broken, then it should be stretched more strongly; and extend it over one cushion, and draw the pouch of the hand higher than the others, and let the little finger hang lower than the other fingers, and let the patient lie crossed on himself, with one cushion placed before him higher up so that he suffers no pain. Then the minister extends his left arm at the side below the patient's hand or to a support, and another minister does likewise above it. And then the physician puts it back in place according to its best shape.
And if in the fracture there are pieces, place each one in its proper place; and if there is any misplaced piece that touches the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then cut it off and remove the bone, as we have said before.
And if there is a wound along with the fracture, I spoke about it in the chapter on wounds; take care accordingly.
And if during the restoration there appear black blisters, then apply one cloth of rose cerate made with oil and white wax, which should not be too hard or too soft; and bind one cloth over it gently until the black blisters are soothed. Then remove the cerate and fill the cavity with powder from the millstone mixed abundantly with egg whites, then put on splints, and make the splint for the fracture a bit stronger and slightly wider than the others; and know that there should be six splints for the arm in various positions: whether the fracture is in one bone or two, and tie more tightly at the fracture site than elsewhere, and gradually loosen as it heals, as I have said at the beginning of this chapter; and let the cloths on the fracture site be soft and moist, not hard or rough; and let the thread used for binding be linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said. And monitor the limb and the bandage after some days. And if any bad accident happens to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, then you should wash the limb with warm water until the itching is soothed; and let the limb rest not too tightly. And then begin binding again, and if the bandage has loosened and the bone has become dislocated, or something similar happens, then address it accordingly.
And if care is taken that the healing cannot come to the limb because it is too tight, then you should loosen it a little and leave it like that for some days until the healing reaches it, and then bind it again.
And if none of the things that we have said happens to the patient, then do not untie it for up to 20 days or more around there, and then when he puts his hands on his neck, let his neck be level, and guard against movement and dislocation, and let him sleep on his back; and know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or 35 days, and sometimes in 20 days, according to the compositions and temperaments of the virtues.
Chapter 18: On the Fracture of the Hand
Know that on the back of the hand and on our elbows there are few fractures, and only then do they occur frequently.
And when the palm of the hand is broken or dislocated, then it is necessary for the patient to sit cross-legged, and sit upright facing straight ahead; then he places his hand on a flat surface, and the surgeon extends the broken bones and aligns them correctly until they are well joined together; and applies a plaster bandage and splints if necessary, then places a roller according to the size of the area; and it should be wrapped in one linen cloth.
And if the fracture is on the inside of the palm near the wrist, then a splint made of cloth is created and the patient is instructed to apply it to their broken palm; then it is wrapped with a long cloth strip, and the roller should be soft and as large as the palm of the hand, and it is wrapped in such a way that it fits properly.
And if the fracture is on the outside, then a roller should be placed on top of it and another underneath in the palm so that the hand is open and straight, then wrap everything around the hand tightly and secure the connection between the fingers.
And if the fracture is in any of the fingers, if it's the thumb, then align it properly and wrap it with the palm, and if you see fit place a small straight roller to hold up the fracture so that it does not move; and if the fracture is in another finger, such as the index or one of the others, then align it and bind it with the healthy finger that comes after it; or bind them all together in one bandage, whichever seems best, or place a roller on top like on the thumb; and be careful about heat and inflammation, and treat anything hot that arises, as I have said.
Fracture of the thighbone
The thighbone is often fractured and it can be seen when it twists forward or backward, and the treatment for this is to apply one bandage above the fracture and another below it. And the patient lies on their back, then each assistant extends their bandage to their respective side evenly, and this is done when the fracture is in the bone itself.
And if the fracture is near the root of the thighbone, one bandage should be placed towards the knee and the other below the fracture. And likewise if it is near the knee joint, then place the bandages on the knee and extend them downwards; then the surgeon aligns the bone with both hands until it is in its natural position, then apply the plaster cast and wrap it tightly, provided that no inflammation occurs.
And if there is heat and inflammation, allow it to subside first before returning to your work and treatment; the bandages are applied in this manner. It is necessary to wrap a firm bandage doubled in two or three layers over the fracture and remove any excess, then turn the leg so that the heel reaches the root of the thigh, insert a long thread between the thigh and the leg below the knee and bring the ends up above; then wrap the bandage around the leg and thigh, place rollers on the fracture and on the shinbone, then fill the space between the leg and thigh with soft cloth strips to make it even, then start tying tightly with three or four turns above the fracture and loosen gradually as you go higher up from the fracture; then tie the two ends of the thread that were inserted between the leg and thigh, and tie three rollers on top, then return below to the end of the thread until you reach the foot, then tighten it so that it does not move from its position, leave it like this until no heat or swelling or other signs appear.
And if inflammation occurs, remove the bandages and treat what has appeared, as we have said many times before; and if there are pieces of bone that stick out, it is necessary to remove them if possible; and if not, it is necessary to cut open the space and draw out pus; then continue treatment until the patient is healed.
And sometimes the thighbone is fractured in such a way that rollers are applied to it, as in the case of the elbow and arm; however, with this type of treatment, the patient does not limp.
And know that the thighbone is healed in about one month or a little less or more, depending on the variety of temperaments.
Ligamentous injury of the knee
Know that there are few fractures in the ligament of the knee, but it often bends. And if it breaks, then it is only a crack or hole, and this happens with and without wounds, and one can feel it well.
And the treatment is to align what has shifted on its sides until it is assembled as much as possible, then apply plaster and place a round roller if necessary, and tighten as needed, then follow all the procedures that we have said for other fractures, such as heat inflammation and other signs; treat each situation with what is appropriate until healed.
Fractures of the leg
Know that there are two bones in the leg, one is called by right "mustelz" and the other "fuscile"; and all kinds of fractures happen to it as they do to the arm, and for this reason the treatment is the same as that of the arm, and all operations are done the same way.
And if both bones are fractured together, then turn the leg in all directions.
And if the fibula is broken, turn it forward.
"And if the big bone is broken, great pain is felt and it is clearly seen. Then apply traction, place it evenly, and tie the splints evenly. Nevertheless, if the fracture is ugly with many pieces, then traction should be lighter and gentler, and align according to your ability."
"After completing your task, take two strips of wood and wrap them around the leg on both sides, from the knee downwards. Then wrap two layers of bandage over and under these strips, tie it in the middle so that the leg cannot bend to the right or left. This is well done. Some people also use a splint made of wood the length of the leg to prevent movement, especially if there is an open wound at the fracture site. Move the leg every day to check for any signs of heat, infection, or other complications. Continue this care until it is fully healed."
"Of the fracture of the bones of the foot"
To the ankle there is no fracture,
"And if there is fracture of the foot bones, and you see these bones projecting over one another, then place that patient's foot on the ground, as if they were about to walk, and then place your foot upon theirs where the bones are raised, and press until they return to their places; then apply a splint and bandages, and place beneath the stomach of the foot a small table with two heads, then bind it securely, and wrap it with cloths and other necessary items."
"And when three or four days have passed, undo the bandages, for you will find the bones aligned, whether they were broken or dislocated."
"And if there are any broken toes, set them straight as we have said for the fingers of the hand. Then place a splint along the length of the broken toe and make it slightly wider; then place beneath the foot that small table which I mentioned earlier, and bind it securely. If two or three, or more than three, toes are broken, then place on each toe a splint according to its size, wrapped in one linen cloth, and secure the table underneath the foot; let them be placed upon the top of the table so that they may support the arch of the foot."
"And remember not to forget the other things that I have mentioned for other fractures, and treat each case according to what is appropriate."
"Regarding the fracture of the wrist bone"
"When the wrist bone is broken in women, make her sit comfortably, then tilt her towards the back, supported by someone behind her. Fill the hollow of the wrist with cotton and insert a stick as thick as one's finger into it. Then raise the woman slightly, little by little, until the cotton reaches the opening of the wrist, pushing the bone back into place along with the stick. Leave her like this for seven days or so: the fracture will be restored. If you wish to check, take a bladder of a sheep and attach a tube to its opening. Blow air through the tube until the bladder is filled inside the wrist. The wrist joint will return to its proper place; then fill it with cotton and leave it like this for several days until it heals."
"And when the wrist bone of a man or woman is broken, restore it as we have said for the thighbone; these fractures are not hidden to those who apply themselves diligently to this work and follow my book. For the fracture indicates in various ways the correct path to restoration: listen carefully."
"When the penis is broken, take a goose neck and insert it into the penis. Then wrap cloths around it and leave it like this for three days or thereabouts, and it will heal quickly."
"Regarding fractures with wounds"
He who has a fracture with wound, especially if it is large, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder or similar, should have his wound cleaned immediately, so that the stitches we have mentioned may testify to this.
And if the wound heals, then apply a dressing of vitriol, if you have none other, and then begin to reset the fracture in the same hour or on the same day, unless some obstacle arises.
And if some obstacle arises, then leave the reduction until a new day, until the inflammation is subdued, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, lest you bring on an evil complication.
And if the broken bone appears above the exposed heart, it is necessary that you place it at ease quickly with your hands, with slight extension.
And if the extension is not sufficient for you to place it evenly with your hands, then use this instrument made of iron, which is twenty or twenty-eight inches long and has a width according to the size of the wound; and for that reason it is necessary for the surgeon to take three or four, depending on what is needed in each case of fracture; and let it be round and slightly thick so that it does not bend under pressure on the limb during your operation, and let it be pointed at the front and thicker in the middle forward like this:
And it is called a "palainche", for which reason the curved bone must be placed on top of the exposed end of the bone; and strike it once until it returns to its original position, and let them be even with each other. And if the fracture is fine and the instrument cannot grasp the bone well, then you must cut off the end of the bone so that the instrument can have power over it.
And if you cannot bring the bone back together as we have said, then use a suitable instrument such as the incision knife or the bone cutter with all your strength; then reset that which remains in the bone by scraping off its roughness and small splinters.
And when the bone is reset and the patient feels great pain afterward, know that it is not in its natural position. So do whatever you can to bring it back into its proper place, then moisten one cloth with black stypptic wine, especially if it is summer; and do not put cerate or any other ointment on the wound, lest corruption come from it. Then apply dressings after you have reset the bone, and leave the wound exposed, and cut away the covering all around according to the size of the wound, and be sure that the dressing does not press against the fracture; for many times foolish surgeons have done this and brought death or corruption upon the patient. And let the bandage be softer and more gentle than those used for other fractures.
And if the wound is bad or large and you fear that some mischance may come of it, as we have said, and you find pain in the area, then do not put on dressings, but wrap it with hard cloths and tie them on. And when you see, after one or two days, that the wound has begun to suppurate, then remove what you had applied with wine, and put on healing ointment such as tetrafarmacon ointment and similar ones.
And it is necessary that you dress the limb twice a day, in the morning and evening, until it is sound and healed.
And it is necessary that the limb be prepared in such a way that the bowels can pass downward easily.
And if many days pass and it still cannot heal but the bowels become obstructed again, know that there are small bone fragments causing this pain. Therefore, you must open the wound with a tent, and remove all these unwanted fragments that cause the pain.
And if a fistula or other corruption appears in the area, then you must treat it according to what is said in its chapter above. And when the bone is broken and exposed on the limb, such as the hipbone or the shinbone, and others like them on the large limbs, do not pull it out, for many times gangrene comes from this, but let it be until it rots away; perhaps it will fall off by itself after twenty or thirty days, then treat the wound if you can; and if you cannot, leave it alone.
And of fractures that come upon the union
Many times fractures come upon the union after it has healed, especially when they are near the joint, and it is an ugly sight to see the figure of the limb; and perhaps the limb cannot perform its natural movements.
Therefore beware if the nail is fresh: you must administer stypptic medicines such as aloes, frankincense, myrrh, sarcocolle, aconite, and similar others. So take some of these things or all together, and mix them with stypptic wine or with egg yolk or with axle grease; then put them on the nail in poultices and bind it tightly, and do not untie it for many days; then remove it and begin another one until the nodule is removed. Or you may bind a well-made piece of lead upon it, for the property of lead is to draw out all swellings from the limbs. And if the nodule has already turned into hardness like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, cut it open on top and remove the excess that appears. Or have it removed by some barber until it is gone, and treat it until it is healed.
When the fracture of the bone has been reset and afterward the limb remains weak and feeble, this happens for many reasons: one reason is that it was bound too tightly, and not bound as it should have been. Or because there were too many bindings, and nourishment could not reach the limb. Or because of too much restraining. Or because of too great movements, not at the proper time. Or because there is little blood in the body, so it is weak.
And the cure is to make the sick person eat well and exercise his body until blood increases in him. And administer baths, and give him joy and happiness. Then put pitch on the limb so that it attracts great nourishment to it, and apply warm water compresses often until nourishment reaches the limb, and it returns to its natural shape.
Of the limb that is crooked after healing
When the limb is twisted after restoration,
"Sometimes dislocation occurs due to prolonged, continuous rubbing with moist hands. And arrange for gentle motion of the limb every hour."
"And if the tortuosity is worn out and hardened, like stone, and it needs to be removed by iron, then one must cut all the way down to the bone with a fine, light-bladed scalpel. And use caution and skill in this procedure."
"Here begins the book of dislocations."
"Dislocations occur when a joint moves out of its proper place, preventing it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing great pain and injury to the patient."
"If dislocation occurs in anyone, it must be immediately reduced without delay."
"But if it is delayed, the site will swell up, and if one tries to put it back then it will hardly return to its place. Therefore, one should not attempt to move it while it is swollen: often this leads to spasms and other pains."
"Nevertheless, when this happens, one should bleed the patient, then leave him until the inflammation has subsided; then bathe the limb in warm water and oil, gently move it, and treat each joint as it comes back into its proper place."
"And I have arranged the chapters on dislocations from head to foot."
"of the jawbone(s)"
"It sometimes happens that the jawbones are dislocated inward, and their dislocations occur in two ways: either they are slightly displaced from their proper place and softened somewhat; or else they are completely dislocated and hang down towards the chin, causing saliva to flow out of the mouth so that it cannot be held in, nor can the mouth be closed, and the tongue becomes entwined with speech."
"If the dislocation is slight, it returns on its own through various manipulations."
"And if it is complete and has happened suddenly, then you must quickly manipulate it without delay;"
"and do it in such a way that the assistant holds the patient's head and the doctor places a little finger of one hand into the root of the dislocation within the mouth if the dislocation is on both sides, with the other hand holding steady, and commands the patient to relax his jaws and move them in all directions."
"And the doctor places it back into its proper place until it returns."
"And if the dislocation returns suddenly, especially if both jawbones have been dislocated together, then bathe them in warm water and oil until they can be gently manipulated without delay, as we have said."
"And when they are properly reduced and the patient's mouth can be closed without being too loose, then place moistened cloths made of waxed oil and pitch on them, then bind it gently with soft bandages;"
"and have the patient sleep on his back with two pillows between his cheeks so that he does not move them to the right or left nor try to chew, but takes only soft food until the pain has subsided and the jawbones are firmly set."
"And then he may chew whatever he wishes easily, and should not strain his mouth when eating or drinking until the jawbone is well healed."
"And if the two jawbones cannot be properly reduced within an hour and are not returned to their proper place, then fever and chills will ensue, sometimes with diarrhea, and occasionally with vomiting of bile."
"And when you see these symptoms, know that it is a loss [of life]; for many people who suffer from them die within eight days."
"of dislocation of the jawbone at the angle"
"The angle [of the jaw] cannot be dislocated towards the cheek from within and from below the chin, but sometimes it can be dislocated backwards, which is easily felt."
"And the reduction is done by having the patient lie on his back with his arms extended, then pressing firmly at the angle of the jaw with your palm so that it returns to its proper place; then apply a plaster and bind it tightly;"
"and the cheek that is towards the ear cannot be dislocated; if it is slightly displaced or if it has been dislocated, then reduce it to its proper place as we have said, apply a plaster and bind it tightly, and command the patient to rest until he is healed."
"And the cheekbone is reduced in the same way when it has been dislocated from its proper place."
"of dislocation of the shoulder blade"
"Know that the shoulder blade is dislocated in one of three ways: either at the lower part of the glenoid cavity; or at the side of the chest; or rarely at the upper part."
"and it does not dislocate behind the shoulder blade nor inward among the nerves; and often it dislocates downwards towards the glenoid cavity, especially in those who have little flesh because it slips out quickly; but in those with sufficient flesh, it slips out hardly at all."
"Sometimes, however, some men suffer a blow or a fracture and the shoulder becomes inflamed with heat, causing them to believe that it has been dislocated."
"It is therefore necessary for you to examine him until you are certain [of the diagnosis]; and then begin the treatment."
"And it is recognized that a dislocation has occurred when it has slipped downwards towards the glenoid cavity, and you will see a noticeable difference between the affected shoulder and the healthy one." "and you will find a hollow at the top of the shoulder and below the glenoid cavity where the head of the humerus touches it as if it were an egg; and the patient cannot bring his hand near to his neck nor move it in any way."
"And likewise, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden because you will find it distinctly by touching it;"
"and this type of dislocation cannot be reduced except when it is fresh or if the patient is a child."
"The method is for the practitioner to lift the patient's hand upwards, then place his fingers below the glenoid cavity and forcefully elevate the joint upwards into its proper place while the practitioner lifts the arm and extends it upwards; it will slip back quickly."
"But if it does not slip back as we have described even after several days, then the patient must be bathed in warm water and anointed with softening and soothing ointments such as decoctions of marshmallow, fenugreek, and marsh mallow roots boiled in water."
"Then have the patient lie on his back and place a soft, but not too soft or hard, pad of linen cloth beneath the glenoid cavity. Then place your heel on the pad and gently elevate the head of the shoulder blade while pulling the patient's arm;"
"and another practitioner should hold the patient's head so that it does not move downwards. The shoulder blade will slip back immediately into its proper place if you perform the reduction in this manner;"
"and you should have present a man who is taller than the patient. He should stand directly opposite the affected side and place his shoulder beneath the glenoid cavity of the patient while lifting the arm upwards so that the patient hangs from it;" and another servant pulls down the patient's hand towards the belly. And if the patient is too light, he places something heavy with him, and the dislocation returns now.
And the dislocation can also be reset in another manner: and one plants a long stick in the ground, the thickness of which should be about that of a finger, not too thick nor too thin. then the stick is placed under the patient, but so that he has soft pillows above him, and the patient should be lying along the length of the wood; then his hand should be extended downwards on the other side properly, and the joint will quickly return to its place.
And if it does not want to return for all these things that we have said, then do this treatment: take a stick of two spans long and four fingers wide, which has a round head for entering into the joint deeply under the armpit, like this shape:
then tie cloths under the head of the stick so that the stick does not hurt the patient; then place it under the armpit of the patient; and extend his arm along the length of the stick, and tie the sling to the stick, and the bandage at the top of the hand, then place the arm on one end of a board of similar width, and let the hand hang down, and leave the body hanging down on the other side: the joint will now return.
And when it is in, however it may be, then place under the armpit a wisp of wool; then put on the emplaster made with flour powder, with incense and egg yolk all around the shoulder, then wrap it tightly under the armpit, and twist the bandage onto the plaster, and bind the hand to its collar, and let the hand remain like this.
And he should eat little until the member is comfortable, for it will heal more quickly; and afterwards he may eat more after five or seven days, and move it; and if it is firm and not softened, then it is healed.
And if the joint is swollen due to moisture that has come there, or for another reason, then you should apply cauterization through three holes, as it is shown in the chapter on cauteries.
And if you do all this and after twenty days the joint does not stay in place, and he cannot raise his arm upwards, then know that the nerves at the top of the shoulder are cut, stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
The dislocation that is towards the breast and nipples, or behind, is caused by a push or stretching of the hands, and another bandage should be applied; and treat until it is healed.
And if after the healing there comes pain in the member and slowness of movement, then the patient should often apply hot compresses until that pain is alleviated and returns to its original state.
About dislocation of the elbow
Know that the elbow joint is dislocated inwards and returns inwards, and it is dislocated from all sides, especially front and back, and the dislocation is not concealed because one can see and feel it well, and it is dislocated according to each type of figure. And when you bring the arm of the sick person alongside the healthy one, then you can see it clearly. For the joint is displaced and he cannot bend his arm nor touch his shoulder at all.
And you should reduce it before an abscess forms there, for if an abscess forms, it will be difficult to reduce, and perhaps it cannot be completely reduced, especially when it is behind; such dislocations are worse than others and cause greater pain, and sometimes gangrene occurs.
And the reduction is when it can be reduced in such a way that you extend his hand with both your hands; and spread his arm, and place your hands on the elbow from above, below and around, and press the joint against the wrist or the root of the palm until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in front, then it returns when he folds his hand towards his hand and presses the elbow that is dislocated against the root of the palm.
And if it does not want to return to its place, then apply strong extension. And this is how: two ministers extend the arm and hold it tightly so that it does not move during the extension. Then twist the arm on each side, and wrap a doubled cloth long and wide around it
and when the surgeon has joined the joint with his hand, then he should anoint it with any oil to soften the joint, and then press the joint firmly until it returns.
And when it is in its place, then put on a dry plaster with egg white and press it firmly, and bind the arm to the neck of the patient and leave it for several days before removing it.
And if the joint is firmly in its place, then untie the bandage and leave it. And if you see that the joint is not quite firm, then start again with the plaster and the bandage, leaving it on for several days until it is well secured, then remove it.
And if he feels pain after the reduction of the joint and it moves, then bathe him and rub him gently and press until he is comforted; or place a greasy sheep's wool poultice on the joint, leave it for one day and one night, then remove it and put him in a bath. And when he sweats, then rub the joint moderately with a cloth, then put back the poultice and then enter the bath. Do this two or three times until he is healed. And if it still hurts, then place a moist compress of warm wheat flour mixed with butter on it and press it firmly until it returns to its normal state.
hand dislocations
The hand joint is easily dislocated and its reduction is also easy compared to other joints. Therefore it must be reduced as soon as possible, before the place becomes swollen or an abscess forms.
And the reduction is done by placing the injured hand on a table and extending it with the help of ministers. The surgeon should then place his palm on top of the joint and press until it returns to its place.
However, you should always check that it is properly reduced. Then the patient should place the back of his hand on a table for extension and reduction. And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand, then the patient should place the back of his hand on the table and the surgeon should place his hand on top of the joint. If it returns now, that's good.
If not, then apply soothing compresses to prevent an abscess from forming and leave them on without removing them again.
And if he cannot endure it, and you are unable to put it back in place after several days, then the joint will remain dislocated.
And it will cause no harm to the patient except that his hand will be weakened and he will not be able to grasp anything: then know that the nerves or arteries are cut, so there is no other remedy than to use a cautery near the case, and sometimes nothing else helps.
"And when the hand is in place, put on the splint that we have mentioned, then bind it and leave it for five days, then untie it and let it remain so."
"And if he cannot move it well, and there is any stiffness, then apply warm water and rub until it is smooth."
"Regarding the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
"No finger of the hand is dislocated at any point, not on the back of the palm or the front."
"Then take hold of the finger, and pull the dislocation back until it returns. Then support the top of the finger and push it toward the part where it is dislocated."
"Leave it for two days, then align it the following day. And the rest, as we have said, and when untied on the third day, move it gently, and bind it again. Do this often until it is firm."
"And do the same if it is dislocated on the front of the hand, and do so until it is healed. And do the same when it is dislocated elsewhere."
"Regarding the dislocation of the heel bone of the back"
"When the heel bone of the foot or leg is dislocated, or when there are multiple dislocations, there is no treatment for this, as the damage is already done."
"And the sign is that the person suddenly falls without intending to, and cannot get up again, and many times some member becomes weakened, either both thighs or one arm."
"And often the heel bone moves to three places; that which moves at the back is called 'gilbositez':"
"The treatment for this is that if 'gilbositez' has come from childhood, then there is no hope of recovery or healing."
"And those that come from a fall or blow or similar things, the ancient physicians used to describe various treatments with great words, but they were not very effective."
"but I have abbreviated it according to my intention and have devised tools in various ways."
"I say that there is no remedy nor health for the 'gilbositez' that comes on the front of the foot"
"And also that which comes directly to both sides and cannot be cured except for that one that properly comes to the back."
"And it is necessary that the sick person be laid on their face in one place and have something under them so they do not hurt themselves."
"Then plant a stake firmly in the ground at the head and another at the feet of the sick person. Then tie one rope around their ankles and another around their hips, knees, and ankles."
"And two assistants should hold the ropes, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the two stakes;"
"And let them be tied firmly, with the stake as we have said, and the doctor press their palms firmly on the heel bone until it returns."
"And if the heel bone does not return with this treatment, then take a plank of wood three feet long and place it under the bed. The sick person should be on their side, and put the end of the plank under the bed, then place the middle of the plank on the heel bone;" "and the doctor should put their feet on the other end of the plank and press firmly until it returns to its place. And if you see that it does not return, then do the same on the side that turns towards the hand."
"And it is necessary that you plant two stakes at the head of the sick person's bed and another two near their feet, with a space of one palm length between each stake."
"And each stake should have a hole where the dislocation occurs, and they should be firmly planted in the ground so that they do not move. And between each pair of stakes there should be one turning stake on which the rope turns, with two small stakes of one palm length each to help turn the dislocation."
"And then tie the rope that is around the dislocation towards the head and the other rope towards the feet to the other turning stake. And each assistant should turn their stake with all the rope, and the master should place the heel bone in its proper position as we have said."
"And when it is in place, then put on a dry poultice with plenty of egg yolks. Then apply bandages and then the splint made from a board three feet long, which should cover the area of the dislocation and the healthy part of the spine. Then tie it with a rope as we have said, and let the sick person be nourished on a soft diet until they are healed."
"And if anything happens at the end of the healing process, then one should administer softening and soothing medications along with the splint that we have mentioned earlier. And sometimes one can also administer a plaster."
"And sometimes the appearance of the spine at the back can seem like a dislocation, but it is not. It is simply the bone that is visible, and one should not assume too much or presume to treat it, as this could potentially lead to death."
"Dislocations of the hip joint"
"Know that the hip and shoulder joints only have dislocations, unlike other joints. The hip joint is unstable in four ways: internally and externally, and anteriorly and posteriorly. It is more unstable internally than elsewhere, and somewhat less stable anteriorly and posteriorly."
"And the sign of internal hip dislocation is that when the sick leg is placed next to the healthy one, it appears longer and the sick knee joint opens wider. The sick person cannot bend their knee at a right angle." "And the area that is swollen with heat and has an abscess near it indicates the location of the dislocation, as the thighbone comes there."
"And the sign of external hip dislocation is that these accidents are opposite to those mentioned earlier."
"And the sign of anterior hip dislocation is that the leg appears well-formed, but the knee cannot be bent without pain. If one tries to make the person walk, they cannot do so and hold back their urine. The ankle swells, and when they walk, they limp on the heel."
"And the sign of posterior hip dislocation is that the knee cannot be extended or bent, and the leg appears shorter than the other one. The ankle is relaxed, and the thighbone is located below the ribs."
"The treatment for this condition resembling hip dislocation is to examine whether the dislocation is old or new. If it is old and has healed in its displaced position, then there is no treatment for it. One should not attempt to reduce such a dislocation, as doing so could cause harm."
"For those hip dislocations that are fresh and occur in four ways (internal, external, anterior, and posterior), one should quickly reduce the dislocation using traction either internally or externally, and then move it to the right or left. If reduced correctly, no further treatment is necessary."
"But if the dislocation cannot be reduced in this manner, then one must prepare a strong assistant and pull on the leg with both hands or use a rope tied around the knee to provide traction." And another servant extends his hand thus, placing his hands under the patient's buttocks, then grasps the thigh gently with a lien, while another holds the head of the lien.
All at once they extend up and down so that the patient is lifted from the ground all at once, and remains suspended.
This manner of extension is common for four members, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, that is good.
If not, one must attend to the limb's care. When dislocation is on the hip, one should place the patient on his sound side, then put the lien on the root of the thigh, and where it is under the angle, then extend the lien upwards towards the angle, and towards the bone.
Then another servant takes the patient's arms, embraces the great bone of the thigh on the affected side, and extends it strongly outwards; thus it will return to its place now; and this manner of dislocation is lighter than others.
And if you cannot set it in this way that we have said, then tie the two feet of the patient together with a soft strong lien on both heels and knees, and let the affected leg be extended two spans more than the other
then let him be hung by the head on the top of a beam, and let him hang two arms' lengths above the ground; then command one servant to embrace the hipbone, and another servant who is hanging with the patient embraces the thigh strongly, for the joint will now return quickly.
And when the dislocation is outward, let the patient lie on his side as we have said in the case of hip displacement, and stretch one lien over the affected thigh properly, also over the foot
Then place two wedges, one at the head and one at the feet, then stick one wedge between the thighs of the patient in the shape of a V; "And let him place wet cloths around to prevent the patient from being burned, then each attendant should extend towards him, and the physician should hold the dislocation steady with his hand."
"If it returns, that is good. If not, place him on a bed and press as we have said for dislocation of the hip, and let the patient lie on the healthy side."
"And when the dislocation is anterior, then one must extend the affected leg quickly, and according to what I have said; and let the physician place his pain on the affected angle of the hip, then press with the other hand, extending towards the knee."
"And if the dislocation is posterior, then one must not extend the affected leg downwards nor lift it from the ground, but rather let it be as if the hip were dislocated posteriorly, as we have said about childbirth on the two hips." "and let it be on its face, and the cloth extended as we have said before, and one must press on the joint with the knee."
"And it will be done when the patient extends his legs and they are even; then join the thighs together, place the splint, and bind with a bandage so that the hip does not move."
"And let him rest for 3 or 4 days, then remove the splint and replace it. If the legs are even, then bind again as before and leave for another 3 days. Then remove the splint and let him go slowly until the member is comfortable."
Dislocation of the knee
"The kneecap can be dislocated in three ways: inside and outside, and behind; it does not dislocate in front."
"And the sign is that you tell the patient to bend his leg towards his thigh, and if it does not articulate with the thigh, then know that it is dislocated."
"And the reduction of all [types of dislocation] is that you make the patient sit upright and extend his leg if he can, then place your back on his face and place his foot on yours."
"Then take his kneecap in your palms and withdraw between your thighs, then strongly bend both sides of the knee; another assistant should extend his foot until the kneecap returns to its place, and the sign is that it articulates lightly with the thigh."
"And place the splint on it and let the leg articulate with the thigh, then bind them strongly together for 3 or 4 days, then remove [the splint]. And do not allow the patient to move until the member is comfortable."
"And if the member is not in place, then strongly extend it as we have said in the treatment of the hip until it is straightened."
Dislocation of the heel
"The heel is sometimes twisted and sometimes completely dislocated, both inward and outward."
"And the sign is that the ankle is swollen, and it tends forward at the part where it is dislocated:"
"The reduction is easy, and one should gently extend it with both hands when it is only twisted."
"And when it is completely dislocated, you must make the patient sit upright and have one assistant pull him forward by the leg above the ankle:"
"Then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, then with your left hand twice, then extend it upwards and gently push the foot upwards:"
"And do this twice as we have said, pushing and pulling the foot; if it returns, that is good; if not, then repeat the procedure, for it will return:"
"And if it cannot be reduced in this way, then make the patient lie on his back on the ground, firmly plant a stake in the ground between his thighs, and tie the straps around so that they do not injure the patient;"
"Then one assistant pulls the thigh, while another extends the foot with both hands or with a rope tied around the heel;" "Then each assistant gently extends until the stake is always between the patient's thighs to hold him when he is extended;"
"Then the surgeon gently places his hands on the dislocation and one assistant pulls the healthy leg downward, and the dislocation will quickly return."
"And when it is in place, then apply the splint and bandages, and strap it strongly, tie the foot to the leg, and watch carefully that the ligatures behind the ankle are not too tight;"
"Then leave it for 2 or 3 days and if the ligatures slacken, then strap it again; remove it on the third or fourth day, but prohibit walking for four days." "And if he walks before that time, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again."
"And if inflammation comes afterwards, then you must calm it as we have said elsewhere until it is healed."
about the elbows
"When the elbows are dislocated, they should be gently reduced without force, and this is an easy thing to do."
"And if the dislocation is in any notch of the back of the foot, then you should make the patient sit upright on a level seat or table and place your foot on what opens from these joints, then press strongly with your foot until it returns."
"And when it is in place and there is nothing more apparent, then place a splint with two forks underneath the sole of the foot, then strap it strongly and leave it for three days before removing it; then let him rest until he is healed."
About wounds and dislocations at the same time
When an injury comes with dislocation, and one wants to restore it,
If you are not presumptuous in the treatment, if you are wise in the art and have practiced it for a long time, and if you are compassionate and merciful and cautious, not hasty.
At the beginning, use gentle remedies to ease inflammation and leave the patient in God's hands if you see no hope for recovery. And when you see hope [for improvement], then straighten the limb now before inflammation increases.
And when the limb is in place, then apply remedies to reduce inflammation and dress the wound with drying ointments as appropriate.
And if there has been a fracture along with dislocation, and small bones are dislocated, then set the bone and do what we have said for simple fractures.
And guard yourself from entering the path of fear, as I have said, for this is more harmful to you according to your Creator, and for the sake of preserving your weapon and body. Amen
