"Dear friends, having completed this book which is the foundation of medicine and surgery, I have come to its conclusion after discussing it in detail with my explanations. "And I realized that the best way to complete this book is by introducing 'surgery,' which comes from the same Latin root as my previous explanation.
"And because of that, the art of surgery is particularly important in our region and has been highly valued over time due to its importance for science and progress. "And from that comes the realization of error and the fear, which leads people to close off their thoughts and align themselves with the science.
I believe you meant "I seem to recall that this medical treatise follows a format of exposition, explanation and abbreviation. And will include examples of the various procedures involved in this field with a description and preparations for each one, as required by the medical treatise's format.
And because of what we have experienced no great doctors of hands are found in our time And he who undertakes the science of anatomy should know how to distinguish between different parts and joints and separations thereof, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and brain cells, as well as their number and manner of motion and rest; so that they can be distinguished from one another.
And because of this, we must ensure that Ypocrates is not only with water but also with oil and vinegar. Furthermore in the art of healing.
In the introduction to this book we say that nothing is written unless it's necessary and if there are any mistakes or errors in what has been said.
And that I have seen many people who become involved with this field and then abandon it, either from lack of knowledge or fear of the unknown experimentation required to learn more about it.
"If a man penetrates the anus with his penis or from anal intercourse, he will pierce through to the artery. "As for women who choke on death between their hands,
"And there is another matter where you treat an abscess of the eye and it is large; "If he takes a part from his bladder with him, then three times he dies.
"And I have mentioned above the treatment of it; and mention its position in relation to other wounds, and how large it was.
"And there is another matter where you treat the foot fracture and with a breezeur or wound;
"And the matter of ignorance holds the fracture steady against the wound and does not let go to the end.
"They command that he do not remove it until his own will allows him to do so;
"And they await until the leg is all healed and the pain is gone, and then come for death.
I am coming to take him away, quickly. When dislocated, it was quiet and felt no pain.
But every vein corrupted or member could not be healed;
And as long as the corruption was in a member, it would continue to spread through all members.
And then there's another remedy which would burn away the abscess and inflamed with the heat of its own nature.
However, when it is pure melancholic humor (a type of toxic humors), only touching with iron can restore what has been corrupted.
In order for you to understand that the fire cautery is divided into two parts And it was necessary to know which part of them had more severe conditions.
I will show you in this book where there is doubt and fear.
It was necessary to hold the eye steady so that it could not talk badly about us.
If you take your arms in custody and tie them gently but firmly, and use the best way that by God's grace you come to healing and may live.
Let the blisters of concern heal.
Let your doubts and fears be at an end; if so you may come to the other world with glory.
He has lost his mind Do not take ill treatment of any disease; for this will be no good
I have completed the third chapter of this treatise.
The first chapters deal with fire cauteries and the remedies against them. And in these chapters are found remedies for other sores.
In all these chapters are found remedies for burns and wounds, and everything else that is necessary in their use.
The second chapters deal with cutting off, piercing, and the treatment of wounds, and extractions from arrows, and similar things;
And in these chapters are found remedies for treating sores, and extractions of stones, and similar things.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and sprains, and similar things.
And order the limbs to be straight, and arrange the body's parts.
And so that we remember of old, it is important to assess the quality and quantity of all healing treatments.
I say that the quality of the help, and also its abundance, is longer words and more subtle knowledge, and it responds to inquiries.
And when they speak further on the subject, and agree with each other's ideas.
I am bored by their talk for too long.
I say that the fire cure should be used universally on whatever matter there is; as it does apply to all things:. It is about knowing how to use heat for treatment, and dryness for treatment.
In using both hot and dry dressings together they found none of them helped much, and they said the fire cure is a great aid:. and they said otherwise: That cautery is not worth doing if it comes from fire or heat. Because when the body is hot and you must treat a hot disease with heat, not with cold water.
And that which promotes the opposite of cautery does great good to a warm, dry illness coming from inside the body. When you bring the fire to one's skin and moisture in contact with it, the fire becomes extinguished.
I agree with this statement. But I have never found any evidence to support my experiments.
And any way you can use to treat the patient if it has been proven effective by experience and with good intentions for the art of cautery, knowledge of the different types of skin, the disposition and cause of diseases, and the remedies and causes of those wounds.
With other diseases we have no fear but for cold and wet illnesses. And they had been arranged and aligned with the fire treatment.
And note that if the fire cure is used in secret treatments, it will be more effective than using it with medications.
Its effects are simple and only occur on the member that is being burned, and do not affect any other part of the body.
The fiery medicines come from different parts of the body to heal the member of pain or disease. And by chance occurs a dislocation
The joints because of their height and the goodness of their substance do not like this if there is excess
And that is why I was able to discover it through experimentation and the length of time and study that I put into art, and also by observing nature.
and for the length of my discourse I apologize, because it displeases me to reveal what is hidden or fire, and also quality of the earth, as it brings about diseases in the body, just as the philosopher says when he demonstrates. And receive in your thoughts.
And see you that they must make the cauterings
I say that cautery is acceptable for all types, because those who are recommended by the cautery's aid. And furthermore it is known that cauterization should be used for necessary pains and haste, so as to not treat larger wounds on the member.
And do not think of anything, dear friend, as long as you follow what I say. because the disease that is treated with fire does not have any cure and it says to leave it alone;
and it says to leave it alone; but it is not necessary to do so if the patient does not need them and they can harm the complexion of the patient and dry out their humors that cause pain, and makes medicines for its immediate relief and for preserving its health and beauty.
And any disease can happen once as long as the complexion is affected by the ailment, or as long as it does not cure itself and its beauty.
and these are collected by acquiring food or similar things, so if you do not administer the fire cure when there is too much fatness or moisture, as long as the fire cures does not reduce the pain, wounds, and similar things, and the pain returns no more. But that happens here
And many people do not listen because the treatments are called "medicine" and they see
But they do not believe that treatments are worth anything after "medicine," but their intentions are false, and they call the doctors of medicine because when we administer our methods for curing any disease, they are not worth it, from the moment we administer our cure, until it is applied
"Even though it is understood that cautery is for medical purposes, many people still do not agree with the intention of those who practice it.
The previous one said that the cure was more effective than any other method of healing, and they did not say what qualities it possessed or its high quality substance.
They said that the cure was not harmful, but it is not seen as effective because I have tried and found that it is ineffective in any case.
The gold cure was worth using if they said so. "When you heat any metal object," it does not indicate how hot the metal is becoming and stops when cooled off.
if heated too much if burned. and the fire is no longer available.
You have ordered the execution of this chapter for such reasons that it is easier to be found by others.
Olive oil cautery is used in hot and cold weather, as with the cause of a disease called 'soda', and due to many humors arising from two main causes: wetness and dryness. And it leads to various ailments like dense pain and throat pain, among others
The form of the fire cautery is that the hairs are burned off by a soluble ointment applied three or four times, depending on how often it hurts and the strength of the pain. And then apply the same cure again.
Then place it between your hands and let them sit still.
After placing the root of his palm on the base of his nose in between its two eyes And when you hold your hands steady if the fire cautery called 'olive', which is its form. And let your hand grow cold and cruel little by little. After making it numb, gently release the limb you see in small pieces If you don't feel pain when applying the fire cautery as I have told you to do,
After a short while, let it rest gently and make it numb, then apply the fire cautery to the affected area.
Then take away the moist with towels. And let it burn until it is white (i.e., roasted). After curing the wound known as tetrafarmacien, as long as he remains sane
And they realized that when a person applies more ointment to the wound, it becomes more inflamed. And for this reason he moves.
And say that one must be so careful with the cautery that some part of the bone may be broken, and then proceed to make a small cut into it where it is broken
And the second is to apply it gently as much as possible on and around the affected area, and press hard enough that you remove some of the phlegm from the bone just like women use when they put a poultice in their ear because this helps bring out the humors.
And for the third, apply it gently and firmly to the wound as much as possible, so that it can be applied for an extended period of time. After applying it, you should clean and bandage it properly.
And these two methods of cauterization seem to be the best way to do everything in all cases, except for those who have fear as an option.
I think it's important to let go and let nature take its course.
because the dislocated joint is already weakened by continuous natural treatments, as we experience with other joints;
And I shall serve you with a cure that is gentle and mild for my sake, and to which all members of the body shall be subject.
When all the symptoms of chronic pain are severe and prolonged, you should use creams and pills that contain capsaicin, which is known for its pain relief properties. And after applying the cure as mentioned above, it will be effective. When a joint dislocation occurs due to its strong nature and is not too cold; After applying the cure as mentioned earlier, you should apply it sparingly. After applying the cure to the joint at its place as mentioned earlier, you should apply it using a tool called a mallet. and then we put it in a container with ventilation. And hold tightly to your hand if you feel a jolt when it comes. The fire cautery has greater pain than any other treatment and I will speak more about that later
And it is advisable to have the corners of the fire cautery be less sharp than those used for cutting into major vessels, and this is how
"Fire cautery When part of the main artery becomes painful and is extended with illness, and dislocations are purged through various medications, I have already mentioned in dividing diseases, everything else does not matter. Without knowing the specific procedures of how to perform it, we must know that medical advice and treatment are crucial.
The medical cautery advice is that if you need a vein to be cut open and the arteries or veins near it are also to be cut, then fasten the eye so that the pain remains in place until healing occurs in such a manner that you may repair the incision without damage to the flesh.
And when it is reset if the tie and restraint are done well, let it rest for twelve hours. Then apply a poultice of honey and vinegar twice or three times a day, and leave the wound open for two or three days. Apply it to the chest as much as possible, until breathing stops.
After the incision has healed completely;
and if you see anything of any other remedies that I have written or tried treating with the burning remedies.
Fire cautery must follow this procedure In case of fire cautery, do it like this:
And call 'close' for when the head is cut in such a way that it forms into a hood or has an appearance of being a hood.
And place it on the sore arm and hold tight and gently pull off a little bit at a time until you feel that the wound is completely cleaned.
And gently tell them not to worry too much because it will subside and recover abundantly
After washing with warm water and salt solution, then rub the wound three times Then apply a moist compress, and continue to clean the wound until it is dry
And cauterize this ulcer with the cautery known as "cultella," at its tip, and hold it so that you do not puncture the artery in this area.
Of the injury
When you have cured the ulcer as we described in earlier paragraphs and do not harm it further, then make sure to remove the cautery known as "cultella" when it is dry.
And gently rub the wound with a line of half an inch twice and hold your hand once, and make sure not to touch or damage the artery and cause any harm to it.
Hold your breath when you speak, and make sure your nerves do not twitch or spasm in any way, and be cautious of the artery as it is opened, or if something terrible happens. Let out a sigh/a deep breath
I will tell you how to treat the artery when it is cut open, and I will show you where it is located in this book.
If the cautery does not help with the disease, and if it causes pain to the patient, use it in the way we have suggested, and treat the wound as long as it is still healing.
And if you see that the cautery I have suggested for extracting an artery is not effective or if it causes pain to the patient, use another kind of cautery with two handles. And if you wish for better relief
Of the pain from the ears of frostbite
When the ear experiences pain from frostbite, and it is treated with solutions and other treatments as we have mentioned in this section, the pain does not cease until the cautery that has been applied is called "ice.
After puncturing both ears with the lancet, put a small amount of it into each ear and gently twist towards its root. And apply this treatment to both ears
After applying the treatment until it is cured.
Of the torture of the mouth
Torture that must be treated with fire should never be attempted when blood moves rapidly, as we have stated in the discussion of diseases.
and not to perform any cautery that comes from wet or dampness.
When you cure this kind of torture that comes from the ears and throat and gagging, it does not work, therefore, if necessary, cauterize one vein. One into the root of the ear and another a little further back near the temple, and one behind the lobe of each.
And instruct the patient to apply the cautery to the healthy part of their body, and to do so on a spot near each ear's corner, as well as another one in between the eyebrows. And let it burn for as long as possible without causing pain or damage.
This is the shape of the cautery.
And it resembles a surgical incision that we have seen before, but it is slightly more subtle and should be made with the cautery being slightly larger.
After curing the left arm as I mentioned earlier, until it is healed.
When a stroke occurs and you treat it as we have mentioned earlier, there is no benefit, and the limbs do not recover, unless you apply four cauteries. Apply the cautery to both ears and to the big ear, as well as on a spot called "the bridge" where we mentioned earlier, and then apply one more cautery on the bottom of the stomach.
And then fix as you have said before.
Litargy refers to a disease characterized by numbness
This ailment is to be treated with large and varied pills,
after treating the main abscess thoroughly, then apply a plaster to cover up its exit wound which is written or treated with plasters;
And this is how to cauterize it. if you do as I have said.
If sane at first sight, good then; and if it is not sane at first sight, burn the main abscess with a large cautery after applying one small one between two larger ones.
and treat it like all the others, and if you see an abscess spreading, then burn it right away; and when the second one is done with its wound, hold onto the third one tightly while treating as long as he/she remains sane.
And if you say "olive", as I have just said,
It is important to ensure that the joint moves freely and as we have previously mentioned;
After releasing the shoulder bone, then apply the fire therapy to release the shoulder joint and its tendons behind it and in between each rib;
And if you continue with more force and the muscles are more tense and the pain is worse, then apply four fire therapies between each rib. Let it continue until the shoulder blade rises further on its own, and gently hold your hand; After the therapy is complete, then apply the fire therapy as mentioned before.
eyebrow
Eyelashes should not be shaved until they are completely healed, and it is advisable to first moisturize the area around them before any other treatments mentioned in this chapter as they tend to be quite sensitive after surgery.
And if this causes pain that cannot be endured, then let him gargle and chew meat with bones to soothe the throat.
After removing the outer layer of skin, we will apply the fire cautery as previously instructed, and then apply it to the veins. And the eyelids stay open and relaxed, as instructed to those who have paralysis or softening of the face, under both arms, and so apply the olive oil with a cloth following the manner I mentioned.
If the eyelashes are still sensitive after all treatments, then apply a gentle cure as mentioned before.
When the causes of melancholia are excessive fluids or swelling and become very thick, then apply treatments that are similar to those mentioned for paralysis as they may be helpful in this case as well.
And because of melancholy they lose the appetite for food and drink, unless their veins are opened so that they can feel something through them
After removing the outer layer of skin after applying a thin coating as smooth as possible to cover it completely so that they are well covered.
And the eyelids tightly closed and well maintained in all ways.
After presenting it as smooth as possible to be cleaned thoroughly with an old cloth. And the forehead should be heated gently so that they do not feel any pain when applied. After viewing the circle from above, let it cool down.
And do this to each vein once every week with another application of heat, as long as he is healthy.
Or if you see that the cautery is not working any longer, perform it anyways to ensure its effectiveness.
This manner of cautery affects the brain greatly;
And then applies butter and grease on the skin, in linen;
"Of the eyes When the eye first moves due to signs that I mentioned in the previous paragraph, and it begins to bleed profusely, causing great damage, and if you fail many times, then they die
After he commands to view his forehead again, and does a second cautery on the forehead, and performs another cautery at both temples so that the eyes become fixed in one or the other direction.
And treat all the cauteries on veins and arteries that are close to the forehead, and apply them at one end of each temple.
And be cautious with the bleeding, if you see too much blood to stop it immediately because your time is short.
And I will teach you how to extract arteries, and make an incision into the vein so that you can hold it steady.
And no matter where they are located
And one sees that it is a frost-induced fluid accumulation that follows the advice given at the beginning of this chapter. I will teach you how to do the forehead, and both temples, and two ears. And if there is another one nearby as well, it should be cauterized at the very base of the scalp to every small cautery.
When you follow the advice given in that chapter and it doesn't do any good, then add a third bleed by making incisions. After removing the head, perform a fire cautery over the entire surface. Perform two cauteries referred to as "clavili" on each of the two arms close together near where they meet.
Make sure you do not cut into an artery during this process.
"The procedure called 'fire cautery':
When the paper of the oil is softened by illness and moisture, but still must be cauterized with the procedure called 'hair removal': The procedure
If you perform the two clavili cauteries in exactly the same way that the arrows are,
do not let go of your hand until there is no third part of paper left in exactly the same way I said before.
with hair There is never a time when the hairs of the eyebrows are shaved off and prick at the eye, or perform the two methods for cauterization. This is knowledge from burning practices, not medicine.
The fire cautery instructs the patient to let their hairs grow long and even; "For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
"When the hairs have grown and are even in thickness, then shave the patient's skin close to the hair growth. "After shaving the eyebrows a shape that is as smooth as possible or close to it with fine strokes of the blade.
"Then apply a powder made from soot and pitch on the forehead and eyebrows to conceal it; then cleanse the fire scar as best you can.
"After cauterizing the face that has been burned slowly and repeatedly over time to its extent; then ensure that all the wounds are in order.
"And the signs of healthiness on the forehead are to shave the eyebrows high and pointing towards the head.
"And after washing your hands, let them stand for three quarters of an hour. "After the treatment is complete when it's safe to do so.
"And after that comes the hair and paper becomes softened until you reapply the fire on the affected area if it's your first time doing so.
"The hairs are burned off if the paper is light enough on its own and even; and do not prick at their roots.
"The burning cautery is that you instruct the patient to let their hairs grow long and even, then make a strip of paper into the shape of a shield.
"Then take French soap and live chalk, from one corner to another. Break it well; And if it does not freeze then in astonish the shape that you have made such as a crooked figure and put on paper these eyes. The illness will remain only if one is overcome with it, or the disease will be in abeyance otherwise. And put on a cloth moistened with oil to prevent the fire from spreading further.
And the dislocated shoulder should be in its place and have two mainstays set into it for the medicine to hold on tightly so that it does not move any more after the fire has been applied, as the pain from the fire will also cause further movement of the dislocated joint like with fire.
"After doing this for a long time, you will know what I mean. And when the medication has been applied and you loosen the band as well, then you see the paper lifted in a way that it was lifted by either fire restraint or cut. If it is done properly
If you do not, if you continue with your left or right leg movements without relief, as long as your wounds are clean and your eyes hold still.
As long as your arms are covered with a cloth and you continue moving them, after curing the left ear injury which is known as "dizziness" and others, as long as it remains steady.
"It is better to apply the remedy often with great diligence, so that it does not touch any of the wounds.
And if the paper becomes thin after that, and the hairs prick in oil, then continue with the treatment of the left one which was moistened properly, just like you did before. As long as it remains steady.
It is the form of relief that follows medicine:
And there are many different ways to do it depending on your constraints.
It is not necessarily the right way for that which has been taught in this art.
"The treatment of fistula by cautery.
When treating a fistula as we have described in the previous paragraph and your treatments are not benefiting you, then it is advisable to apply cautery according to this method.
Instruct the patient to put his head on a pillow. And keep your hands steady and do not move or disturb his head.
After wiping the forehead with a warm cloth, apply it to the eye in small droplets of liquid.
After the fire cautery is complete:
and put a bandage on his head if it forms an oval shape so that he can have the cautery.
If you see one part of his head is smaller than the other, and if it's like a tent:
But whichever bandage you choose should be in place for your entire treatment session.
After the fistula is closed and treated with a poultice: then bind it firmly to prevent any leakage.
After applying the cautery ointment, keep your hand on it until the numbness wears off. And put the cautery on fat from the body and burn
At the beginning of the cautery procedure, it is well If not, if you continue to use it after one more time, then leave it off for 3 days.
After applying cotton wool soaked in vinegar to the burn, apply a corrosive medication as long as it is painful, and let pass 3 days until it stops being sore. And then you should follow up on this by consulting your doctor.
It is a manner of fistula cautery that none of the ancients knew. If there is a fistula and you open it up. After applying the burn dressing of which kind? And how much quantity of it do you use? And hold your hand or firmly grasp it so it does not move at all.
And make sure to wet the arm with lukewarm water and wipe off any excess.
If a fistula occurs, take care of the healthy surrounding skin.
"And when it is cured as we have said, then everything will work out. "If that's not the case, if it is necessary to administer poison and bring the fistula back into the neck according to what is best for a healthy body.
"The veins have been cut. "Twice as many veins are cut when the hairs are long, and especially in young people.
"When you have cured these veins as we have said by making incisions, and it doesn't benefit them, then apply a gentle cautery according to this form:
And hold tightly until it is completely healed as instructed by your doctor.
After curing the sore, make sure it has fully healed.
When pulling out of the root or vein, or the tooth, or any other part of the body after injury and infection occurs, it becomes a fistula. You treat them as described in our previous response, making sure to follow all instructions closely. Unless instructed otherwise by your doctor regarding the specific treatment of the fistula. After making an incision in the fistula, hold your hand steady until it stops flowing.
And after that, when you've done what we've told you in the previous treatment, as long as he is calm;
And if he calms down quickly. But if not, then you should check the shoulder and correct any misalignment that is found in his treatise.
When joints become relaxed due to moisture and move, you treat them with medicine as necessary but do not hold the arm down on a pillow. After applying the cautery that comes after, you must apply it in such a way as to place a bandage on his finger.
And hold the cautery tightly while keeping your hand steady so that the heat from the burn does not spread to the fingers.
After gently holding on to your arm, apply the fire cautery according to your will.
After loosening his jaw muscles and applying a poultice for an hour or two
In that manner you have tied the moving gums and held them in place, their mouths were stopped from producing saliva.
The pain of the limbs
When pain comes from coldness, either it is from the cold itself or its source, and treatments by medicines are not effective; then use the fire cautery in this manner burn/fire cautery
A barber's cautery is when you need to remove hair from a blade or arrow, and the end of it in a steel or iron cutting tool; After wrapping cotton around and placing it at the point of a needle, making sure that it is hot enough to cause pain until it is cooled down.
And as soon as its virtue begins to weaken at the base of the tooth, if you see that it is becoming dull and cotton burns, and put on iron filings until they burn out equally;
The fire cautery assembly is such that if you touch it with fire or rain, and so long as the flames do not go out at the base of the bad hair,
After applying the fire cautery, make sure to rinse it off after a while and hold it against your teeth and put it in your hand as long as you are using it.
Do this carefully because the pain will be severe now or tomorrow.
And make sure to pull your lips back and spit out any burning material immediately after applying the fire cautery.
This is how you use the fire cautery
And do with it what you want and according to your ability.
This is how the cane works:
scalp When the scrophules are cold and wet, they become thirsty for digestion by medicines. After applying the fire cautery to one part of them, wait until it is done and then apply the fire cautery to another part.
Once you have applied the cautery to the abscess once, it will remain as long as one continues applying it.
If more caustic is used in proportion to the amount of the abscess, and allows three times after that. And it should be applied as long as there is bleeding.
After curing the wounds and ensuring they are healed completely.
When moisture weakens the veins due to cold weather, and especially when this is accompanied by a pale complexion, it should be first treated with topical solutions.
After applying the caustic to the root of the throat and making sure not to come into contact with it while swallowing, do not drink anything for at least an hour.
After applying the second caustic to the elbow joint on top of the arm, and if it is called "clavicle", as we have seen the form
"And treat the left as you would have done when it is right.
"If the disease of the arm is cold and frostbitten, do not heat it too much, as that may cause further damage. It should be treated gently. "And another cure for between two moles;
"The treatment to be called 'clavicle' as it is in front of us.
"And if you see one, treat it by puncturing the treatment called 'pimple' as that is in front of us.
"The pimples are just like this... or here.
After curing it as described above, apply the third cautery in this manner:
And for those who are using it more often, please do so with caution
dislocation of the shoulder
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture and it cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. "Afterwards, treat the moles on his back and side; "After gently rubbing what is dense in the ears with your hands.
And if you hold tightly to the fire cure when it is applied, then you should ensure that the connection remains unbroken so that its effect continues.
And cauterize long enough to burn through any flesh beneath it and make sure the fire burns across all the cuts.
And for this fire cure with the third ember, there should be six cuts total made by the cautery.
The nerves are treated with the subtlety of a tent and it is the third fire that is used for this purpose.
And no joint is ever dislocated on this arm.
After applying the cure, you must place bandages over the area. After letting the patient rest and ensuring their limbs are not tense for as long as they can be comfortably relaxed.
And if there is a dislocation of the shoulder, then it may be necessary to perform cupping on both shoulders together or at different times depending on which shoulder has been dislocated.
The alignment is maintained, and the patient's moisture is kept under control, and their limbs are well-cared for.
When the stomach has brought coolness and moisture that is excessive on his complexion, it multiplies the chattering of him, and the accustomed ways of treatment he doesn't profit from anymore, then it is necessary to put a towel or cloth over his back, stretch out his legs and his hands. After the third fire has been used to set all the cuts and the cautery eyelid is done, there should be space between each of the two cuts so that they are not joined together when they begin to heal.
"Make sure to follow these instructions for performing the fire cautery. Do not let the hairs grow short or uneven.
"If you are going to perform a gastric cautery in this manner:
"if someone has fear of the cautery procedure, perform it by puncturing and holding steady at the stomach's base for a certain amount that you have determined. "Then proceed to applying all the poins as they are called.
After the treatment of the preceding ailment has been completed and is healed.
"For the liver, there is pain from fruit and moisture and excess volume. As long as it remains in its natural state, it will expel any surplus. "And the hair is cured as we have described in sections and it will not benefit from being shaved over its hairline. "Sign the third poin in this form and fashion, with its quantity, on the liver. Treat it for any symptoms that may arise from consuming alcohol.
And say between a small fire and a large one And the smaller ones on both arms should be held as firmly as possible.
Only let it go gently through the hair, and hold them tightly to his feet.
If not possible, if he is still conscious, extend his legs, and lightly hold his head.
And if you are skilled in the art of cautery, you should be gentle and hold him gently as he grows smaller, so that no harm is done to his neck. And if he does not see well because the sores are in place and low down by sight.
When you prick his liver, and find out whether it is soft or leathery "If a person is burned with fire, they will feel great pain.
"And if it's in the water, then there is no feeling of pain.
"When this remedy wants to see the eyes closed tightly;
"And then close one eye when the other is being pricked by a needle, and then remove the fire from over the face so that it does not burn. "Burn until the hairs are burned through, and every time there is a rupture, as long as it bleeds.
"After this treatment for burns, follow any other treatment until it is healed;
"And do not recommend this treatment for anyone who has not studied extensively in the art of medicine, as these diseases have never been cured.
Certainly.
fire cautery
The first one said that you must perform multiple cauterizations of the roots of the physician's vein. Take one root of a vein that is long enough to cover your finger tips and make it dry, thick, and as large in circumference as you can. And wrap it in oil and apply to the fire, cauterizing between the heel and toe, and performing cautery a short while later on the part that is next to the beard;
And perform cautery between the fifth and sixth fingers, pulling it back slightly. And I perform cauterization on the nipple and another on the stomach, separating two spaces, and between these two fingers there is a cautery.
Do not press too hard with your hand, as it causes injury when smelling.
"And they said that no one should use the fire cautery at all, except for removing hair and putting it between the lips until the abscess is healed. And if there was pain like what we experienced in the previous sentence,
"In this case there is fear and many die, or fistulas come that cannot be healed.
of the mouse
"When treating the disease of the mouse from what we have mentioned as cures, and it does not benefit me, unless you use three different methods to cure that which is good.
you do three or four incisions at various places along the length of the vein, according to its shape and the size of the incision in that place.
don't press your hand too firmly on all of it or put pressure against your own back.
another way to do this is by using the technique we mentioned in the previous sentence for treating dislocations of the shoulder.
And gently apply the treatment to the part that moves around and has a lot of hair, or if it is on your back towards the front side; and apply the treatment according to its size, length, and location, so as to be able to see the area clearly when applying the fire cautery.
After holding their eyelids open as long as they can stay open on the other side, and then apply the cautery, and in a short while there will be two.
And if you see that all the hairs are burned off with the cautery to the third eyelid,
After the treatment when there is pus discharge and it must be known to apply another treatment immediately.
Fire cautery is not advisable when using sharp objects; it should be done in the manner prescribed as "asclytes.
When you treat them as we have described in the divisions, and your treatment does not profit, then it is advisable that you perform four cauteries at once on the back, behind the stomach, behind the liver, behind the gallbladder, behind the ribs, and behind the spine, and place there the needle. And then apply them well near to each eye.
After letting the cautery burn off the long hairs, do not leave the treatment of the eyelid after the cautery. And healing will take place, and they will assemble with God's aid.
The form of the cautery for the belly or the collarbone as we have shown before. And it should be on the back if that is where it is located when you are facing forward.
When the veins are inflamed in that area and they are covered with jaundice, it is recommended to cauterize between the auricular and ulnar points on the back. And gently hold your hand while you perform the cautery so that it can turn properly.
Do not enter too much force, or it will cause bleeding; and if there is bleeding, then cauterize in the following way
After performing both legs' cauteries at their respective points of insertion. And if you are cauterizing both sides, one on the front and one on the back of each leg.
Let the cauteries grow slowly so they can heal completely.
After completing all other treatments as described before.
For the belly ache comes from cold or moisture as long as the stomach and digestive powers remain active, they cannot be cured by conventional treatments. You see the stomach ache radiating and intense pain, if you apply the fire cure to the stomach as prescribed here or to the stomach itself, apply it externally. And also apply an external application of the fire cure in the small intestines and around the joints.
If you see abundant moisture and the patient is in pain, apply the fire blister to their finger, and also to both wrists and any other part of them, as treatment will be beneficial when it has little aid.
"for curing hemorrhoids
When the hemorrhoids are present and one or more, old and large, cold and damp, they will heal if you apply fire cures as we have suggested in previous sections. Apply the fire cure to both shoulders, one after another, holding them steady and slowly in a triangle shape, then apply it to the belly.
And if one thinks that their stomach is cold and the meat does not cook properly, then you see swelling of the vein on the stomach, unless the vein has already been mentioned before, also with the liver, and another on the sternum altogether. And let the cautery be maintained for a long time. "After curing him as much as he can bear.
When you catch fire, if you extinguish the cauterization that seems necessary, and then apply it all over the affected area. And I let my hand grow as long as it takes to cauterize new veins that have not yet developed, until they do develop.
Do this once or twice more, and if there is any swelling from the heat, then cauterize as quickly as we have mentioned. After treatment of the affected wounds until they are healed.
And if you apply a greater fire to the cautery, it will have more effect.
If the patient cannot endure the fire, we will tell you about it in their next post.
When there is any fistula present, and pain and moisture are prevalent throughout the wound, if you perform a thorough cleaning with a subtle solution, keep in mind that you should clean as thoroughly as possible for as long as it takes to heal completely.
After you have applied the cautery and it seems to be working, place a finger into the fistula according to how much force is needed for insertion. Continue applying pressure on the cautery as long as the pores that are inflamed and crusted remain firm, one, two or three times depending on the amount of swelling;
And watch your nerves when you do this, and avoid large veins.
if the fistula is in the arm and to the intestine, be careful with these procedures, do not perform them without a nurse present;
after curing the sore as much as it is healed and the wounds are sealed up tight until they are completely healed.
"And if they do not heal properly, it is as though their bones are broken. And if one of these we have mentioned in the above sentence should happen to you.
When the pain of fruit comes and great suffering, do not let it pass without applying a cautery on both sides at once to the fruit cautery that we have mentioned before.
And if you do not get enough help from one cautery, there will be three in a row, and they will make even more aid.
Of bladder disease When the bladder is small and fragile of fruit and moisture, if it holds urine in it, then apply cautery to the part below the bladder. Where the hairs begin to prick at their base, and one on each side, and so there are two others where they do not come off with a single blow;
And if you use a fire cure on your back, do not move it.
Or should the shoulder be burned in accordance with the form described?
When the marrow is cold and damp, it cannot conceive or bear witness to its death. If they come, if there's great pain. When it is not convenient to do the third fire cure on the face as we have described for the veins, and the second fire cure on the back.
Or should you burn your shoulder?
When the moist external secretions come out of the mouth and this leads to its death, it is known that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together.
And if you want to burn the hair on the back of the neck in one go, as with the fire cure similar to a circle and facing towards its front at that time when it's turned, so that the back is burned inside the circle.
And if there are burns of such severity that they require cauterization to the stomach
If there are burns of such severity that you need to apply a third degree burn treatment on the skin, and if they require similar treatments all over.
And then treat it as soon as possible.
of the arm pain When pain comes from the bite of a snake, it is cold and wet, and the wounds are treated with what we have said in the division and the treatment is not worth much, and the disease is ancient. It's advisable to purge the large lumps of fat pills or other similar pills. After applying the burn treatment.
And if there are two methods for treating burns, it is recommended to use It's important to know how to combine strong painkillers and burn treatments.
The fire cautery is performed in various ways as follows.
The third type of fire cautery involves the application of triangular bandages in this shape and is done deeply and extensively to cover as much area as possible. It also includes olive-leaf bandages.
There should be no fire cautery performed in the vicinity of the jugular vein because it may cause four injuries to occur based on this shape.
If you observe that a fire cautery is being performed at or near the dislocation of the shoulder,
in any manner where the circles cover all parts of the arm and the shoulder blades.
This is done in surgery when the pain persists in the arm or leg and cannot be alleviated by pressing on the shoulder or knee.
and if it comes to the arm and leg as well, do two more fire cauteries where they say that this pain holds them tightly, and then cut into the side four inches further towards the front of the body.
And if you wish to use a cupping forceps, ensure they are gentle enough.
And they should apply the cautery at points or intervals where it causes pain three times or twice as intense, known as "pains. They must continue to press on.
And make sure when applying the cupping forceps or circular cautery that you do not cause excessive pain and restrict blood flow to arteries; and avoid causing unnecessary harm such as constriction of major vessels.
"I have seen many who had their shoulders dislocated but suffered greatly until the arm was completely numb and they lost feeling in it. After the belly has been opened up there will come death
And the pains are in two parts combined, apply fire to one and then to the other according to this manner.
And if performing a phlebotomy cautery, you should aim to pierce through the vein as quickly and efficiently as possible using a large needle or slightly less, depending on your skill level.
And let them between cuts of two parts, and as neat as needles, so that it may be well done.
this is the form
And let them be seared as much as they are rough and soft spots. Then place it onto the surface of the skin and turn towards the affected area.
The fire will burn once, then stop after three seconds. Then apply the plaster, and let the wound heal quickly. After the healing process has begun until it is completely healed.
Albucasis says that we should use this method sparingly due to its severity and danger.
And for all the painful burns which may occur, where it hurts very much.
The cautery instruments which are very hot should be used if you make cuts at the edge of the vein and either burn or cut them long and thick enough to heal within two days. And they are joined together in a bundle this way:
After placing the hook of the arrow at its base on your string, press your thumb against the hook. After applying heat to both circles that are burned by the first fire for a time and allowing them to cool down, leave them exposed and let the arrows burn until they are consumed.
Because of this cauterization with fire;
and when the cauterization does not succeed, gently remove your hand from the instrument and lift away the arrow gently, leaving three wounds, then press the wound that is dark with soot until it stops bleeding. And leave the other three wounds open;
After treatment of burns, he would be in need of care until it is healed.
And if the pain extends to your arm or leg, use the same remedy that you used on the other affected limb.
That is how I treat it, and I prescribe or advise the treatment of medicine for its remedy. Crush all the living things equally from one to another, and throw them together into a new pot. Or if there is a small opening to allow an arrow in
Or if there is a small opening to allow an arrow in And places the arrow in another place that it may not enter, and puts ashes and ashes on it, as long as you have no powder to spare in your hand;
And leaves it as long as he has burned the arrow and cut off or pulled out feathers from it, then take all the ashes and apply them to the wound with a bandage if necessary.
And afterwards they will be treated for burns and wounds on other parts of the body as well.
For this treatment, instruct the patient to burn and cut open the abscess with fire, so they can see inside it; then apply a mixture of olive oil, vinegar, and charcoal, which will be burned together
"They tell of a treatment that cured the pain in the veins and arteries, as well as the sciatica; they say there is no other remedy for it, and if one does have it once after this treatment, he gets wet from head to foot.
Do this in such a way that you press gently on the affected area with a warm compress and apply butter to it, covering all the joints of the body except for those where pain exists.
After three hours, as long as the blisters no longer feel the heat.
And then let it enter water as long as its course is running smoothly, and the fair will enter, and the pain will be gone entirely and be healed.
No one should use a fire cautery after the evacuation of blood.
Also note that if a varicose vein is cauterized without injury, it may be helpful to do so
This treatment should be done in the same way. Take a needle and smear it with oil; place it between the thumb and forefinger on one hand and the little finger of another hand.
After removing charred veins and leaving them to cool off, apply fire until they are burned away, and then place the cloth over it as you wait for the fabric to dry.
"And keep doing it until you feel sure that he has reached the goal and the pain is gone.
The cautery method is called "fiery cauterization".
The pain doubles
When pain comes to the back or from hitting it or from too much cold water, or by excessive application of cold substances; nothing of these will alleviate the pain unless there is relief through hot application.
After the patient has been advised to stop using pills or any other such substances that cause pain, three lines should be applied at the back of their hands where it hurts the most. If no improvement is seen after five lines are applied repeatedly and according to the expertise and quantity of pain they may suffer from;
The points method, also known as "pinprick", should be performed.
Apply three or four points on the injured area depending on this way
The disease often comes in childhood and its signs are evident when the patient's limbs become weak or pain occurs. "And you will see a difference between these two and in us the appearance of those who come with others.
When you see it and view it cured by the fire treatment as described above If a certain part of the spine is burnt, the entire body should be treated with caution
And if you see that a certain part of the spine is burned for more than two or three lines and points are present at one end of another,
After curing it as much as you can according to what we have said, and be sure not to apply fire treatment in any place where there are nerves.
Joint pain
"Joint pain is often caused by moisture expanding in the joints of the arms and legs, and when it comes from ice, they call for 'podagre' properly; if there are cold causes or treatments cannot be cured, then treatment should be done through cauterization.
"Does the mouth of cautery to the joint, and if so, cautery olive in this way:
And if it is desired to prick at its base with a needle, you shall apply the cautery as described. "And the pains grow with joints and other places, often happening, so they do cautery on each finger three or four times for each part of it, all olive cautery.
"And if you have more control, do so, but never let your hand stay longer than it takes for the swelling to go down.
And when the pain increases gradually on all sides, you shall apply the cautery as described in our earlier chapter.
And their pains are so great when one enters into the second lines
and if no more pain is felt after entering into the second line of the joint or moving its hairs.
and their pains come quickly or far apart when the cautery is applied to that part of the body; hold your breath tight and apply pressure on the wound as well as take medicine right away.
"If you hit him with a strong blow and draw blood, he shall live by God's grace.
When the wounds come in angles and they multiply quickly, if you are treating them, make sure that when you cure one wound, it will not cause another to appear. And if there is something in the belly that causes wounds from inside of their stomach
After he lays his head between your hands, tell him to keep his eyes closed until the wounds heal completely, and you must hold tight on both sides of his head as well.
"Then apply the cautery as follows:
"As long as he is bent over and breathes deeply. Then release the bowels. And let his limbs remain motionless until they return to their place.
And treat the patient well with cautery, and bind tightly around his wrists and ankles, and another around the buttocks where they touch the hands;
Then apply the cautery around the entire arm and hand, with the right one and the left as you reach for the bone, but if there is another injury to the limb, then reapply it until healed. And gently warn them not to move when doing the cautery; Do not burn him. That he does not die from that or any other injury.
"And if you do not come close to the fire treatment, your wounds are nothing.
And it is necessary to apply the cautery gently according to their size, and for large ones as well in proportion to their size;
After the third burn, let the hair grow long as it may.
After other burns that are healed completely and leave the patient free of pain, let them grow long as they may.
And make sure that his nostrils are kept open so he can breathe easily if he tries to move towards a corner.
And after the third burn, when he wishes to stand up, they will bind his hand tightly and tie another strip over the top of it.
And have him rest well, work gently, take too much drink and food, and too hot air.
When he has completed this lesson when it is completely healed.
After curing this ailment from the surgeon's work, I will tell you.
When the other wounds come and heal over time, it means they are done with one more burn according to their quantity, or else cut them off. After treating as we have said
to burn with a third degree fire
Also note the first time you apply ice packs and follow it up with another one to cover all of the affected area
The initial treatments are less severe but more frequent
Pain in any member When pain occurs in any member, whether from a cut or a bruise, and the pain persists for a long time, treatment with medicine is not effective; instead it should be cauterized at the point where they say "pinch," and also apply cautery based on the length of the member and its thinness and flexibility, and the location of the torques and the pain.
If the first burn is successful, it's good.
If the first burn fails, perform another one immediately; since it is custom to do so until all hairs are burned off.
The illness comes from the decomposition of blood and melancholy.
If you cannot perform the fire treatment, look for a disease at its beginning; if it is cured according to what we have said in division and does not move or die, then you doubt that corruption has spread throughout all the hair. I applied the treatment on the back of the neck towards the front to the end of the cheeks; and on both ears, and behind the head.
"And if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
The patient should be instructed to make the fire cautery on the nose according to what is in front of it.
And the pus from everywhere escapes. And if you are about to apply the fire cautery as we have mentioned before or chief, and then apply it in a straight line across the nose, and V across the brow of the face, and VI across the eyes on both sides, and I above the bridge of the nose, and II above the ears. And II across the cheeks, II across the tendons of the lips, and I above each hand joint and ear joint, and II over the ears.
And beware of burns that may occur from touching it, so do not burn them.
And once you've done a fire cure on one bone, and another on the sternum bone, and another on the liver.
That is to say that as more cures are administered, the benefit becomes greater
And it should be noted that there will be no pain when applying the cure if the patient does not feel any heat because his nerves are already burned up.
And it is advisable to make them big and small depending on the size of the members and joints, as you can find that in various ways with needles.
After curing the head injury with flour and honey and other remedies until it is healed.
When a member becomes inflamed and is treated with medicine, oil, and plaster, it does not harm the body part, unless there are cuts in that member.
And if they go too deep into the vein's skin. Then hold the treatment as long as it is safe.
And once you've done fire cures to the hand and arm, and back and leg, at the end of which nerve that must be numb in the member, if it is not numb then there was a mistake made.
"There is no longer any movement of limbs or joints.
"The disease called 'albaras' is deadly to both men and women. When a cautery is used on the skin, it must be applied only once as long as the fire continues to burn steadily.
"Then apply a poultice of flour and lentils mixed with rose petals and leaves of the fig tree to the anus and anal fissures as well. "And tie it together with bandages or cloth, so that nothing else touches it while it heals.
The cure for chancres through fire
When a chancre appears at the beginning, and you see it arrested with a fire that seems to circle around it, then apply heat all around the chancre
"Then the surgeon will perform a cautery in the gallbladder area.
"But I am doubtful and afraid that it may ulcerate or be corrupted, so I don't want to do it again.
"And further more right is that he be burned inwardly or externally to the fire cure as it is called 'circulation', as we have mentioned in the previous passage.
"If one has an illness called 'adubelati', which either dies or is caused by excess moisture when the hairs are worn down and it causes sores on the body as it were too much, and there is pain present. "And you will see how to cure. "Do not burn the patient with too many fire cures when pricked at their base. After leaving it alone. She will die
And if you observe the burning carefully when performing the cautery, then perform it in this manner:
And hold your hand still in the midst of this ailment called "adubelati" until you have performed the cautery correctly and it seems as if the pain is gone or reduced to a minimum, at which point the course of illness should be considered finished.
After curing him when he is cured completely
Another way to describe this ailment is "corrosive," and it's nothing more than a wasting of the limbs because it eats away at them as if they were dry sticks.
"If you see this illness in a place that might suffer from too much heat, avoid applying the cure with small and large amounts as needed according to what is best for healing or prevention.
"After the cure has been applied until all corruption is burned away and nothing remains of it, whatever was corrupted will not be healed.
And leave it for three days and put on the burned areas fire cauteries with oil until all of the burns are healed, and any remaining corruption.
After applying this treatment to the wounded limbs.
And if after three attempts no healthy hair appears, it is good.
However, if not, if the fire cure continues to be ineffective due to a weak pulse or hardened veins.
This remedy is never effective in place of a fire cure;
However, every fire cure is more helpful, and I have already given the cure for the disease through incision. Take what you will from this.
hairs that come out This happens often when the sores are pierced through with a sharp object; it is called "closed" according to our understanding, and is an extremely painful thing that causes great injury.
And the treatment for this disease is done in two ways. It's to do cauterization with fire and cautery of hot iron.
Fire cure is that it is harsh and painful until the hair is long enough to prevent the nail from being pulled out completely, and when it has fine margins.
After holding tightly to the nail until it breaks off, then let go as quickly as possible while the edge of the nail is still sharp. And leave the third joint as long as it is being burned, Then apply the salve of bitter herbs with a cloth, and leave it on all night; after which you will feel its effects as it burns through to the roots.
"Firstly, apply ice to the affected area as soon as possible.
And if they are turned by the cold, and many times happen in hand and foot, it is advisable to apply a hot cautery; The other way is this one: Take a piece of iron or steel, or a strip of leather, and place it on the wound and the flesh, this is to burn warts. And place the strip on so that it burns through all of the skin, then apply some hot oil and keep your hand tightly closed, press your hand as you turn to make sure the edge of the strip is at the base of the wart, allowing the heat to reach into the root.
And suffer the patient some of the heat application one hour After which, and it will be loosened all at its roots.
"Afterwards, continue caring for the affected areas as before until they have healed completely.
If any trembling from cold or feverishness is present, whether it be four o'clock fever or otherwise, if appropriate you do a fire cautery between the two ears. And an esophagogastric caustic.
If it leaves trembling and treats the cold disease's healthiness.
No signs of large corrupted substances appear on the body and pustules wounds
When it is necessary to perform a fire cautery on the head of a pimple A subtle cauterization with a small flame to pierce or burn at the root of the pustule, or to a cautery on the eyelashes.
And never perform it at the beginning when they appear, in this manner, and it will not cause damage before that, but it is able to remove excess which comes from them, and heals.
After the evacuation of blood
There are often great swelling of blood vessels near the wound that comes from above or below the incision at the abscess, or in cutting into an artery, and similar things And there is often pain when pressing on it.
And if nothing happens when you put your finger on the vein's wound, and hold it as long as they are not pained away from each other, until there is no more movement.
Then apply fire cautery for longer periods and larger areas if they turn red.
Then apply the fire cautery according to its severity and location on the vein or artery you hold, and hold it until they stop moving.
"And if this happens when you apply the poultice to a vein and it stops burning, quickly apply another cautery that is on fire.
"Do not stop doing this one after another until it is fixed.
"Make sure you don't harm the nerve that has been damaged and prevent any other injury to the area affected by this.
"And it is important to ensure that when you cut an artery, even if the patient bleeds heavily and cannot be stopped right away because of its size, then we will do one of these methods only. "Or by cautery (burning the area to stop bleeding), or by extraction if it is not treatable with other methods, or by tying off the artery and applying pressure on what needs to be stopped. "And always ensure safety in all cases.
"Whoever will endeavor to burn or destroy anything that may harm the patient's health, or other such things, shall not profit from it.
"And if there is no immediate medical solution available and the patient needs to put his finger on the vein as we have said, then hold it steady until it has been bandaged properly. And it shall not move unless it is kept warm to such an extent that it does not freeze and become stiffened.
After the application of heat, give the patient something to soothe their burns and wounds.
We have stated in the first chapter that any illness for which there is a need for heat therapy or strong medicines should be treated with cautery.
And in this chapter I will describe the various types of cautery and how to perform them in order to make it easier for you who are inexperienced, so that what we say here can be understood better.
And so you should know that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in any other cautery, and for this reason it is necessary to use greater forceps
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; "There is doubt and fear, and many die.
I assure you that no folly is practiced. The manner in which people come to cure themselves. "They would suffer greatly from their disease if they didn't die soon due to its severity and the great pain it caused. And that is why one should have fear.
"And as for those who had lost their senses," he said "Listen, I am wise. And the disease is cruel.
"However, it is best to consent with those who come in this way, but put more strength into your defense than into your offense, and do not fall too quickly without knowing the cause.
"And use prediction and guidance in the treatment of your wounds to ensure that health is restored;
"This will help you achieve honor, glory, and memory for life.
"Dear son, our dear Savior is giving you good understanding and grace; and he will inspire in your heart the holy spirit from his hand, Amen.
"I have ordered this chapter by doctors in such a way that it is before those who are doctors of cautery; I have devised for you the chief which may come to pain, because you will find more easily what you may treat.
This disease often comes from very young children when their illness is too severe.
It cannot be cured because the reason for its occurrence was not found.
And I have never seen this disease in anyone except children and those who died from it. Because of that, I think it's best to avoid the chapter altogether.
And I saw a child whose dislocation was very severe and their shoulder became crooked so much that they could not hold up their head.
I thought it was because of too much moisture that they died, and the moisture was so severe between the arm and the bone.
And dislocations are often caused by too much moisture between the arm and the bone, with pinched nerves that make it hard to move their shoulder.
And so long as the moisture continues
For example
If the pain is greater, and if the patient's eyes are bigger, then make these incisions in a cross shape.
And if the moisture is excessive and you see cracks in the joint at the base of each limb, and it suddenly starts to move when you press down with your hand on its end. If you want to calm the swelling around the third finger this way.
After the incision is complete After binding up the wounds and applying oil and ointment, leave them for five days.
Then apply compresses and heat to treat the wound; leave it bound up tightly, and keep the affected area dry until the member is comfortable and healed.
Another incision method involves making a large opening in the abscess and assembling all its contents together;
"No joint moves out of its place once. "No joint moves out of its place after this. "Not in the right direction. "Nor in the left direction.
"When opening a vein and applying tourniquets to control bleeding from wounds or arrow injuries, do what feels right based on your medical training.
"And watch for any signs of arterial damage. "If the patient is bleeding too heavily from wounds or blood loss, do not hesitate to evacuate and treat for shock and fluid replacement.
"If there is no illness called 'cataract' in the eyes or elsewhere on the body, and it is not contagious, treatment with cautery does not help; unless it causes internal bleeding from a cut artery.
"It's important that you check the pulse at regular intervals, as the patient's condition may deteriorate rapidly. "After securing a tourniquet on both arms tightly if the arteries are bleeding, apply pressure to the wound with gauze or cloth. "Then check for a pulse on both sides of the neck and press them down gently to ensure they are secure.
After cleansing the skin, apply one or two small bandages soaked in a weak salt solution to both sides of the wound as much as it reaches the bone and wherever else
"And if you see a small crack on an artery or vein, do not attempt to repair it as you would otherwise.
And when the wound is closed, if they continue to bleed continuously
And hold the artery steady when you measure its length in centimeters and apply pressure to it.
And put in place a sixth bandage if necessary, and depending on how much the patient is suffering from it, and filling of the artery.
Then examine the wound: If the abscess remains stuck in place or if the patient loses consciousness during treatment, hold the wound and bandage it tightly, and perform a stitching procedure until the bleeding stops.
To emigrate When emigrating occurs and is accompanied by dryness of the eyes and nose, due to moisture in the air, and the skin becomes inflamed and similar things; it should be treated with remedies for burns and all that doesn't help, if arteries are burned or cauterized as we have experienced.
And the method of extraction when hairs on the temples are pulled or blood is taken from an artery in the temple because it comes out easily through its pumping motion and often regains consciousness after being removed.
"After the dislocation is corrected and any remaining pressure on the limb has been relieved, then release the arm or leg gently but firmly until it straightens clearly. Then apply a splint to support the position of the joint. Then hold it gently but firmly until the artery is clearly seen and then tie off any visible parts.
And if it's an internal artery that becomes visible at the tip of one finger, tie off only that part according to its quantity of hits (the number of times you can strike or tap your fingers). If not removed, they will cause harm in any way.
Then tie off three veins.
If it's a large artery that can be tied off with two loops of strong silk thread so as not to be seen in front of the recent wound and visible from above.
Then apply a superficial cautery as many times as necessary until the dislocation is reduced to its original position.
It will be healed with warmth and the pain will subside The cauteries are effective in finishing off moisture. Because it is more helpful for moistery.
Or, when extracting an artery, one should apply a clean cloth and place it over the area well made.
And if you're doing a lancing, use dry medicines that are gentle and apply them continuously until the wound is healed.
And if you're cutting into the artery, whether it's to cure or lance with a cautery, or you apply alcohol and press down on your hand so that none of its fingers are moved. And if you have frostbite, put it into the cold as soon as possible to prevent further damage and hold it there until it stops shivering.
And you must have between the two hands a strong grip to keep it steady against anything that comes towards it, and hold tightly until it cools off completely on its own, then release the hand. And there should be a difference between them as the cure is of all kinds;
This is the shape of the cure.
And the extraction of an artery is more severe when you use a sharp fire cure, but make sure to burn it for longer so as to maintain its heat better When extremities are too cold, if they lose heat quickly
tears When the tears of the eyes are descending from veins that are close to an abscess, and it is not possible to treat with medicine, you see the wound closing in on itself, and feel the movement against your face. And so the hairs of the paper are wet and moist, such that they stick to each other, scorchies of tears from the eyes, such is the better remedy for this cure. They called it the "rough cure" and it was to shave off all the hair on the affected area, then make three incisions across the forehead equally spaced along its length.
They called it the "rough cure" and it was to shave off all the hair on the affected area, then make three incisions across the forehead equally spaced along its length. And one of the incisions was just above the eyebrows and went down to the nose while the others were across the forehead at an equal distance along its length.
And keep your hands steady as you continue cutting through the cheekbone, and stop when three wounds are made to each side.
Then take a cloth and wrap it around the wound so that you can clean it thoroughly with water.
After making the first incision at the temple, make a second one next to it. Cut all the flesh between those two incisions completely down to the bone and then make an additional small cut next to it for extracting the arrowhead. The first tool that is used in the opening of the wound is called a "culet," which has two edges and it can be sharp or blunt depending on what you need.
And place the strap around the neck of the patient and then put it against their chest to immobilize the arm on which the wound is located.
And cut off the veins that are above and below the incision while it is still open for cutting into that part of the body.
Then extract them all at once, pressing on their sides to release the pressure.
After that, put a bandage soaked in wine and oil on top of the wounds.
And after the second incision is made and the arrowhead has been extracted, apply a balm for wounds with rose oil to treat the wound, as well as other treatments that heal wounds while remaining fresh.
When there is no joint pain or stiffness, you see the eyes tense and small, and weaken the vein, making them bleed. And the hairs grow longer, causing great pain to the patient, and the veins are strained. And as there is no joint pain or stiffness, these accidents matter and the patient feels cured, if they are severe.
"Then command the patient to raise his head, then make one great incision in the forehead, and another two long ones. Then begin with opening the temple towards the temple opposite, and make an incision through the bone. And hold your hand steady in between the temples as it moves to prevent injury.
And when the bones are uncovered, if there is no bleeding, then wash between the fingers and apply a sterile dressing. Then put on wet bandages of wine and oil, and keep from touching it with your hands.
When bones are broken, it is advisable to immobilize the joint as much as possible until healing begins
Certainly In two parts of flesh and bone, in four places, and make a plaster The physician treats the wounds by starting with the afflicted part.
The removal of earwax
What you have just heard is one of the four things. or grains, or beans, or stones, similar things; Or semen, if you're lucky, feverish, perhaps. A particular thing that may be
If it is in the ear more gravely or another way that doesn't go well with the ear, do not put it in the ear; but rather, put it on the ground.
If you see the stone, if you find no oil of blue or white, then the physician extracts it. And he puts a bandage on his nose when inflammation comes and goes in the ears, and puts cloth or wool into it. And hold still the ear to this end.
This cure comes once for each treatment.
And if it does not come out on its own, the patient will undergo a subtle pinching operation to extract it.
But if it jumps when pinched, that's good.
If not, perform a subtle pinching with two fingers.
If not, if you do a pinching with the thumb and forefinger or press very hard on the ear lobe or pull it out gently through the ear canal so that nothing can enter with it. Then remove the bandage because this cure always comes out as we have said.
And if it does not come out in this way, pinch tightly and then hold the earlobe with both hands without any tool to press on.  And put some cotton inside. "Press firmly onto the base or whatever it may be, until it stops.
"If none of these things that we have spoken about happen to you as you pull out the arrow, and there is spasm.
"The way to do this is if you make the first cut of the scalp, and then draw out two stitches according to their length, hold the hair between your hands and turn the ear towards it, making a small cut at its base with fat or anything similar. "And if you do it like this as one piece until you reach the base, and then pull out according to your practice, and spit into your mouth.
"The treatment should be continued as long as necessary.
"And if it is inflamed and you need to extract it,
And if it cannot sit upright, he must support it gently with a soft hand. And perform an incision on that vein.
But do not worry when you think the patient's head is wet from moisture in their ear as long as you have tried many times.
After gently pulling and supporting it with care, if like we said, the extraction should be quick and gentle.
When you think the vein is moist from moisture in your ear, ensure that the needle remains still as it enters and gently apply cotton to cover the ear after piercing. And if this happens on another ear or both ears simultaneously If it is well done, that's good.
If not, repeat many times with gradually increasing heat until it becomes firm but light and the patient feels a little warmth. And place ice on the ear and then on the other side of their nose, firmly holding one of the piercings while the other is left free to avoid injury. And do not stop doing this piercing over time until the pain completely stops and it has stopped completely;
"And if you see one joint moving while the other is burning,
"Then continue to heat all of them until there's no more movement at all.
In the extraction of a small abscess, as with similar things and wounds, treat it in the same way that we have described for incision.
"But if the abscess is large enough to feel, then proceed with a pincers. And this is more delicate place to extract from the ear.
In the extraction of veins from the ears proceed as you would for other extractions and treatments. If it is not necessary to treat the distillation, if you see fit look at the ear in the sun. If there are no veins to be found, and you find fine needles, if they cannot be seen, then prick the side from which it originates.
"And it's also important for the eyes and ears to be free from any pain or injury. And place it gently in the ear according to the degree of pain, then continue until the bleeding stops. Keep doing this as long as you feel like pressing on it.
And if they do not answer the question, stop and ask again with the same urgency as before.
And if they do not go away like we said before, perform extractions of the previous kind, and you will find or treat these distillations.
And if you apply your oils and medications into the ear with any other instrument, where it is located as you see; And either gold or silver vessels are used for this purpose and to distill over.
And for pressing the distillation through an iron vessel is best done this way, and if you see the opening closing gradually with cotton. Then you apply some oil or juice from your medications into their ear canal.
And then gently squeeze the cotton swab until the oil is completely removed or softened from their ear canal. And after that, gently clean out the ears with cotton swabs and distillate into the ear to remove any remaining oil. Make sure it is not too cold, as the medication may not work properly if applied while it's very cold.
The removal of earwax
No baby was born with any ear discharge in their ears;
And this is the reason why there are no ear discharges in babies when they are born without any injury to their ears.
And there will never be a time where you can see anything coming out of it.
"And if you cannot see it clearly, there will be many attempts to heal. And when seen, it is advisable that the ear lobe touches the sun. "Look at these: "If you see the eruption prominently, then the cause must be simple and clear.
"And when facing forward or backward it should cover all of them if it doesn't cover the ear lobe;
"If the eruption is due to a knot or of the ear itself if you gently pull it and tie tightly but do not too tight until all are healed.
And if one of its ears is detached from the head due to heat and a slight jerk, then it is attached back at its place.
"If you feel the eruption from touching the ear lobe slightly, gently and keep in mind that you must not press on the ears of the ear.
"Then put a bandage around the ear according to its size and thickness in the Egyptian manner. Do not cause any harm as long as the wound is clean or apply a fresh bandage and aloe vera juice on it.
And if you see blood in the ear, make sure to remove the bandage and apply a new one made of rose oil and beeswax as long as it is necessary. Continue until it heals.
And if the discharge of pus comes when you put an ice-cold compress on it and apply to the ear other remedies that relieve the pain temporarily, such as distillation treatments.
When the hairs are moist and dry, it is advisable to straighten them with hair ties and combs. After that apply a clean wound dressing.
And do not leave it uncured if the surgical procedure causes burns or other minor burns after the incision.
And many times heal again, nothing is missing from their roots. And if they are burned by fire, their roots will not grow back.
of the elbow And many times come to these diseases that seem like a swelling on the skin and in its texture, for this disease is called "grandine", and it is an assembly of large moisture on the skin. The work here refers to surgery or medical procedures.
The work here refers to surgery or medical procedures. And it is easy for them to know one way and another, it's just an easy thing to do.
Take a small incision in the part of the body that is easiest, then take a larger one, and cut through it
If you pierce just slightly into the skin without causing any harm.
And when it is done and there is stitching involved, and it continues to be cured as long as it is fine.
And if it is small, do not exert any force, as it will hurt the surrounding area very much
And if the large vein descends towards the side of the ear towards the back, when you turn the paper and pull it gently, and squeeze and press from one side to another.
And if the incision is shallow, no harm will come to it
And when a large vein is cut off if you pour oil from the same place it will heal any damage that occurs.
The discharge of pus Exinach is a grease that is found in the paper and other things, it was more common in children, and it caused great harm to their eyes, and they would come with a terrible headache at midday, and could not see the light of day because tears filled their eyes;
"And as the hairs of their face recede, and they sleep on their side, and their skin becomes sallow from the moisture that swells it and conceals its complexion when it is exposed to light. And when you press down on both thumbs, it forces the elbow to extend outwards.
"The manner of doing this is by putting a hand over their eye so they can see better.
"And then they put a cloth over their eye and make an eyepatch in the shape of a circle to cover that part, and fix it there. "And press at both ends with equal force so that the patch is tight across the circle.
"And then take away the moisture by making an incision with a large needle, and do not make it larger than the wound itself.
"Continue to sew as long as you can see through the patch. "And more wounds will appear from the incision, shaped like a white fat piece.
"Take a strip of cloth between your two hands and stretch it out as far to the left as you can.
"Keep your hand away from the fire and do not touch any part of it with oil or grease.
"Do not let the incision open at the beginning of the fire, if it appears slightly and only then.
"Then stretch out the strip as you have been instructed, make it smooth and even, and place it on your body, and straighten your limbs.
And if there are such wounds that burst open and putrefy from moisture which is drying up
Then the treatment until it has healed.
And if a dislocation occurs at the base of the shoulder, then hold the eye steady as long as you can until it has healed.
hairs of paper "When the hairs begin to grow naturally and become even, if they are painful or bothersome, it may indicate an inflammation of the eyes, causing various ailments such as tears and skin irritations.
The treatment is as follows: The treatment can be through cautery or surgery depending on what the patient's condition is and which method the doctor decides to use.
It is important that you put oil on the wound first, then take paper from your hand and gently press it against the wound.
If it's clean, it's good to proceed. But if the wound is dirty and has dirt or debris in its fibers, then take the paper to the barber and let them shave off those hairs.
Then remove all the hairs from that part of the paper and put it in with other scraps ready to be burned.
Then take the paper and make it into a small tent of cotton and cloth; then put this onto another piece of cloth with a pattern, as long as you see fit, and whatever way seems best to you is how it should be done.
And if there is a piece of paper torn to pieces, tearing it apart will not help.
After having studied the two lines you have written and starting from the small ones And if it is one of those scars next to the hairs in the size of a root, then cut off the end near an angle on one of the two lines, and remove all the rest.
After joining the two pieces with a needle and thread of fine wool, sew it up tightly, remove the scab, then cut off all excess thread from between the two stitches in any way you want.
If not, if there is no cure then leave it as is and let the stitches heal over three or four days.
After sewing it up tightly and constricting the cloth to make it heal quickly, as the paper becomes soaked with the blood and binds together but the stitching is harder (as they say) which causes great fear. "And if otherwise:
"And if otherwise: "And you are to write down the paper of a person who has that form like this:
"And if you wish to gently move it with small movements, just like this:
"And if you don't have the strength to hold the laces, and it is not right side up when holding an arrow or thread, then tighten it tightly: "And take the larger rope and the smaller one together between your two hands in a loop.
"Then gently hold the hand with stitches in place and keep it tight as you sew up the wound together,
"And after the skin is sewn, if there are any remaining cuts or wounds that have become infected.
"No matter how many times you cut the paper:
"If you are to follow what we have suggested, cut.
"The stitches on the front and back are more artificial.
The cure of boils is as follows: "And you spread the paper and apply it thinly in the manner I have described, then make a second incision as fine as the first one. "Hold both ends of the incision so that they do not move.
"Then bring together the two ends tightly over it and pull out both boils from the two parts. "Let them rest without further restraint until they are healed and firm enough to endure it themselves.
"If you have to wait if the incision is too painful then apply care while it heals.
And when a wound is healing, if you remove the paper, and they will not grow any more.
This shape of the second cane you must follow strictly; according to this length and width as well
The wounds are such that you need a very fine needle, and in the thread of silk you must be very careful; Then gather them together gently and sew one to another closely, so that the longest filaments are a palm's length.
And then you arrange in sewing one thread of fine silk lightly, and knot the ends of the threads;
Then put on the bandage securely.
And let it be removed so that the wounds are clear, for they are small and simple, then pull out the needle at the root of the hair tightly, and pierce through to the paper gently as you remove the hairs naturally.
"Pull out hair until you reach it or one of its branches.
"Pull the hairs out as long as they are still attached to the branch, and tear off any hair that may be stuck in the paper.
"After the hair is treated and removed, it will not come back with any remaining strands of hair if you pull the hair out in one piece until all the hairs are removed and you see through to the root.
"If you pull out the hair and thread, cut off any remaining ends or strands after the second or third time, so that the hairs remain in their place.
"The hairs are plucked until they become long and even; if you prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move.
"The dislocation of the shoulder When this ailment is called alecratia or poison comes through oil, if it occurs in one of two ways
One way is naturally and the other unnatural.
"It may result from injury, bruising, or cautery, and similar things.
The way is to bind it tightly with sinew until it is cured.
And you should use in the treatment of it only things that are binding and restraining. But if you do this, then the ailment becomes worse than before.
but use gentle things like figs. And the roots of alecratia and aloesia should be boiled, and then soaked in water until they are cooked thoroughly; apply a poultice after this to cure it.
And the strength of your treatment must be that you stay firm as before in the form she took on her own.
And we have said so often that such a disease will not go away in the manner it came unless
"This disease, which truly means 'axacratia', and is natural and accidental.
The accident is from injury, burns and sores, similar things;
When you apply the remedy when someone has a sharp pain, it will have two folds and go into the flesh, and make piercing cuts to the sinew so that it may not move after being cut.
Then you apply the remedy on all the sharp edges of the arrow and the large wound. And if the shape of the paper returns according to what is right, it will be good.
If not, if you put a razor and place the paper in the wound and tear it off, and make two cuts at the edges of the paper.
"And let the incisions of the two corners that you have made be straight so when they are closed together that the shape will be as similar to the shape of an 'X'.
"Then after that the thumb according to the quantity of its fingers and toes, do as you did with the incisions on the other side, and cut off a thread from one end.
"And then apply the remedy of the moistening medicine as well as the poultice, until he is cured.
"And if the disease comes from a cut or burn, it is convenient that you make a straight incision through the skin and hair, according to what has been said earlier. "Then sew between the two ventricles of one tent as I have mentioned.
"Then sew between the two ventricles of one tent as I have mentioned. "And the operation must be done according to the shape of the disease as they are very different in shape and require different skills so that they can return to their natural form.
And his limbs are misaligned accordingly as it is necessary to treat him with more care than others
When this soreness happens in a way that the paper is torn and damaged by white oil from his hand, he cannot move or perform any of his natural actions if it's necessary to cut off the tip of a razor so as to remove the paper gently.
And stretch the tweezers as much as necessary to touch what is small and delicate, but not too tight or too loose so that only a slight scratch occurs on the oil.
And when you make your incision, whether it is one or many, gently so that the paper follows its natural shape.
And each of those gathered together is always smooth and free from scratches, but gently apply oil to lubricate them.
between paper and oil there was a tent of flax After the third hour, apply cold compresses and other soothing things as much as they are able to be applied
The wounds that occur in different ways One is nervous and similar to a burn, another is not nervous but itches from cold, when touched with iron or treated properly, if they cannot come off.
Both are similar in terms of pain and discomfort, crossing over one by one as they find their way across the entire view and all light and movement of oil.
The manner in which incisions are made is that the hairs must be cut into their place first then remove them. Then take paper in your hand and wash away any small wounds with these compresses, use them for the injuries of greater severity. Then take an arrowhead, or a stake, or a knife, and cut it sharp. Then, sharpen the arrowhead slightly and pierce it through the middle of the fur. Stretch out the string attached to its base, draw it tight as you can, and hold it on the wound to prevent bleeding.
Do not stretch the arrowhead only once or just with string alone, like we have mentioned earlier. Then, remove any remaining small fur pieces from where it was attached to.
And ensure the thin fur does not touch the shiny cloth and tear it, and that the wound is not pierced.
After making an incision a little further in the oil, and then closing it gently with two fingers, leaving one side to the other. Then apply the treatment that is suitable as long as he remains conscious.
And if the patient is not nervous, and you cannot hold the needle in place repeatedly, this treatment may resemble a method of medicine.
and when the division is done, you must view closely, if it is a fire cautery, and remove the bandage quickly according to this form. And gently remove the bandage, and if you see that it is burning or there is a reason for concern in his voice as he ties the ribbon tightly with two fingers on either side of the incision, and burns the oil gently to the other side.
There should be no harm in the oil if you burn it with a candle and treat the abscess as soon as possible, then reset to another place as long as both are sane.
"And repeat the previous chapter as exactly as possible.
"And when the face becomes swollen with tears for some time and only part of it is numb, so that tears do not flow.
And a red rash appears which is caused by exhaustion
"The eyes become red and the eyelids are held open with paper or cloth to prevent tearing.
"The veins will turn red and the eyes are opened to see if there is any blood in them. If so, hold back the eyelids until they stop.
"First remove one vein and repeat with another until all the veins are removed. And remember to not apply any oil on the wound.
And if it's a small incision that we have described in the chapter on incising an abscess and with weaker forces when cutting into it so as to open after this procedure.
And when the incision is complete and all the wound has been cleaned thoroughly with a cloth moistened with vinegar if you use an astringent to close it after this procedure.
If nothing is done and the stitches remain tight, and you doubt that it has been properly closed after this procedure.
Then return to your work as soon as possible, and apply the cautery in the oil through this method.
But it is important that you use a cure that is not too strong from the natural course of the wound; And from an accidental injury
Do not shake your hand in any of these accidents as long as you keep the affected limb still
The red veins are covered by the liver oil and tolerate the sight of the wound but weaken over time
The physician is what one should look for, when it is present, there are no other diseases that follow. unless the coil is completely torn
Instruct the patient to put his head on their chest and support them with both arms according to their wisdom, or hold onto one arm gently as this form.
And there are two other remedies for burns in different ways
Then forcefully pull the wounded veins gently while holding the wound still after that, until you remove both arms from around them.
And keep in mind not to apply any ointments or poultices until the end of the day when facing the sun and rest frequently throughout the ordeal if you don't control the bleeding.
"After you have done this, if you distill it into oil with a colander, the impurities will be separated and removed.
"If you don't have enough of the substance in that hour, if you squeeze out oil from things soothing to the eyes, and leave it uncrushed as long as the eye pains are eased or stopped, then proceed according to this method which is best until they are sane.
"This is the form of a strengthener:
The term refers to fistulous tracts.
When you cure it with cautery and with medicines as I have said before, if she is not healed or is still hurting, then apply the remedy that was mentioned earlier; until there is no more moisture, so long as the eye continues to ache
And when it occurs you will see the damage and the pain if there is something to be done about it.
And he is called "the quick doctor," and if the vein opens up then do what must be done as quickly as possible;
And to clean out the joint cavity after the swelling has subsided and straighten your arm a bit so that the damage is cleaned up as much as possible.
Do nothing once; then apply cold compresses.
The eyes are closed when the patient is asleep and to prevent any pain or injury during that time.
If not, if there isn't another way then bring the fistula back into its place as close to this form as possible; And if you see the dislocation for the second time with a hammer and medicines, and when it is corrected as shown in this form, either from three points or fixed in such a way that you can observe here.
Then it is reset back into the socket of the shoulder, and then removes your hand from holding onto its base, and stretches all the way until you feel the bone as you press on the joint if you hold tight to its side.
Then it is reset back into the socket with a fresh force, as I taught you earlier, and when they harden and endure them joints, if there was material on its side. If it's lighter on the bone.
When the eyes open completely and they do not move at all, if you hold onto it tightly.
After cleansing the skin and removing dead cells and oil of that sort, put on fragrance oils, aloe, incense, and sandalwood powder, and strain the oil. Then wash your face with warm water and a soft cloth to remove any remaining impurities.
The manner in which to apply the powder is that you put enough on one cheek and then place another on top of it so they are touching evenly.
Then strain through a fine cloth to remove the fragrance oil while continuing to apply the other oils as directed.
Then put on the face masks and let them stay on for one hour to two hours as you see fit.
After putting it on in the morning and at night, if the oil is repairing itself that's great.
And then After cleansing, spread out the cloth and linen, tie it up neatly, and hang it to dry until it is dry.
tearing of eyelid If there are tears in the weaving fabric, start by opening it up and look for small pieces of resin to see if they can be removed.
Once you have opened it up and examined the tears in detail, stitch another needle into the root of the part that is damaged next to the one already there, then sew another needle through where a double thread from the other side passes. And pierce it with the first needle according to its location;
Then take the first double thread and wrap part of it around an eye loop, tie tightly, then pull out the needle and put a smooth piece of cotton in its place.
And leave it as long as the thread continues to wrap around the eye loop, then remove any discomforting pieces of cloth until the wound is healed.
And no wound is held still by any edge of a cloth as long as it is intact
And the eyes may appear swollen if a fine needle punctures and causes bleeding from inside them, causing swelling and discomfort.
Then hold it as long as it remains intact
This disease is called 'unsane' and occurs when bleeding takes place in the oil
The way to treat the wound appearance is that you apply pressure over the abscess and right away, then hold it between two fingers of your hand, and wait until swelling goes down in your eyes. Then seal the wound, don't squeeze it or move it around and if you see any discharge from the eye, do not worry. It will be like this unless otherwise.
And if she does not descend down from above, then the bones are disjointed and do not stand together as we have mentioned earlier.
If you grasp it between your fingers and pull out the thin thread gently while continuing with the sinew thread from a bow and using both threads to make the knot securely.
And when she is done, if you distill the hot oil with honey or fenugreek and honey, then treat her as before until she is healthy.
Of the fire We have seen the similarity of wounds in this respect, what should we do about it? If you feel sick after eating such food.
It is necessary to grasp it between your fingers and pull out the thin thread gently while using the healthy oil as a binding agent tightly.
Then put the paper of the oil on your left hand first so that they are straight to the right or your right hand.
Then take hold of the paper with your right hand so that they are straight to the right.
Then take the tip of the instrument and draw it through the center by placing the blade at its greatest length on one side and the paper on the other. Do this repeatedly as you pull the paper until all the hairs are cut off, and remember that "almagda" will grow from any wound.
And it is important that the length of "almagda" matches the width of the blade at its tip, right up to the end. It refers to the hair on your head.
When you see the arm on that paper near to its edge, and then press it gently at one end where it is tight, and release it slowly along another way after
They now see what they are facing before them and the equipment at their disposal
After resting for a moment, and then gently pull it back to the second way, hold the instrument firmly as it becomes fixed, and when it's tightened and cannot move anymore, strain your arm lightly around in turns slowly.
Then release slightly from the edge, and let go of its hold to lessen the tension. Then lubricate the valve stems or lines with a brush-on lubricant and plenty of grease, and apply with oil to seal.
No, those who are from our own stock, we put into play as much as possible.
And the maggots cannot enter into the oil through their pores because they have too hard skins that make them resistant to the oil when it is called 'Alberite', so please use a tool that is called 'Alberite' as its form.
And when it is only connected slightly and not too tight, but hold gently as we have advised.
and at the end of the work to apply the leech-cup, placing it on the abscess where it lies on its back in darkness;
and may it be free of any movements, light gentle foods, and not move its head left or right but lie still according to where it lies.
After resetting it into place, you will see clearly and fix any issues.
Do it as soon as possible after the treatment or incision has been made, but ensure you do this to prevent any further complications.
When the abscess is opened, apply a solution in front of it and squeeze to extract pus.
When they are cured, if you remove the poultice and place it over a new wound, cover any open sores to prevent further infections; but be careful in moist environments as well.
And in some cases, when you do this at home, and the procedure varies based on your individual situation.
It is important that no one should interfere with these procedures unless instructed to do so by a professional medical provider. And we have come to you who were of the arrow, and said that in some places it was possible to shoot arrows without any difficulty, but in all places I did not see anything else. It is a new thing.
These are the forms of armor, because they do not know how to use them
They are made of iron properly. "And there is also a chief part of this subtlety in that he goes down into the third angle [of hell].
There were no darts that came out separately or appeared to be scorpions in all places
And if there are any arrows that have been painted with different colors, and if the arrow is painted red with good fortune. In that case where the arrow is hurt and not painted, it should be held between your hands towards the sun.
In that case where the arrow is hurt and not painted, it should be held between your hands towards the sun. "And cover his nose with a cloth, and give him something cold to drink "As long as the patient stays still at one point, it's all right.
"If nothing else occurs when the patient stays still at one point and it doesn't move anything, if you gently massage around it in any way. "And if there is no danger to speak of or an abscess to cut into
"And if there are no malignant abscesses to treat and the wound is completely closed, then give them rest, drink water, or whatever they prefer. "If it doesn't move at all and the patient is calm
"And if they do not move even slightly at all and there are no injuries to treat from that point on.
"Once you have made a small incision in the vein, and hold your hands steady, it should not move or less. "And when the hair on his fingers is cut to make it stand out, and he breathes through the nose constantly as if trying to grow longer.
"And many times, you will see him do this lightly when performing it.
"Then take the head that comes through the nose with one hand and the other coming out of his mouth to do it again in alternating sequence.
"Do it until you break the joint that has been corrupted and then take away the hair, extract the pus, and wash the hair in Egyptian style, and reset him directly afterwards.
"Do it three more times until all the joints that are corrupted are broken;
And then let him have an ointment of pleasant smell that is soothing to the skin, so
This is how the instrument works for getting rid of lice, by collecting oils and medicines.
It can be made with silver or iron, like a lamp wick, if you put it there.
And when you light the wick, so long as you hold it in place, the oils and medicines inside will purge the lice.
And then let go of the wick while holding steady the oil or any liquid.
"From the abscess or from sores
Many times this is seen as a disease called "scab," and it grows large until it is watched closely.
So that you get rid of the scab at the beginning by applying a strong fire cautery or ointment.
And hold it steady as long as it is big, if you press hard, to prevent the redness and discomfort.
Do not touch lightly with fire as it is very painful if you press too hard because when done once, great harm may be caused to the patient.
And the eye should be held steady during this treatment to prevent any injury and to ensure that it can endure until the pain subsides or is relieved in some way.
If you find this text confusing or unclear in any way, please let me know and I'll do my best to assist further.
It is important when doing so to check if there are any fresh wounds all over the patient's body as well. And after stitching up two incisions and treating them until they are healed
And the cuts are deep on both sides and should be treated all over as much as possible until they are healed, then stitch up two cuts together tightly, hold tight, and sprinkle with sand of healing powder, and incense. "And sprinkle the wounds with a strong or other soothing powder and leave it as long as he continues to cleanse them.
The method of stitching is that you assemble the solution. Or through needles if we have said in the belly stitch. Or through thread as I told you.
"The last
When the veins near an abscess harden, similar to arrows and stones, it becomes worse and larger.
Whenever you turn the vein, and pierce through the chest muscle into another part of it:
Then seal the wound after the incision with glass, as long as it is not inflamed.
And then seal up the eyelid and treat the dry wound until it heals.
Mainstay still as your hand approaches me;
If you hold onto my roots tightly and leave some of the hair or wound open.
Then add something to the wet abrasive powder that binds and dehydrates.
And after incision, it comes back often, if you reopen, and cautery is applied a second time. If not, then do nothing more
No instances are found at the base of the teeth in between the lips and gums, which are raw and tender; And no instances are found with black or red teeth, as long as corruption comes to the gum, and the tooth is falling out.
If you hold the abscess between your hands and it stays firm, and you remove the sores or wounds as they appear, until nothing more is needed. And send away the blackness and whiteness, green things, etc. as long as they are smooth
If it is done at first attempt, that's good. But if not, try again with another stick and so on until you succeed.
There are different forms of remedies based on the nature of the injury. For example, if one remedies a wound that is between two bones differently than others where it was treated inside the bone, etc.. These shapes and other things should be present with you.
It is advisable when treating the pain of a tooth to apply pressure as long as possible because it shouldn't be applied too hard; As it is high in juice, therefore there is no excuse for not doing so.
If the nails are constrained to endure, make sure you take special care of the teeth when they prick. Many times does the pain come from the vein, and try to make it clear or sharp, and force blood out through the veins. And in all ways do not let go of this pain as long as the vein is bad because we have already tried to treat these sores.
And when you are certain that the vein is doing well, it should be checked thoroughly to prevent any further damage from all sides.
Then tighten the two main tendons first and gradually, as it is well aligned, then firmly fix the main tendons. And if both arms are dislocated between your shoulders, hold them steady so they do not move.
After you remove the broken tooth directly and if it doesn't move, then pinch any of these points gently along with it to dislodge the clot from its base, and remove it as soon as possible.
And make a tight wrap and tie it if necessary to immobilize the limb where it was, so that movement does not occur. "And if he restrains it gently so that it does not break away.
And always keep the main thing, which is to approach with gentle care.
And make sure you don't break it further and leave a part of the tooth remaining, and remove any debris from its base with extreme care as more severe injuries may occur at that point.
"And remember that you do not act like the fool who always breaks it apart by rushing and struggling without ever having tried.
"But they never come from the root of this great disease, or from the path on which it breaks off. If you want to.
"When his bones are strong enough, if you soak them in wine or some other liquid and release them;
"So that the wounds will heal as they come to expect it, when exposed to a solution of vinegar.
"And if he is burned with fire.
The extremities need to be shaved close first so that they are smooth at the tips and large in circumference where you will apply the balm.
which means "these are the shapes: And if thick members are such that one may not pass without tearing them and should be firm enough to hold tightly, but they must be steady
of the roots of veins When the roots of the hair are plucked with tweezers if it is convenient that you apply a solution made from boiled cotton to calm the itch and soothe them as they become inflamed.
And should be done similarly to how we have practiced, which is the shape
And if the roots burst through to all of these veins, it's advisable to take out the instrument called "althali", which is for this purpose, so that its form is
and if they break easily and roots are pulled out in that way, it's good.
However if you have tweezers to assist the hairs come after this shape.
If you use a tool to help with this process, then do this procedure for example: and others in the reason of pain, and tools that seem to have large tendons.
And if the hair is too thick and cannot be broken easily and some of its roots are very thin. And other such things which are mentioned earlier
And the most subtle veins are examined by means of one's own instrument; for its various purposes and to which it is related to different things such as those that burst or cause others to be broken if they strike them with force.
And large and well-maintained ones hold the bone securely, unless there is a lack of grip, but are able to hold and maintain it.
And then apply leeches according to the rules, if there is pain in an organ and it is small, so that all of its instruments may treat.
When the tooth is revealed by nature and its form looks bad, and especially in women who are pregnant or nursing a baby, if you want to save it from pain don't neglect it immediately, but take care of it as well.
without reason and if he holds the tool with which this happens, it will not move.
And hold the finger gently and gradually towards the direction of extraction, so that you do not move the others, and if it appears to be on a line with its shape as is its form.
like how you tie your shoelaces.
And in the manner of holding this tool gently and gradually, if it does not move as soon as he pierces.
In the end it is smooth and clear to all except this tool, which too frequently causes friction and makes the tongue bleed if used excessively or improperly; causing injury to the speech organ (pharynx).
When the tool is in use whether by friction or scratching, and the bristles cannot hold steady because it moves when he presses against them, then they will be treated with astringents remedies.
if you tie it down with an iron wire, for the silver wire becomes green and rotten but the other ones do not move.
And let their fingers neither too big nor too small, according to the amount of space between them.
And if you find that the fingers are too close to each other and there is no space between two healthy teeth, then place them between the two healthy teeth, as long as you see it clearly on one side. And then cover up the area where you applied it gently and steadily until it no longer moves.
And make sure your concealer is placed at the base of the tooth, so that it cannot move away.
Then cover up the fingers with some tape and stick them together, then press between the healthy tooth and it will not cause any discomfort.
And leave them in place as long as they can stay there, and if they move or get stuck to the fingers, then hold onto another thread.
If one is to succeed and serve all his time, it must be in the form of the dense and figure of the main direction of the two true paths, if you see
And when the head is dislocated, if they let it go in its place, repeatedly, as we have mentioned.
And they don't interrupt or remove the joint and formation of a false vein, and hold it in place until it is right, as we have mentioned, and increase and serve their time
There is never someone who comes from outside the language or nature of things, that should not be. Or by accident and injury sores.
And the ulcers are such that you open your mouth with a wound but keep your eyes steady, and let the tongue lightly.
Until the tongue is held firmly in place, and if it slips out or not, and that's immediately painful, if you bite on the edge of the tongue tightly.
And remember to keep your jaw from being too open while performing this procedure
After you've done that, if you gently remove the bandage and ice pack from your tongue, put a new one on.
And keep the mouth closed for as long as possible to prevent bleeding.
If you see blood coming from a vein, stop immediately and seek medical help. And if bleeding stops while performing the cautery procedure, it is better to proceed slowly with caution. Then continue the other treatment as long as possible,
"And if it becomes red or black or painful," if they become inflamed, but do not itch, because that is a sign of cancer;
"And if it declines in color and becomes painful with moisture, then the incision is made quickly and delicately on one side and the other. "And if it goes without pain when incised through the veins up to where it is inflamed, then repeat until all are cut.
"Then remove any remaining lesions and continue with other treatments as long as they are healing.
Of the throat "There is no time to remove the throat bubbles that are called 'godath', and one should treat them separately from the other. As long as they heal, do not worry.
This is a dislocated shoulder; it does not want to move its arm if touched, causing pain and injury.
If the joint is red and the root is large, do not try touching it with a finger, as this may cause more harm. But leave them as long as they are short and don't cut them off if you cannot control their movement, or it might break on its own.
And if the joint is light pink and the root is thin, try to apply gentle pressure first with an instrument like a cloth; only then should you gently reset it back into place.
Do not let the joint be in front of the sun and keep it in good shape by making sure its arm is always between your mouth and first finger. Press your tongue against everything as if you were tasting something delicious to help hold it in place.
And either gold or silver is so fine, as those countenances.
Can you press the tongue against any instrument, and see the tip of your finger if it touches or not?
And try nothing on cloth with, then press the object against which part you want to know is strong. And whichever way they are bent, and one place to the other, they are blunt, and made of iron or steel.
And if you do not have this instrument at hand, then hold onto them tightly; because when that is done they will be And either strong from one side, or another side no.
And when you have applied one of the blisters according to this manner, and afterwards incision gargle the hot blisters, and vigorously and it is necessary that wounds come, if gargle the blisters or wash with scalding fruit juice are cooked, or firewood, and similar things until they do not remain. For as long as he remains sane
And whenever the second artery is cut off while swallowing, if it does not happen with both arteries being cut simultaneously
If there was a woman who had a heart attack, it would be advisable to remove the artery that is close to her throat.
If the woman could not breathe or drink through that artery because it was blocked and she couldn't live without air or water, then she would die.
And the eyes were blinded by two darts so as to see no more
So, he did everything first by making a small incision in one artery and then the second, followed by removing both arteries as quickly as possible.
Then he closed up the other end too tightly against his throat and pressed on her tongue
After closing off one artery in this way, he took some of it out at once. And if someone were to choke a woman's throat and begin drinking quickly without ceasing to tighten their abdominal muscles.
And the eyes would roll back in a reflex action as he continued drinking heavily until vomiting occurred.
Unless I restrained him and tied off his mouth with a cautery. he will continue to drink heavily until vomiting occurs, unless restrained.
and I took pity on him in those days, and He alone would forgive his sins after my death.
from
When the dew rises upon the earth, it is bent down and long, if pressed perpendicular to itself;
And when it is spread very wide and thin, if pressed perpendicular to itself.
And when it is cut as finely as we have described in the previous division and does not profit from it, you will see that his eyes become calm, and they are subtle, if one wishes to observe closely.
And those who are gathered together and are far away And if it is red or yellow or black, you should make the incision there. There is great danger there.
When you see it, according to what I have said, of its redness and length, that you make the ulcer face the sun, and press your tongue against the instrument which we have mentioned before. Then cut it off quickly and trim the excess, and place on one of the two instruments that we mentioned in making the incision into the second artery.
And make sure there is no excess beyond what is natural
if you cut more than necessary and bleed the voice or nose.
After the incision, apply what we mentioned in making the incision into the second artery, and treat it as soon as possible.
"And if you wish to use any cautery on their eyes,
The manner of applying the cautery is very important. And when the patient applies heat to the affected area according to the instructions of the fire cautery, and compresses it with a tight wrap, ensuring that it is not too thick nor too thin. And when using this tool, make sure it fits properly;
And when applying any remedy or ointment to the affected area, as with using a knife and applying it all over the wound;
And if the hairs are on his chest, and saliva and muscle movements cause difficulty swallowing from the medication due to its density, so it is not swallowed or goes down the throat.
Then take your hand and apply it all over the wound, pressing as much of its moisture as one hour's worth in order to ensure that you see no pain or discomfort from the medication.
"And if you pull the cotton and roll it tightly around any instrument, causing pain in doing so, continue to wrap it tightly around until the cotton stops moving.
"And once you're done with that, as long as the fire is still hot, leave it to dry for 4-5 days.
"And if you've mastered the fire cure technique and it goes well, after applying it to the wound, place a bandage over it and clean any residue from the medical procedure.
"And if you apply ice or gargle for as long as you can tolerate being healthy.
"This cure is more safe than the fire cure, but still dangerous to the incision;
"If you apply it with this method using clove and oregano and rosemary and chamomile and lavender and similar herbs in a single pot, put them to boil;
"And let them grow well on hard ground," he instructed, "and make sure to remove any obstructions that might hinder their growth. "Whether made of gold or silver," he continued, "or iron if they are in the mouth near an abscess as it grows and reaches towards the eye, until the eye is damaged.
"After the wound has healed," he instructed, "and make sure you do not move it until after your next appointment with an eye doctor. "Do not worry about this," he concluded, "for there are many things that come before the eye doctor's appointment.
"And if your instrument is present," he continued, "if you prick a vein and it bleeds heavily from the eye, then do not worry too much. "Because the vein may not have given enough time to heal properly," he advised, "and that is a common cure used together with the eye doctor.
Many times one swallows or spit out fish, or any thing.
Therefore, it is advisable that you try to see through what you put into your mouth and press the tongue against the sun at all times.
And what you do not swallow and is returned to the mouth, it is advisable that you spit out the food so as to cook in the stomach. by vomiting, if something has been swallowed.
or swallowing a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of lettuce, or the kernel of dry bread. and then it swallows the sponge and then spits it out; and when she comes to her head, she will spit up, and then you will take it.
And if she does not come back because of what we have said, if you hold the instrument according to this form
"And if it reaches the throat with ease, then place its head at an angle to prevent choking. "Also be careful not to touch the epiglottis or scratch it in any way, as that may harm the delicate structures.
"And make sure not to touch the instrument when you are done using it or any part of it is dirty. "If he throws away the instrument immediately after use or if it has been used for something else.
the throat
"No treatment is given without consulting a doctor as I stated earlier in the chapter on medical care; "And if it does not work immediately and you notice that the abscess is red or inflamed in the throat after using an instrument I told you about earlier.
If you see the sore, if it is very small and tender, or there are tiny veins which may be present in this
If it is not worth it, then take a warm compress and place it in the throat where the sore is after which you should apply gentle pressure on it and do this accordingly And if there are sores that keep coming back again.
"Then rinse with ice-cold water and gargle, and gently suck the abscess back to prevent swallowing. "and if suddenly he senses heat
and if the patient does not feel any sudden heat as we have advised in the fumigation process.
Do this many times because she will need targeting of her wound.
The method of the fumigation is that you prick or pierce it with a needle where there are charcoal splinters, and in both cases cover the area with gauze and bandage securely.
Then apply the fumigation and place a cloth soaked in it over her mouth, covering both lips tightly if she is unable to breathe through it.
And now the treatment should continue and repeat the fumigation many times as needed,
and if her wounds become infected with bad smells or tastes, and she does not feel any heat,
And after that the injury has become greater than what was expected by this treatment.
And the form of the instrument used to treat the poison, if seen whole and properly, it can cause convulsions from muscles entering the throat. And its appearance is like a bee sting, and it causes numbness of the limb if you take it, you cannot stop feeling numb.
The forms of the abscesses vary depending on what is described in this book and are perforated or cut.
There are two ways one can occur; either it resembles a bee sting but from moisture or
The second way it can occur is when there are cuts on the arm
The second way it can occur is when there are cuts on the arm
If an abscess is not pierced through and through, as long as the bow remains moist.
If you have already pierced them and they are still alive after that according to their completion or the joints, whichever comes first.
When veins come from joints and are left to be pierced through until they are completely cut through; because when a wound occurs that requires piercing in the vein or nerve of the joint, it is due to a contraction in that member.
"When the arm is dislocated from its joint, if you hold it steady while making a small cut on the main part of it.
"Or when it is from the base, if the hole is too shallow then make sure that you are cutting through to the middle.
"Do not cut through the bone without making sure you have reached to the middle of it. Make sure that if you are cutting from the base then do not pass through any nerves or blood vessels. "And may never heal in this way.
"Make sure you have done the cut through the joint correctly and ensure that any pain or movement of a vein is prevented. And be careful with all other signs as well.
"Make sure you have made the cut in such way that it cannot move around freely. And make sure you do not cut through any blood vessels.
"And if it pierces through the long tendons, and seizes the arteries or veins, or in the joints of the nose or ears, then there is no escape. The first sentence translates to "The one who seeks...
And when the abscess is opened, if it can be closed while still complete in digestion, as we have said.
"And if you pierce through this vein, and it hits an artery of the head, then they are dead. "And by that time, their limbs become paralyzed and they are filled with fear.
And if any abscess is pierced through the large part of the limb, that which has been treated thusly will be healed more quickly.
"It is also necessary to stretch the patient's arms and legs gently. "And in great strokes, great kicks, as much force as possible on one arm or leg.
"If there are such strokes or kicks that they should be given with the heel, "When it has become so, if possible to do so, do what you would do for a fever.
"And if there are teeth that have been broken in half or more, and if they come out with the force of an arrow, like arrows from an animal's mouth,
"And if there are teeth that have had a cavity or other holes made in them, and similar things.
If someone has no wisdom teeth but only surface ones, it is advised to remove those simply.
"And when the wisdom teeth are large and cause great swelling, it is advised to remove them in pieces rather than removing all of them at once. After that, you should stop the bleeding immediately and treat whatever blood there is gently. "Do this over and over again as necessary until all of the bleeding stops.
The teeth are particularly vulnerable to weakness or injury when they have been exposed for a long time due to illness, old age, or lack of care. This sentence means that if the swelling persists after repeatedly pressing on it to no avail (as indicated by "que par aventure muert li malaides" - even though you're pressing on it), then do not press further as this will only cause more harm than good, and could potentially worsen the injury.
"Perform the fire procedure with great care. When you have pricked your abscess, if there is a small wound, and observe whether it is superficial. If it is simple, then try to gently remove any lint or gauze that might be attached. If it is large and painful, try to gently separate the abscess as much as possible, if necessary, so that one side does not touch the other.
If you have exposed a part of the abscess to air and it has started to weep or ooze moisture, try gently pulling out any lint or gauze that might be stuck on its surface.
Then apply pressure until the bleeding stops.
"And every time that chapter is opened, it often occurs that blood is evacuated from the opening of a vein, and incision into an abscess, and in treating wounds, and in extracting arrows, and cutting into stones, similar things; where there's doubt and fear, many die.
And if the abscess continues to persist, try to apply pressure and care for it as much as possible. Take powders that I have mentioned in my hands from this book, or any other remedies you may have, and if they help ease your pain or anxiety, wrap them with linen cloth soaked in vinegar and oil.
"And when you hold the eyelids tight and steady, if the patient is good or indifferent to doing so, then close them gently but firmly.
"Then remove the arrow and treat the wound as necessary, until it is healed.
"And in treating abscesses:
"Do this before you treat the abscess and follow your physician's instructions.
And the methods of us that are in the clouds, and those like one from another, but they say
"It is in such cases, where moisture causes it to move:
"and if the joint is very hard and painful to straighten, there will be no doubt that it cannot move contrary to your efforts.
The length of time until the effect wears off depends on what you call an instrument that is called "entremisoire" which means it takes effect after a while, and then fades away
If there's moisture present, if the fire cautery is done by skilled surgeons only
"And when the moisture is very high and you should not leave the hairs containing that moisture alone because it will return whenever left unattended.
"Then plunge him into a hot bath if he is present. If not, gently clean and bandage the wound and place it next to the other one. And those who are suffering from this will die
Then rinse gently with clean water if it is present, and the second wound as well, so that you ensure that it does not move in any way.
Finally treat the burn with something suitable until it is healed.
And hold the eyelids steady if the patient follows this form of treatment, so that they do not move. and get your fingernails and remove all the dirt from every place, and apply all of your remedies to where it hurts.
And if you do what I have told you after that.
"In addition to holding them tightly when instructed by the surgeon and during healing, you must also hold tight if the abscess is painful.
"The incision into the abscess should be deep but gentle, as it can cause pain; because they are soft and tender parts of the body. And if there are any of these bones or joints that no longer have moisture, and the fractures were caused by a broken bone in one place
And I found this bone in the same way, sharp and white, that could not be fractured. If there is no such thing, then apply a dressing similar to one in the same way as an injury.
In other bones that come or go from the ears and roots of the ear, it is important to keep them tightly bound with a bandage if they get loose.
And you must treat them as advised.
Often these abscesses occur at the base of the scalp, and along the hairline; there are none elsewhere on the body, except for sores that open up and heal quickly once they start.
And any scab should be securely attached to the side of the body if it is rough and the bone protrudes through the skin as we have said before. The wounds from these sores are many.
The wounds from these sores are many. There were some sores that contained moisture, which refused to obey to the treatment.
In that case where you see good alignment of the axis, and there are no problems with the arms, and he is not able to bend or move his head in any direction.
If you want to continue with the dislocation treatment and attempt to align it better by using a pillow or similar support, then do so if necessary.
And as you go slowly and carefully, be sure that your neck does not move or touch the face, do not force it too far so that you do not cause injury to yourself; use gentle pressure only when necessary.
And if you try to align the veins or arteries and they do not respond, put on a cloth wrapped in vinegar, or any other soothing powder that can help alleviate it. And let it remain as long as the abscess is closed, and until the wound heals completely, and until the infection subsides.
When he has finished, so that you have done it all:
After doing everything to the best of your ability and strength, then examine whether there are any small wounds.
If there is a significant vein at the base of the wound and it's not possible to close that wound with sutures alone, then tie a strong, double thread around it and leave it loose so that it can be tightened later.
After covering the wound with Egyptian cotton gauze and dressing it.
And if you cover the whole abscess, then make sure to tie up two layers of the wound and keep it moist now, and there is no need for further treatment due to its size. If you want to understand how the fire treatment works, and take care of the root of it, as we have said
If you want to understand how the fire treatment works, and take care of the root of it, as we have said The wounds that are not significant should be examined here or now.
And the one in front of it will be treated with Egyptian cotton gauze and similar things if it becomes infected or corrupted. "When a wound is well healed, as long as there are no stitches.
They spoke and talked about the throat stretching But I do not see anyone in our land who practices it, as this is their written word.
Those with a cleft palate should have the roof of the mouth (hard palate) removed. And this cannot be helped in any way because all the veins and arteries are at risk for those with an open wound in the mouth or throat, or both.
When the disease is in the channel due to water, it's necessary to cover up the epiglottis so as to prevent drowning that has come from choking.
When we want to remove the hard palate (palate), it should be done from within or between the two circles of the roof of the mouth, depending on how much of the roof is to be removed.
The head of the shoulder cannot move because it is dislocated from its socket, causing discomfort and misalignment in the joint.
And if it is painful to do so, extend the skin from the throat all the way down to the chin, and hold tightly as you swallow. Remove the veins of blood, if you see nothing else, and then close your eyes when we have said so;
And demonstrate through the section of the throat where it slips out from the left side that is torn and by the defect in the voice.
Leave a small cut open.
And when time is passing without doubt of strangulation, bind the two ends of the wound together and continue sewing up to the elbow.
Then apply medications that make your pain better as long as it lasts.
This must not be done until the throat is completely stopped up and the patient's breath has ceased entirely; at that point they are to be considered dead. When the epiglottis is unable to move because of swelling, it blocks breathing and death ensues.
Until the patient leaves the illness and is cured in three days or four, they must leave it open so that the disease does not spread.
I will tell you what I saw. I saw a woman spit into the fire and burned part of her tongue
And I went to call for help, but found it already dead.
I discovered the wound and found that it was caused by an abscess, which appeared to be protruding from within; I knew that its flow could only pass through the throat, as seen in this case.
I got sick and cut out the sore until it was cured;
And he did not have her speak again after she recovered.
Because of that, I thought the epiglottis had no fear.
Hernia of the throat is called an incisional hernia, and it has many colors due to its location.
and there are two types: natural and accidental.
it cannot be helped by any means.
The accidental type has two forms: one is when the fat comes out through an incision, and another form occurs due to damage from arteries. And there is fear, and it is advisable not to try anything more invasive. If you pull it out as if from a knot and cannot remove any hair, seek medical attention immediately. And seek immediate medical attention, until they are perfectly healed.
In all these ways I shall tell you everything.
And it is necessary that I explain the difference between not and issue.
I say that issue means strength and firmness until the ejaculation stops, and it is achieved through perseverance. Until rest has been obtained and strength has been maintained.
Without issue there is no strength or firmness, and contains it self-sabotage which is its own trap and is contrary to the course of nature. And it causes swelling that becomes large;
are similar in their effects, whether heavy or moist, and all wounds are like I have said in the previous statement.
When you come to the treatment of dislocation, it is important that you first examine thoroughly all the instruments which are called "extricators" as described in this chapter, depending on how they shape or form and after the practitioner who is experienced in their use.
And the manner of extracting arrows from wounds is that you pierce it more deeply than you would in a limb, and keep turning your two points until the essence has been extracted completely, then according to the size of the arrow.
And hold on to your breath as well.
When moisture runs through the artery, it will cause injury if not treated promptly and appropriately.
After the artery is opened and treated appropriately, if moisture remains present it will cause injury, especially if there are any tears in the wall of the vein that may need to be closed or repaired.
If you do not treat it properly and promptly, it will cause no harm.
When it is treated appropriately and promptly, it may return in many ways.
If it is treated promptly and appropriately even a little bit, preventing injury from corrosive acidic substances that damage the skin, and closing wounds quickly to prevent further injury.
And they swell greatly if they reach two thirds of the wound's length, and the remedy for which is to cut away what causes the harm
And if the vein is against or on top, and you need to remove the base of the vein bone, let it heal for two or three days until the wound has healed. After that, return to the surgeon who did the treatment earlier
Here are three forms of external wounds: large and small;
There are three kinds, called "albaret," "breb," and they come in the following forms: large, medium, and small, through which to open an abscess.
And these are like the needles which pierce the horns, and they are of iron or silver, or gold, and may be yellow, and are more easily removed with black pitch.
And there are three ways large, medium, small, according to the quantity of blood vessels
The shapes of arteries are like this:
and if one artery has three ways of each kind.
And if an artery has three openings, and they are the same way in all three.
And if an artery has two openings, but one of them is only half as wide and they are the same way in all three.
It must be considered necessary on their own.
The head of these is where one finds it most useful, and for those who cannot stand the pain that arises from cutting through them, which causes nerve damage.
And regarding these issues are the ulcers healed after opening of veins.
The third way is through: great, small, and mild, as you see it
And if you can't find any better way, then by all means do what I have suggested.
No other small tool is suitable for cutting incisions like this one, according to this method of making an incision; where the injury occurs. And they should never apply any force when performing procedures involving veins and arteries; none of this violent or forceful behavior is acceptable.
No matter how many times they try to break open, as long as they seem to be of the same type;
And when they are opened and closed, and who cure it as needed according to this way of doing the incision line by line up until .g. Then sew up the fat and close the wound starting from above, then gather the two halves of the wound to stitch them together, and cure until it is healed.
And she has lost her hair at its roots, it is smooth because of its greatness like when it was a woman, but now that it has two swords in hand, she faces two dangers. And if both are held at the end of one and the other, then the longer line will contain the shorter in this manner: b. after the line g. And after cutting through the flesh between the two cuts and removing fat, he must follow what we have said about stitching and powdering, as well as what is necessary in treatment, so long as it remains sane.
And if it is not healed or the incision is not completely done, so that wounds do not heal properly, or due to the corrosive nature of the cotton, you should apply the healing wound with absorbent cotton. And let him remain until he has finished shaving his beard and chest hair, then continue to hold him steady as long as it is still straight.
The veins in the arms may be used as conduits for carrying blood to places where it is needed or contains moisture.
"Whoever is experiencing moisture must lie down as follows: And when the vein that is being opened is visible and there is an open wound nearby, soak it with cotton and leave it in the other hole, then apply more cotton until it is saturated.
And the abscesses are of similar severity: if it is as bad as we experienced in previous abscesses, and there is a wound bleeding, then use the fire cautery as we suggested before.
When the artery runs through and the skin is pierced as it were, if there are many times the pain occurs at the opening of an artery or vein.
And if you suspect that it is due to the artery, if it happens repeatedly in front of one's chest, and when you feel at your back, if you feel pain.
And when it is due to the vein, if it bleeds in front of a person.
It is folly to try to cope with this pain, and in particular when it occurs at the angles and corners where one can also touch oneself with other parts of the body, and there are many problems. It is advisable to avoid the cure of fire, and for those who are sick it is advisable to also avoid this, and in case there is a vein cut through the skin deeply into muscle.
After measuring its length, remove a significant amount of blood vessels
After piercing one artery and cutting through to the other side, hold onto a single artery with two loops
Hold tightly onto the loop that is between the two incisions until you remove it and the artery.
Apply a tourniquet to the limb while holding on tight. Cure any bleeding that arises during this procedure as much as possible.
And hold onto the artery in your hand as you remove it from all of its surrounding tissue, and then pierce another artery into that limb. After removing a stitch or cut from one of two similar parts.
And if you are doubtful about the healing process, if another incision is needed on all the similar parts of the first incision and hold steady with four stitches.
Continue holding the eye open until it has stopped bleeding entirely, then close the eyelid gently and let that be done.
Then treat with ointments of oil and grease, then administer treatments for burns until it is healed.
As veins and arteries become damaged or through too much work
And when this happens more often with joints and dislocations, causing the eye to become swollen or painful, and its colour seems to lose its normal colour due to trauma.
And when it is held down during restraint, if the eye causes pain and does not open normally even with ointment, but only with pressure.
And must always stay still, not going forward or backward, nowhere to go but straight ahead. The one in joints should remain steady by force through contraction And those who are up or down or forward, put on the bandage tightly
And those who are up or down or forward, put on the bandage tightly If the patient's pulse is weak and he has tender tendons around his elbow;
and if he is large, if his spine is tender, then apply tight pressure to the wound, hold it closed until it heals.
No matter where they come from and don't go to another place. And there is a disease that is called 'fuge' because of the similarity with 'aus', it has a subtle cause, and large root;
And in its course are many things large and small;
And I saw one that had II or III bellies which were more similar to the others, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had a large root, and they were hollowed out, and in it there was excess moisture.
I saw one of them weighing 18 ounces and the other six, and their veins when cut open showed that they were wet, and the color of the artery was bright white and moist and had a soft root. If you apply it to the inflamed area, then apply fire cautery.
If you apply it to the inflamed area, then apply fire cautery. Because dislocations often occur from a joint that moves out of place and is unable to move again, if you tighten the dislocation without performing surgery.
And if you see the vein is inflamed and painful from cutting it, if you tie off the artery well and leave two stitches.
"And hold it steady while cutting into its base as much as possible, making sure to do so with care.
"If the roots are large and there is fear because of its location close to the belly, but you must still carefully cut it out, then cauterize so that it does not grow back.
"Afterwards treat the wound and make sure you do not cut into any veins that are blue in color and poor in quality as well as those that have white hairs.
"And I will come to treat you for the ulcer after this.
When you say that "And the appearance of the boil comes from a boil or a furuncle, and is on the belly and in no case are there any pustules that come out of veins or arteries as long as it exists, unless otherwise stated.
"And it is through the incision of furuncle and removal of boil that this happens; if there are pus from an abscess which come out as well, these will have a different appearance due to their proximity to the belly, and they may be light in color with little pain, but can cause multiple issues. And if it comes through the intestine, then there are many different issues, and when pressed at its two ends, it returns, and often spreads, enlarging to enter into the bath water as well as causing much work.
"It is by moisture, it's a light thing, and when you press on it with your hand, do not hold tight.
"And by an abscess if pressed at the base of the eye socket, will cause great pain and injury; "And by sudden movement if there is pain in the ear or eye socket, and when you look at its appearance from an artery or vein.
"And by sudden movement if there is pain in the ear or eye socket, and when you look at its appearance from an artery or vein. "If necessary, allow the treatment. Because there is doubt and fear, as I mentioned earlier in this chapter about the doctor's work, for arteries and veins.
"And by the intestine or bowel, if you instruct to take his remedy and swallow it without delay, then be sure that nothing bad will enter your body; "Then command to put in between your hands and then go into the mouth that you have signed with all the saliva. Then be sure of it until death; Then bind it tightly with a strong rope or cord firmly.
Stretch the abdomen outward and bring your knees to indicate it, and tighten your abdominal muscles. If you take the right leg, if necessary, and place it on top of the abdomen.
And if you use the left leg to pass over the knee, and make sure there is nothing in its way.
And if you make the opposite movement or come out of it and then return to your own side and take two more stakes, and put them into the holes that you have made on this side where you think they pierce.
Then tighten the abscess with four stakes through the holes, and if you view it from above, the stakes, and leave one loose as much as possible, and pierce the heart by yourself. When it happens suddenly and forcefully, then treat as before.
When it happens suddenly and forcefully, then treat as before. Treat the wound with moisture or friction until healing occurs, and straighten it afterwards.
There are two chances In the treatment of gallbladder stones, after incision there should be done by medicines, and also in doing the cure to remove.
And treat the gallbladder in a certain manner, and do much cautery to remove it, and say that when a gallstone is loose or can be removed as before, and then in its discharge, and in the same way, and they should do everything as soon as it comes.
No one else can assist in its removal before me.
And if it is loose or can't be held open, as we have said, you must remove the black scab.
Then apply pressure to make the dislocation pop back into place.
Then squeeze any abscesses and the base of all veins so nothing remains inside.
And leave the wound completely exposed, and press it well with your hand or any object so that no stitches are made contrary to an incision in the artery or vein if it is burned as long as you stay still. And continue other treatments until all wounds have healed.
dislocation We have said in the division of the signs of inflammation and that the assembly of the fire is made, and the signs of a broken limb, and the treatment which is done by medicines, and the healing which is done with fire.
And they must not try to do this either. It is important to know that tympanitis and otitis occur because it can be deadly.
When you have this symptom of dropsy that is called "eclights" from the medicine, and its cure does not profit if one sees that the hairs are weak or if there is another disease other than dropsy, such as abdominal pain or similar things. If you do not try to do this because of doubt.
And if you see the hair very white and it has only dropsy without any other disease but for dropsy itself, do not overdo it. Take the hair in your hand and press firmly to the stomach at its base, near the lowest part of the belly button, then take the spiny thimble according to this form. And there are two ways to do this. "If one presses him hard enough to the intestine when he is released, it will not be able to come back and will become weaker.
"Look if it has dropped into them (intestines). "If you need to find out where the bone is located, do this: touch his shoulder blade with your finger. "And if it has dropped into them due to liver disease, then you should look for its location in the third rib.
"If it is due to fatigue, and you are on the right side of him, then focus on checking his shoulder blade for any bruising that may indicate weakness.
"Then carefully examine his body thoroughly, from head to toe, and gently touch the space between his skin and fur as you would when washing him.
As soon as the skin is tight and firm at the incision site, then apply pressure directly on it. There should be some silver thread, either fine or coarse, and also attached to the small part of it. Or use a separate piece for that purpose. And another one on the other side as well.
Apply pressure in a way that is like a pen's form and also matches the incision shape from which the doctors measure it.
On applies pressure in an elbow when the vessels are close together, and as soon as they come into contact with it.
If you see more than is necessary in those cases, as time goes on and it seems to be resolved by the arm's strength or death comes closer.
But according to its quantity, and considering that the wounds of the flesh mean, it follows
Then gather the instrument and hold it steady, as you would if piercing through the flesh of your finger.
Then release the instrument and hold it steady again as you would if piercing through the flesh of your finger.
Do not pull it until there is no more pain and a moment of rest has been provided.
And if you doubt about the wound and let go of the instrument, then seek medical help or soak in warm water, until it is healed. And the treatment of drying agents as long as it is healthy, and cauterize over the stomach, liver, spleen after extraction of the arrow, if what I have said in front of you.
There are no infants who have no injury in the ear, or the injury is small, or it is not present at all
"If he desires as much so that there is no pain throughout his spine in such a subtle manner according to this form.
"Then let him put it gently between the finger and thumb, holding it firmly in place for three or four hours as he feels necessary. If it is swollen, and making urine will not help, then he must reapply.
"And on the other hand, nothing came from it because the urine that comes out does not remain closed.
"This is where we put our attention if it's a matter of urgency or importance as you've mentioned, and should expand.
"Those who have lost their grip on the left are blighted, because none of them can hold the testicle at the top if they do not keep their foreskin up. "They cannot enter or come into contact with that material as it brings about marriage and is a bad illness.
"The manner of the procedure is that they shave down to their anus, leaving the foreskin and the top as smooth as a fingernail. If it should occur during intercourse, if necessary.
And keep from applying any ointment that often comes with many times, and if it happens when the vein is cut open, or in treating a wound until it heals
skin lesions The second sentence seems to be incomplete. Could you please provide more context so I can better assist?
Are you referring to the line "et en i a malignes et non malignes;" in reference to venoms and non-venoms, or something else entirely?
If you want the stitches removed gently, but make sure they are tightly bound in cotton and then apply Egyptian ointment. After that, treat the healed wound until it is completely healed
If it is a malignant tumor, do not burn it with fire;
After you have applied the ointment and it has spread through the furrow, if it is necessary to remove only that which is dense first. And when it is dry, treat with what you like best.
When you cure a burn, if it is not treated promptly, the blisters may break open and cause further infection.
You should apply a paste made of honey and flour, ground from the stems of onions and garlic, to treat burns as well; then repeat the treatment until it is healed.
And when the patient is being treated with a lunar fire cure as follows:
The cautery provides relief by instructing the patient to let their hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold them steady so that they do not move until they grow. It is also important in dealing with sores and infections;
And if the blisters are broken and inflamed, you should apply a paste made of honey and flour, ground from the stems of onions and garlic, to treat burns as well.
And when you find that the blisters are coming to the head of the vein and it has become inflamed due to a wound or abscess, if you suspect that the vein may be injured too, make sure you squeeze gently at all points of the vein, until both ends of it are delivered.
"And you are to gently draw it back into its place if necessary.
"Subsequently, put the limb between two pieces of cloth that are moist and cold, so as to make it stay still.
"Circoncision is similar to other wounds in terms of healing process. "In any case when we do our best to perform this work of ours with care and properly, if it is done well by us, then the outcome will be better than others in terms of healing.
I say that the earlier ones did not know how to circumcise their children, as they were unaware of its custom and we only have what we acquired through trial and error.
"But I want the greatest part from those masters and doctors who did circumcision before me, for they were powerful and all skilled.
"And if it is because of the second blow and from chance that it came upon him in this way or otherwise. "The dislocation occurs here, causing great pain to both members.
"The joint is often dislocated due to the sharpness of the object, causing great pain and many dislocations.
From the strong incision that was made with great force to all parts of the body I got the good fortune through trial and error because the strong ones cut very similarly as those who did it skillfully.
"When you press your hand, if you make it move slightly... "...the fingers are still in the groove.
"...when you press your hand as if you were thinking of a child, should he hold on, make sure to let the fingers stay in place only, and then gently pull them out using all the movements that you've learned.
"...then place it between your hands directly and pull the fingers gently out of your hand. When you're done, make sure to close them up using all the movements that you know.
"And breathe deeply through your nose, holding it high as long as the dislocation remains. "After cleaning up the discharge, tie your arm to a double loop of thread with strong binding.
"After cleaning up the discharge, tie your arm to a double loop of thread with strong binding. "Then tie the other arm to a hook and thumb loop at opposite ends, crossing them, then loosen the loops of binding, release it from its place and cut off the base of the shoulder. "Then let the discharge run slowly, as it must. "And then mix the powder with a mixture of wax that has been heated until it is dry and brittle like dried rose petals; put this onto a hot iron and press flat.
"The form of force for purification, as follows:
The dislocated shoulder should remain loose and relaxed.
There was an error during the dissection when the cords were cut into.
When it is necessary to straighten your arm by bending at the elbow so that they are held steady.
And then gently extend and hold on tight if you're unable to straighten it by bending at the elbow, and release when ready.
If they enter the third joint and swell up at that point where it's inflamed, if you let them go until the stitches are removed gently.
If your arm becomes numb or there is numbness in that area after holding it tight, do not worry about it.
Treat any sudden wounds with powders that we have mentioned earlier in this chapter.
"Treat the wounds as quickly as possible,
Retention of urine
"Hold the urine back if there is a fever or coldness in an abscess, or when a vein becomes blocked, or in the case of a boil, or similar things that we have mentioned in our text.
"And if the urine is not held back tightly, and you see that there is a contraction at the base of the bladder, it's important to ensure that the veins are closed. "The buttocks should be positioned behind him and extended on his back side. And tighten the bladder to prevent it from moving. "And when closing the bladder at its peak expression of the base is important to prevent leakage from occurring.
"And when it does not work as we have mentioned and the veins cause great pain if you perform an extraction using a tool called 'string', which is its shape.
And if it is a light touch of silver, as when removing an abscess. And if with the palm of one and a half, or lightly on top
The manner of using a needle for urine is that you take two, and tie to the top with wool or cotton, and then tie around the thread as it goes through.
And put an end to the wool and tie around the needle's head with the thread as it goes through.
Then tightly wrap the thread around at the root of the thread, and then tie it under where you want.
Then tie the needle in front of the bladder and let it go toward where you want to go, but not until it has reached there.
And then it is taken to all its wool one by one, and tied in after the wool, then removed and straightened.
Repeat the treatment as long as there are wounds visible or bleeding, and tie them to prevent movement.
If scours or wounds come into the bladder, or through urine is gathered together and you view them as clear and treat with appropriate ointments if it has been called "clepsydra".
She is closed off securely; if a third attempt occurs... On the one hand and on the other hand as you see.
And hold his eyelids so that the cure ointment is applied well to prevent itching and swelling as much as possible, if it becomes too dry.
And when you apply your medicine in the vein, put a cloth soaked with water on top of it to cool it down and prevent further burning.
If there is more burning after applying the cure, quickly rinse it off with cold water. If there is moisture inside and swelling occurs, then immediately come to the vein for treatment if they start to hurt.
And this is how one performs a subtle cauterization
It may be from the arm or the thigh, and higher up.
Either on the left side or both sides.
Then take a sheep's vein and put the moisture from which you have heated up the vein between two fingers to form a double knot, then tie it tight with a thread so that the heat is held on the fire.
Then heat up the head of the fire and hold your hand tight around the vein while applying moisture all over it until the hairs feel as though they are hot from the moisture.
And if you don't have a vein, then take some parchment and make an even circle around it, and cut it neatly in half. Then take the strong thread in between them and tie it as you would tie a knot.
And do what you did with the vessel, press your hand until the moisture has gone from it.
of the
We have mentioned in that passage the techniques of piercing and extraction for the treatment of wounds.
I mentioned the difference between a first incision and one to remove stones, and in piercing when it must be done with great caution. In veins and in skin
I will explain thoroughly and briefly.
I said that when piercing is done in the vein if it has not been made with great caution and it causes an immediate jump of blood from the vein.
And I mentioned that after piercing into veins, and especially near their surface, they should be held gently many times, and then tied And hold the limb steady during this process.
"And healing is gentle until they are four years old, and increases with age, causing pain to those who are between youth and old.
And the treatment is more mild for those who have a great many, compared to those who only have a few.
And when we come to the cure, if it is necessary first to harden or soften the abscess by scraping gently around it, so that all the blood vessels inside are not disturbed. "The patient has had no prior dislocation.
Then take the abscess by its base and remove it with a probe, if the abscess is at the front of the bladder, so that no urine leaks out.
Then place it between your hands and have your hands placed below his legs, so that the bladder does not descend downwards.
Then squeeze tightly until you feel a sense of closure.
If you have already felt the abscess at that point, if your hand is now ready to remove it from its place.
If it doesn't feel like you need to press harder on the whole thing, if your second finger feels numb or loose from squeezing too hard, then the abscess is getting softer and more tender. And insert it into your anus, and hold tight to its base, and when you feel at its tip, if the opening of the vagina
And then push it in your rectum, and tighten around that exit as far as possible
And order the minister to press the vagina into his hand and tell him to extend both fists up high in front of them, so that he can see if there are any sores beneath where one might shave the legs;
And then apply the spatula gently as described below Then place it between where your legs meet and the base of the spine straight ahead;
And tighten it both at the base and at its end, as far forward or backward depending on how wide your pelvis is, making sure not to overly stretch it, according to the size of the opening, do not excessively stretch it;
"When you press on it, where exactly are you pressing?
"It is either at the highest part of it or near its edge. "If you say that you are pressing on it while trying to sit up.
"And if you say you're pressing on it and feel numbness or tingling in your hands, that is more severe.
"When there are edges and corners to press on, the larger size of it will be felt.
"And if you press on it and do not feel any numbness or tingling, then you need to strengthen the grip with your fingers. "Or if you've tried using subtle instruments such as a needle for example at its base, but it doesn't work.
"And if you try to push or pull on it and cannot straighten your leg without pain, then the dislocation is severe.
"And if there is more than one, pierce the first with the largest at its base, then close it, and after that make little cuts on either side.
"And if necessary, make a larger wound. "The two things I mentioned earlier are: "Or if they die or the urine comes out with a great burst and leaks,
"but you'll try to stop tearing by restraining it, or cutting through the tendons, until you tear it in small pieces;
"And when you've finished your task, if there is a wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood to heal it, hold tight until the wound heals. You can cover it in oil or wine, either hot or cold, to soothe the eye; "And then rinse off the area around it and leave the connection as it was.
"When you dislocate it, if the bone is loose and flexible, then only hold onto its ends until both are healed.
"And he will hold in the bladder and prevent urination: And if you are in pain, and feel it again after surgery, as it causes the bladder to swell and urinate excessively.
Then remove the bandage from above and below, and help him in all ways as you can, until he is calm.
And make sure to follow the prescribed treatments that are given to you by a doctor.
The last sentence translates to: "And his wounds will be small and closed off from the skin, with no ability to urinate. If you follow these instructions carefully many times, then please excuse any delay in receiving the treatment. I have already provided a translation for this sentence.
Place it at an angle of three degrees, fixed to one side:
Then take this file and insert it into the base of the urethra if you are unable to urinate immediately.
"Heeding the doctor's instructions, he gently rubbed his forehead, as much as it hurt. He then pulled on his brow with gentle strokes and as far to the other side as he could.
Once it is this close, press your hand firmly on that area between his brows which has been shaved very short. If broken, and the patient bleeds, and gets a cut in their brow hairs.
And if you don't do this for any reason, then shave off the eyebrow hair on one side and another, then put it back together with a single cut between them both. And keep treating him until he is healed.
of the very worst
Whenever the forehead is shaved on both sides in women, and if it has no times been done before, then treat him for three things;
One thing to note about a virgin woman
The second is that you can't find a good match for her if she isn't chaste to some extent, especially when she gets older.
The third way is that through experience you cannot find a good match in the field of hands;
The fourth way is that the first of the woman may be stronger than the first of the man. As you get older, it becomes more important to have fine judgment and great care, or else fear will come upon you. And when one loses this subtle wisdom, they cannot find true love;
The fifth way is that a wise woman in the life of women is like one who learns and masters part of art, and commands what you command of her inquiry into her heart. "And look well to see if she is a virgin.
"And look well to see if she is a virgin. "Or, he should inquire of its location and seek out the source;
"And if he truly finds its location and restrains it with his fingers, then he recommends that she prick her finger into the abscess, and wishes for her to press her finger into the vein;
"And if she truly finds its location and desires to move it in small steps from the entrance of the vein down towards its source until she reaches the root of the arm;
"Then he severs the tendon at its base and in that area where it is most apparent, so as to see what part of her arm it is, and sees the source in that same part; "And does not move his second finger from its place or remove it, but rather cuts off only one at first.
"And does not move his second finger from its place or remove it, but rather cuts off only one at first. In length, when you sense your pain from the wound as long as it is not healed yet, and there are many ways to relieve pain.
It includes knowledge of small things and large ones, acute and chronic, short-term and long-term, and others.
"To ensure that everything is clear and to know what comes next.
And if it is not healed within a certain time period, hold them steady as long as they stay put;
Then come back to your work while the wound is still there, and apply remedies I have told you in the extraction of a stone by helping it heal.
And if it is from the artery that is cut off, then apply powder to the left and right side of the wound as well, do not repeat this anymore, leave it alone but not tear the vein completely, or else you will cause more harm. "Apply a dressing to the wound.
"And when the cold sore is painful, if it returns to its place, as long as it's healed.
"Ramie is nothing but an assembly of moisture or white pus, which contains the evil spirits.
"It is called 'syfac', and once it is on a clean cloth there should be no more pus. "This is what we mean when we say 'syfac'.
"It does not happen. The growth of this blister is a result of inflammation that causes the material to spread out.
"And once it comes from pus that has been squeezed out, and the moisture is present in many places: "Or there are colors becoming yellow or black or aqueous stains, which has more.
"And these are the signs of knowing that assembly exists; whether it is 'syfac' or pus as we have said, if there are wounds open because moisture fills everywhere.
And if there is moisture inside it [the abscess], then pierce and explore with part of the blade, as for this reason we believe that it is another injury.
And if there is moisture between the skin of the veins and the white fascia, when it feels good;
If you see where the moisture is coming from, through which orifice it entered should be clear to you. "After examining the injured part, determine what has caused it.
And when we cure it with fire, if necessary make sure the hairs are healthy and filled up for their growth.
Then tie a bandage to his back, put something soft on it.
Then bind the side of his chest and tell the minister to do it right, extend the bandage over one of the two ribs on the right.
Then take a sharp blade and make an incision through the muscle to the bone on both sides of his chest until you reach the spine, then tie it tightly so that the white skin is pulled taut as possible.
After applying fire cupping to the right shoulder, hold your breath, and then raise it up.
Do not touch any other parts of the body except for the area being cupped. If you apply it too lightly or don't do it correctly, then it may come back with an abscess.
After applying fire cupping to the left shoulder, if you miss it completely then make sure that you perform the procedure correctly.
After wrapping both joints of the affected area with bandages as similarly to other wounds, hold it steady until healing occurs.
If you believe the cupping has caused another illness, make sure to consult a doctor about supporting vessels as needed.
Then treat the joint with fire cupping and remove it, then apply treatments similarly to what we have said.
"And there is one more thing to remember. It's always assembled into two parts. "If you follow the same procedure as before for each part then drain out that one and put it back into a clean oil bath.
"If you follow the same procedure as before for each part then drain out that one and put it back into a clean oil bath. "And then drain the second one out and put it back into an oil bath with vinegar and oil, and place both of them on a rack so they can dry completely in that form.
"Then take both the racks and apply them with wool glue in that shape and arrange them by stitching on top of the wall frames, one at the back and the other at the front.
"Then attach the second rack to both sides and make it all one continuous strip around the wall with twine.
"And never use this kind of cautery for anything other than a small superficial wound and only if you have already used the medical cautery. If it is not white that contains vinegar it may be corrosive.
"Perform this cautery carefully according to these instructions, and prick at its gentle point with great care.
And do all the things you have mentioned earlier as well.
And make sure it doesn't touch your eye.
And remember, this method is more painful. And be careful of any harm that may come from the treatment and make sure it doesn't worsen the injury.
And nothing contrary to my instructions should happen, whether it's from touching the abscess or anything else; if something contrary happens, according to what is in front of you do.
And the pain is great and it's difficult to endure this treatment if you get a hole, as advised, and remember that when you are certain about what we have said regarding this method, then prick at its gentle point so that it doesn't move until it grows. "Pierce near the base of the bone through to all parts of the limb, making one cut from the back.
And if they are too small, that is, when every little flaw occurs.
Then cut through to the bone and tie it up, leaving enough of a gap for any little flaw. And then treat as long as the wound is healed.
And do not let the white cloth come out of the wound's mouth when treating it with a tool that is sharp or similar in shape to help close up any gaps.
And you should open up the wound and wait for it to heal completely after six months or more, at which point it will be closed as before, except that the healing process is complete.
Be careful in this part of the passage where there seems to be more concern for safety.
"I will tell you about the work of the chapter and its contents.
"Each patient may come with different needs and complaints; And this is in most cases.
It's important to know by experience and skill, which is widespread among healers, or from striking the wrong spot
And it depends on how deep the abscess strikes. And there is no pain to speak of, and the patient grieves;
And in that case there is great fear and trembling, and many die.
When it's by the blood, if the abscess strikes at your fingertips when pressed against something hard, Then you must touch gently.
Those who do not have the expression of their fingers to measure properly and feel for hardness may use the other hand in this way. "And once you have coped with the eyes, open up the vein in a high place, and deliver the suspension of all veins.
"If the vein is closed with those hairs you should tie it off, and then cop.
"If the vein is open at that point or if it is dense with veins, then you should deliver all of those veins and the cop again.
"And if it is from the back side, you should tie off all of it and extract the substance, as we have said.
"And when your wounds are closed, if you apply the healing ointment with rose water and vinegar, then treat other wounds as well while they are fresh.
"This is an abscess opening similar to the incision with the softening of the veins, and you must hold tight the muscles as it happens.
"The treatment of this disease should be as severe and painful as it appears to be right now, and we will explain the course in detail that they took.
"It is necessary that you make yourself into the vein at one end and tie off the suspension of veins around your two wrists to all the veins that are pointed towards the edge, and extend them.
"Make a small incision on the forearm to draw out blood vessels that are near the arm.
"Pierce it with a single needle or two needles. Tie one end to the first vein where you inserted it and tie the other end tightly. "Draw out all the blood vessels gradually, towards their length, and squeeze any crooked ones tight.
"Treat the wound like other wounds or seek medical attention if no blood vessels continue to gush from one of the cuts.
"No harm is done and all the vessels are extracted if you tie off the veins to each other. "If they do not cease their gushing from a cut and become uncontrollable, seek help immediately.
The veins of this vein may be cut where the section enters or extends towards the abdomen in the area of the ribs.
There are two ways that this injury can occur:
Or by impact, or from a jolt, or by crushing, or raising the pain and similar things.
The signs when it is from a sectioning injury are that the pain comes gradually and gradually, in the short duration, and does not come suddenly. And if the section presses on the intestine,
"The pain is sudden at the start and varies in intensity; it's also because of the stretching and squeezing from both ends.
"There is no defecation while holding it in place, and great pain is suffered by the patient due to the squeezing.
"And in these treatments with fire there is fear, so it's convenient to withdraw.
The method of treatment is that you command the injury to hold it tightly against the intestine at its base if there is a wound, so he can be brought back. And hold them steady with your hands
Then release the cord and cut through all of its length After that, remove the staples in a way you think is best to open up the wound and make sure it can heal properly.
Then burn off all of the flesh surrounding the incision, as long as there is no longer any sensation from all parts;
After that, you take your second needle in the same place as before, between the white flesh which is now exposed skin and between the second layer of tissue, and pierce through to where it ends behind the incision, and between the second layer.
And then move to your left hand to cut through the cord and expose all of the flesh surrounding it, and hold the white flesh on top with your right hand steady, and gently remove any excess skin towards the bottom. "Command the minister to extend his arm upwards, then remove any clothing that is attached to it.
"If there are no wounds or ulcers on the abdomen, he should gently remove any clothing from his waist.
"Then take a needle or thread made of the material 'X', and tie it behind him where his clothes end. "After removing any clothing from the waist, tie each finger to a thread as long as there are four threads. "Then gather them together in a cross shape and tie the ends so that it is behind his back where his clothes end. "Then tie the fingers together with threads and make two parts as long as they are. If any of them will not stay still then do not release until you have tied it. "And after completing the first lien, leave it alone for a while. Then come back to the second one and attach or detach as needed. "After everything else is done according to the previous instructions.
"Then proceed with the part that is next on the chain of events. And bind or loosen as needed, just like we have described earlier.
"Then anoint with oil and apply it to the wounds, then fasten in place what we have mentioned. "And no time is there a burn on the veins after incision due to doubt of bleeding. "But this often happens, and leave the thing as long as it is safe for you;
"And if it takes time to come out with a hot tool then apply what we have mentioned while it is still in.
"Then treat the other wound as well until it is completely healed.
Hernia
The treatment for this wound is not to be performed by fire.
And they said that it was done similarly to how you tie the laces after cutting off the excess material.
And then apply a poultice over the abscess as soon as it becomes inflamed.
And do this similarly to how we have mentioned, until he is healed.
No time comes when the wounds will not heal, as we have said, and release them open.
And do not allow any of the entrails to protrude, and if it does, quickly correct it and treat all wounds.
If at any time this becomes too painful in that area, whether from an injury or a fistula, as long as the intestines protrude.
And when it has been prolonged by the extension of the fascia which is inflamed, as we have said, for it is stretched and then moistened and inflated with water to release.
And if healing occurs by cauterization as we have previously mentioned;
And in no case is healing achieved through this method; and if the limb swells up between your hands after a deep cut is made so that it hangs down in three sections.
And then remove the bandage from the wound and apply a compress soaked with alcohol to the exposed area before dressing it up.
And press down on the belly and count the two protruding fingers with alcohol onto each of the wounds and count one by one.
And then remove the cloth and do not apply any bandage or nothing else as I mentioned in curing the inflammation of the bowels. Then treat with the treatment for wounds.
Then treat with the treatment for wounds. And when you apply the stitches, if it heals and treats the wound as long as it is closed up.
The shoulder joint is inflamed, it has no appearance when dislocated, the muscles around it are relaxed in this state, and those who attempt to move it will experience greater pain
In the treatment of wounds
There are often many bruises from blows in any place because when they are heavy the skin becomes softened and it shows.
"And when you see a wound on someone's back," [it is important to] cleanse the area gently with water and apply gentle pressure.
"Then gather up the two layers to sew together, first making sure there is enough space for the skin to be relaxed at three stitches or four firm ones.
"Then put a stitch between the layers as you would with other wounds, ensuring it is as smooth as possible and ties it tightly.
severely
"This is why I asked that you refrain from mentioning or discussing the law in this book.
"No, it's not necessary to mention two ways.
"One way is simply asking for a response when you ask him and then curing his wound.
"The other way is simply to treat him well with whatever you have at hand and of whatever nature - like a dog or sheep.
I understand what you mean by "chastremens," but it seems like a typo or an error. Could you please provide more context or clarify your question? Do you want to know the translation of "chastremens" in English, regardless of whether it means traction or severance?
In doing so by traction, we must hold the patient's hand firmly in hot water until their muscles are relaxed and remain still. Afterwards, lead them gently with your hand so they are steady and you no longer feel any more.
This is the way to proceed It is necessary that you apply heat, and press the muscles of their hand firmly with your hand afterwards, then wrap it in a cloth soaked in cold water to cool down.
And I let there be no slack or loose movement at the joints;
And this method of traction is more gentle as it does not cause any movement in the bones during treatment.
Treat the wound as long as it is clean
"Hermaphrodite
Heremofrodeye is according to two ways The first way is that between the two veins visible as a female's shape, or it has hair and never pierces through the urine.
And another way is through wounds, and with an arrow like a thorn.
And its treatment of flesh and wound is that you pierce through all the close veins and treat it like other wounds
In the second way, from veins whose urine pierces through the skin of those veins, there is no treatment.
Tendonitis is an injury to the natural part, as long as it's too close to see; And none of them have this way like a hand, and that's treatment.
It is necessary to remove the excess of tendonitis from your hand or arm, and it should be treated gently;
"Do not apply excessive force when applying remedies, so that other cures do not worsen the condition, until it is healed.
And another remedy that is applied to the mouth of the mare and its application, and by chance alone it works, and according to which the resemblance of a cow, and for this reason they called it "cow disease. If you want to help them, like we have suggested earlier, continue treatment as long as it is necessary
If the nature of woman is not properly perceived or her body is weak. It can be due to birth defects or accidents that happen later in life.
It can be due to birth defects or accidents that happen later in life. It can be due to excessive force applied, or it could occur through subtle or severe strokes, and is performed in the horse's mouth, or in its flank, or in any other place.
They prevent conception, and miscarriage, and can bring about flowers to bloom.
And knowing how to treat a burn requires knowledge of fire therapy.
When the body's strength is diminished by old age or illness, they may appear weak in two ways: either from weakness of the muscles and bones themselves; or through fatigue and lack of energy to perform even simple tasks that were once easy
If the patient is very thin and has poor circulation, if they lose consciousness, then act quickly
And tie your two arms together behind their back, spread their legs.
Then stretch the patient's limbs as much as possible while keeping them still and trying to straighten out any bends they may have.
Then put cold water on it, oil the wound and lay them down flat to prevent shock if they go into shock
And if you gently press it, as shown by the small finger,
If their wounds are very bad, then support their head by placing something under their chin or putting an object on the ground in front of them.
And apply any ointments to the wounds if they are very bad, such as honey or dragon's blood mixed with camphor, and gather a lot of aloe vera.
And set a splint on the broken limb so it cannot move.
And keep it still for a while and wrap it in a linen bandage.
Then continue with other treatments as long as the patient is conscious.
If the patient is to be treated with fire cautery, then instruct them to let their hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold their eyes steady so that they do not move until they grow. And in the treatment of an abscess, you must be gentle;
hemorrhoids Those are symptoms of veins that are not usually encountered and if they become worse over time;
And we have already discussed in the previous chapter, the symptoms and signs, and I will discuss those that occur with treatment.
"I tell you to apply ice packs and hold them in place as long as they are attached to the shoulder, and if not held steady it can be painful because of the movement.
"Those at the mouth of the arrow cannot feel them so they are unable to cure them.
It is advisable to put the patient in a cold place and warm them with towels, wrap their wounds tightly, and apply powder on any sores or abscesses, as well as ointments, incense, and similar things;
Then put his feet in cold water for an hour, then wrap him up warmly.
"And when he is in a mixture of sumac and pomegranate seeds, gooseberries, and similar things, and then add wheat flour, mix with honey and apply it to his back.
And if you break a bone "And if not, tie the hands behind the back and gently twist them so they do not hurt.
"Then apply liniment made from the juice of fresh banana or alligator vine with vinegar, and tie it tightly around his back.
"And when the abscess heals so that it is no longer painful, then you can loosen the bandage.
"And the abscess that comes from 'albather' is red and is similar to an ingrown hair if it suits you exactly like what I said. "And then, when the cure has healed as much as possible.
The various incisions of the arm are treated similarly as I described earlier; including hemorrhoids and fistulas, abscesses, erysipelas, and other conditions mentioned in previous divisions.
It is important to treat each of these traits separately, as they are not the same type.
And if you see signs of fire, look for redness and swelling, and if it turns red, seek medical attention immediately. If you are not in pain when piercing but the pain persists, stop doing so until the pain subsides.
And then pierce through the middle of it and around both sides to close up the wound, aligning all its pieces towards the leg.
And spread his limbs out wide, put his hands behind his back and tie them together tightly with a bandage.
After that, put the ball over the left ear and bind it tightly with something to cover your mouth, so after you come out.
"When you use this instrument to measure the depth of the incision, make sure that when it is inside the wound, it will not move any more than necessary. And ensure that you do not remove any hair. "If the instrument is longer, if covering the depth of the incision with cloth, make sure that the instrument does not cause injury.
"Make sure you put the handle of the instrument inside and hold it tightly.
"When the abscess is opened up, and one feels heat in their hand, if necessary cover with a cloth over the finger.
"When the bone is visible and it is necessary to make an incision in a moist place with oil or fat-based grease.
"Put the cloth over the wound in such a way that it covers the front of the incision and extends to the base of the finger. Make sure any moisture or burns are covered.
After two times of bleeding has occurred, until it stops.
And no matter how many times they are burned and treated with honey and vinegar, until the wound is healed. After the bleeding stops.
"The wound is dressed with a bandage, if you are to be burned do not cover up the burn as we have mentioned in our instructions.
"the infant The physician is first to observe the natural growth of the child and look for signs that it may be injured; when you see a woman pressing her abdomen, and smelling of urine...
unless they are properly held. The child is considered injured when its appearance corresponds to the natural growth of a child and the urine odor indicates it...
And if you see these signs, gently press on his abdomen so that he stops moving as quickly as possible.
because when it starts to move its leg and urine is excreted in large quantities by the kidneys...
And so he comes naturally
And he comes nowhere near his limbs, and towards the heart or joints, hands, stomach, thighs, buttocks, and through various other bad things;
The best way to deal with this is through both surgery and subtlety in these matters, showing all the things that need help;
If it occurs naturally at the top of his head and the infant woman tightly holds it with her fingers, or its virtues are very weak if placed on a stool, women hold onto it.
And if it arises from oil or fenugreek, when cooked, a balance must be maintained between its two small pieces of that shape. The second one, holding on until the moisture which is at the base disappears.
"The woman's belly should be held tightly until she finishes giving birth and is not in pain. If it is necessary to apply pressure on her lower abdomen with oil of lavender.
"Afterwards, place a cloth or napkin between the woman's legs and keep it in place for some time; hold her mouth and nose closed for one hour. "Now that she has finished giving birth,
"And if necessary, gently stretch her arms one by one and repeat the process. "If they cannot be pulled out when placing a hand on it [the baby], gently pull her feet up to your chest; "Then lower the baby back onto the ground, then hold the woman so she doesn't move when she gets up.
"And if the hands cannot be pulled out and are numb, hold them by their wrists at the end of which is closest to you, then remove the baby gently.
"from the child standing on their toes When a finger comes out of its socket, if you gently push it back up. And then turn it slowly and gradually as long as it is loose.
Then straighten the finger out slowly and gradually.
He may leap from one side to another if he is commanded to do so, but it should not happen unless the conditions are met. If he leaps, then death shall follow.
And if not as we have said, then gently loosen them slowly over time to their natural position. As long as it is gentle.
And if not, as we have experienced, and he becomes a murderer of people, and kills himself through bitterness, and grinds everything into powder. And strips the nature from the woman's face and burns off the wound, making her sit in a hot bath until all wounds are gone.
And when she is tired, he applies the mirror collar and puts it on her, then leaves one hour to rest. Then he lies down on his side, then lies still with closed eyes and mouth, and presses gently at the belly
of the child with its arms When he finishes in this manner, if he moves his hands slowly and slowly then he stays still on the ground between his stomach and buttocks, holding onto the edge of the table then he holds his hands slowly and slowly against the belly, loosening them from above as much as they can be seen below then he opens his eyes slightly and moves his hands forward, then lifts them up towards the belly, and pulls them back to a certain distance. and you gently hold him by the hand slowly and slowly. Instructs the woman to lie still as he finishes the exercise.
The issue with a child who holds one arm wide It is convenient to practice holding your hand "Once [it] cannot be reset if it is removed while the woman stands up.
If she can't stand up with her leg bent, and both legs are bent.
Then you will hear the muscle twitching I mentioned earlier.
And if she can't stand up while holding onto one side with her hand. And you should support and guide the child's growth while they are lying on their side, and instruct them to keep trying as long as they are able to do so.
Of the child is separated from its mother I recommend that he lower his hand slowly and gradually, and gently hold it while guiding the arm movement.
And when he gets older, if his muscle twitches badly and shakes it, then gently hold the muscle as we have described earlier.
And when you have done this, if it is placed on the eye, command its removal with a tweezers. And make sure to remove it gently. Of this method, try the same as everything else
Of this method, try the same as everything else When he comes this way for the second time and if the second joint is swollen, as long as it continues to be inflamed.
And hold the fingers firmly but gently, and pull on both sides if it feels too tight to prevent death.
And then hold the child firmly but gently, as long as you have held it in place as required, and command the woman to remove it once.
of the shoulders Wounds that come and go many times, but never in threes or fours. This is not the removal of any other thing, nor could it happen This sentence translates to "The separation is not good, it causes harm.
This sentence translates to "The separation is not good, it causes harm. "You are many, and you will be defeated by the sword which devours those who oppose it,
"And once they are naturally separated as we have said.
"If there is a severe attack like the one that has been described and it comes with small movements and gentle force as we have said. "And make sure to do what it takes to get better. for very young
"No matter how many times you are injured in the first, second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, or seventh place, or more than fifteen places, they will always take their shape from measuring with a sacred measure, and if the blade seizes them as it should, then everything happens because of chance. "As you wish.
of a dead child
When healing a woman from a dead or dying child's belly, as I mentioned in the previous text, and it does not return, you must perform the surgery while holding both hands. If you wish to heal a woman who is healthy and has no accidents or fear of death.
If the woman lies on her back with her arms bent at her sides and legs spread out.
And minister to her with two pillows or if she is lying on the bed so that her head does not rest on the child's chest.
Then wet the mouth of her dry lips with mustard, and oil from flax seeds and sow thistle seed, then hold both hands over them.
Then gently wash her face with this mixture, and wipe them gently when they are dry, and remember to remove the powder that may remain on your hands.
When the ninth ribs are affected by sores on their back or collar bone, or in their mouth, or in their tongue, or near their beard or from between fingers and toes.
And it is advisable that the ninth be held in their right hand and put the bandage between both hands of the left arm. It should be applied gently to all the parts we have mentioned as long as it remains visible on the thing.
Then apply another tenth one, or if you are doing a double procedure, and its extractions should be equal to those of the ninth.
Then apply alternately from one side to another, as you have learned, and both the ninth and tenth should be equal in their extraction.
If he moves a part of it, if only one or both of its eyes move, then hold the remaining part still.
If he moves it not at all, if only one or both ends of it move upward, then hold onto it as much as you can until it stops moving on its own.
And if one hand comes in front of the other and cannot be pulled back due to stiffness, as long as you hold onto it tightly, do not let go until all movement stops. Then wrap the bandage around the joint or wrist, and if you have another hand to spare, use that one too; otherwise just use this one.
And if the child's dislocation is severe and causing much pain or injury, then bind it tightly between your fingers to stop movement. The instrument is called "almidach," which forms come with tools or physicians who follow it.
He puts the patient on his back in order to perform the operation
And then he cuts into the bones like tendons, and holds them steady, so that they do not move unless moisture is present or otherwise
If it cannot be held in place with stitches alone, then you need to close the incision and apply pressure on any wounds that may have developed.
If it is swollen in the abdomen or chest, if necessary, you should press as hard as possible until moisture returns.
"And if it is gently drawn towards the mouth of the lady, then gently guide its movements to that end.
And if it is swollen in the belly or groin, if necessary, you should extract it while holding it with your other hand. Until moisture returns to the belly or groin.
And if another member becomes inflamed, it is often the shoulder blade that becomes red and swollen with a boil on its mouth. next time
and the mouth of the abscess is treated with warm wet compresses if it does not improve, then moist and gentle remedies must be applied. And they apply plasters, using those that are soft and moist or damp.
And you put a poultice on its chest, if it is necessary to do what we have recommended for the infant.
and if they are unable, then you leave nothing of the second kind.
And when you have done this, apply what we have recommended for our patients who come with boils.
And the dislocation occurs when it is held firmly with restraint, and other treatments are applied.
She gave birth to a baby who died right away, but later bore another child, and the second one survived. After leaving behind the abscess, it swelled up quickly, causing great pain.
I called for treatment but they were unable to stop the bleeding.
I placed a very strong adhesive, and it stuck right away, but after some time other things came off as well. I became weary of my mouth because there was no longer anything to eat.
If I thought it were the bones from a dead child.
I wanted to treat a wound, but first I tied up my hands so they would not move in the process of treating it better. and then she left her hand loose for a short while;
And I do not remember this treatise stating that when the master surgeon removes an object, he should assist with it.
After this comes the form of pressing, where one holds tightly to the books;
And then it turns into two dislocations. In every case the corners are more subtle or restrictive, and either make things better or worse;
or a mouth with two small fingers in the middle of it, the edge where there is a palm and half. "And the limbs should be set in a firm manner one to another, with half palm length or slightly more;
They are set at an opening of the mouth when you turn the two horns
Another form, more subtle and lighter to be made from one end or the other according to the likeness of the tendons; And having set the two joints as seen above, with half palm length on one and larger on the other;
And when you see opening the mouth to all the equipment, if she is sitting on one leg, put her feet down and then hold the two joints together in the mouth and hold the head of the equipment between her thighs. And after you have taken your hand to all the equipment, if you did it as above with the joints in turn according to how much you saw open the mouth of the opening, while he does what she wants.
These instruments are sharp, numerous, and dangerous. When you look at them, they appear sharper, and the sharpness increases with each view proportional to their quantity.
Even if you do not have this instrument, its necessity is undeniable.
When the second part is in place and it's time to cover your mouth and nose with gauze or cloth, then tightly hold both hands over the wound. And if you sneeze through this, do well.
If you are unable to cover your mouth with anything else, then hold a handkerchief or cloth over the nose as well. All these herbs, or none of them, should be cooked or dried in the fire.
Then put a cloth over your nose and mouth as well, and tighten it so that no air escapes from the nostrils.
"Then follow what I said. If sentence two is finished.
After this treatment, if the patient's hand remains after it is healed, he should move his arm naturally in a circular motion or an upward movement of the elbow, and then rest. And when it has healed properly but slowly, so that the arm does not pull out of its extraction.
But you should gently move your hand to the front and back, and then tie it up tightly. If he will come and get dressed quickly.
And hold the mouth shut during the treatment we have instructed to burn herbs with fire cautery;
and if you do not follow what I said, then you will fail in this task.
And it is recommended that the mouth be closed when burning herbs with fire cautery, you should tie it up tightly and burn off any hair around it. If he falls and gets up again
But every time when she swallows something bad happens to her stomach and throat, bleeding from the nose. If you want to perform fumigations, then it is advisable to do so in this way
None of the old ones have experienced successful fumigations with dry figs and raisins.
The shape of the instrument used in fumigating the woman's eyelid is as follows:
And it is like seeing an arrowhead, placing it gently into the fire, and drawing out broad arrows from the fire.
Or perform fumigations over coals, burning until they are dry, then start again with another batch.
The small child who does not have the foundation of learning, has it spoiled by subtle methods. If you want to perform fumigations at the bath, make sure he puts his hand gently on it and does not let it touch even a small thing, or damage the bandage if it is torn.
"Apply ointment made from wine and oil to the wound, then apply a poultice as long as it is healing.
If there are doubts that he will not stop moving, if you place a heavy bandage over it and let his hands go loose while keeping his eyes steady; then apply oil to soothe him when he falls asleep.
There will be no sudden movement of the limb or joint. If you need to cover it quickly Do not do this if a poultice has been applied; as we have stated earlier.
Fistulas that arise from the bottom are draining, and grow towards the outside of the body or towards an external opening if there is one.
And when a fistula arises from the bottom and is small, it can be treated with gentle or subtle heat, and will not cause pain in most cases.
They are closed by applying pressure until the fistula stops producing discharge or leaking fluid, and sometimes when a finger is inserted into them.
And if there are fistulae coming from the vein, or even from the edge of it. They come through the incision, and also through the artery wall.
And it is known that the fistula will not go away by itself. You squeeze your finger or the base of it, and insert a small needle made of iron or steel into the fistula as long as there is no tortuousness in it.
And if it has tortuosity, you gently squeeze the base of your finger or the hair on its tail as long as you feel the tension or sensation in that area.
You do not feel it and cannot be extracted or move; just like we have said earlier. That is what matters most to me. If you want more details, here they are:
"And when the fistula is found in the vein or urinary tract if it comes from urine and cannot be treated by medicine.
She has dislocated her arm from its socket. If there is no bone injury and the dislocation occurred spontaneously, then it should not be treated immediately by repositioning.
And in these cases, there is no cure and the wounds worsen as they progress.
In those who are not pregnant and have no recent injury, there is hope for healing through force, as I've experienced, and it is that the arrow must be removed from between your hands on its back.
And lieg his legs down to his hips, and place his hips in front of his stomach; Then apply a compress of cold water or ice if there is a dislocation that cannot be reduced immediately, as long as you maintain pressure over it and it continues to protrude.
If a patient pricks at their base (the root of the hairs), if you want to hold their eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
And whether it is between your thumb and the finger that you suspect it is a thorn or needle, say so because this will allow you to remove it. If this occurs then please seek medical attention immediately.
In any case it is best to seek medical attention quickly anyway, but it can happen in a short time.
And the aid is provided if you have done this carefully according to the size of the fistula opening and as it has been described earlier. And continue holding on tightly until they reach its base Do this two or three times as long as you make sure the hairs to be pulled are firm and like a bird's feathers.
"And apply a poultice made of fresh bear's grease as long as it lasts and then apply an ointment containing honey.
If a patient is well-treated, it's good (meaning successful treatment).
Unless otherwise specified, the cure cannot be applied unless [the patient] is healthy.
And place the poultice between the two fingers, so that it presses on the boil, and put a thick layer of honey or bear grease over it. When the poultice is applied to start a boil, and before covering it with honey or bear grease, and after holding it in place for as long as possible. The poultice will be delivered when the instructions are followed closely.
And after application of the boil dressing, nothing remains but its marks on the skin.
And if he cannot remain still while holding his breath or when a fire cautery is applied to him or medical treatment causes such movement.
The fire cautery consists of two main parts "To understand this, you must first understand the cause of these wounds and the source of the moisture.
"And for the treatment of wet sores, or those that are inflamed and painful, apply as much butter as you can to them, keeping them moist until they become healed, and seal their base with butter.
"Then treat the deep wounds by applying hard charcoal, and seal the medicine in place to dry out.
When restored, he is sound and does not move again.
And if it occurs from the base of the fistula, or if it is located in the base of the urethra, then squeeze here.
"If you see the tent and between two things or stones or it is close to piercing through, if there are no other options but patience and hope, then by one of these three methods:
"or you perform the cautery as we have described, or burn it with a flame below, or if you cover it with something and treat it as mentioned above.
"And do not apply too much at once so that you do not damage the foundation holding it in place and prevent any movement. Then the treatment, as we have spoken
Then the treatment, as we have spoken through which means you cover it completely and leave nothing of the foundation, or by any instrument pointed at it then apply whatever cream is in your possession as much as necessary. and study to restore the wound, and to remove the fistula from its foundation
and study to restore the wound, and to remove the fistula from its foundation if there is only light damage to the wound.
There are no fistulas of this kind ever If you cut into the fistula and it is close to its root, if a piece of cloth is placed on top as this form: "And in case it happens on the second finger as well, and you prick all the way through to the fistula from its base.
If it lies near the edge of its root, remove a piece from that and place it over your wound.
And tie the joint together, let it move freely in either direction.
Do not restrict it at all unless its ends are between two surfaces and touching each other
And heal the wound as long as it is wet and clean.
"If the fistula doesn't pierce if you prick it in all the ways that you do, then... "In order to perform surgery safely, it is important not to prepare for too long a time beforehand, and then to proceed with the treatment as we have advised, so that he may stay well.
The form of a fistula is shaped like that of an abscess or one-piece type. And the other way around, because you cannot touch what you cannot reach without touching it.
Emotions can be shown in two ways. Either by the root of the matter, like the basis of justice, and in small or large amounts, with great pain or more than one, and it penetrates to the base and at the bottom of a foundation.
But those that are destroyed when there is little moisture, and cut to the bone or a little bit of blood, and have the color of the flesh.
"And in the treatment of those who have lost their base, if you instruct them to stretch gently with fingers on the affected areas as long as they are still moving. "If one feels tense and clenches their fists, or if you hold tightly onto your own hands, then gently apply pressure to the roots.
"And if they cannot hold themselves due to moisture, whether it's from touching something rough or a thorn, or any other cause. "And extract the eyes and put powder on to prevent further cauterization. "Or you may cauterize them if instructed by the chapter on cautery, and continue with other treatments as long as they are stable.
"And the limbs will not move if you cauterize them in a harsh way and press firmly on the affected area to prevent it from growing any further. "The patient must avoid pressing on them, as they will naturally straighten out with light use.
"The patient must avoid pressing on them, as they will naturally straighten out with light use. "And when you pull them to your ear or touch their earlobe and the base of the ear lobe gently, then treat them as advised, until they are healed, and ensure that no incision is made. "If you must sew in this manner:
"If you must sew in this manner: "Take the upper thread and tie it to a needle, then pull the lower thread through the eye of the needle in both directions until you are sure all is done. And if you miss twice:
"Then hold the thread tightly and pull it through, remove the needle, do this with all your strength to release these other things from the abscess, until you are free of all pain.
"Then place a small drop of oil on the thread or wool and place it over the base of the ear lobe, tell the patient to rest.
And let it rest as long as they grow, until they are healed if there is healing and other treatment, until he is healthy
"Soak the wounds gently with water or apply a moist dressing over the foundation. "Occasionally, pus in the intestines, and by natural constriction, as well as when there is a long illness that has no cure. If it's necessary to reset the dislocation at the tip of a small finger or on an edge that is exposed, do not allow moisture. And heal as long as he is sound and convenient.
If you cannot support it, if the dislocation occurs again forcefully than before, as long as he is sound and not in pain or burning. And heal until he is sound.
"Doux fremet" could be Formica is a little hard substance that can be seen on the skin and may itch when it rubs against something
And there is no respite from its touch, which feels like death itself and covers the whole body, and more than any other place.
And the treatment is that you take a needle of an onion or a very sharp one, and place it under the eye, so that it circles around the eye tightly. Then turn your hand over completely as you hold the eye and press it gently, to release the eye from its roots.
And if you see it through a thorn or iron, according to this shape, and keep the eyes steady and quiet. Do not worry, just hold tight and apply gentle pressure.
And if the fire application goes badly or by a skilled physician, as it is in front of him/her who performs the cautery.
There should be no mention of silver or gold, or arrow wounds that penetrate deeply into the flesh;
Nor any mention of these harmful and large substances mentioned above. These who are to be treated in the treatment of children and are weak and painful, have a tendency towards death.
These who are to be treated in the treatment of children and are weak and painful, have a tendency towards death. The shape of the cautery is small but strong if it enters through a hole or wound; its effects are tied in this manner.
Or if you see that the veins are tied up or blocked, so act accordingly as you see fit and tie them securely;
And say to one of his arms, "Let it down gently.
And if you want to make the stomach empty with a pessary or parchment, and pierce every small vein in turn, but at each point an artery must be chosen first. Then let into these veins flow as much as possible, flowing straight through this vein until it arrives, and assemble the belly as tightly as a drumstick; And when the medicines are dense, if they go to an instrument with a strong thread, then strangle.
This is how it's done in a circle:
And if the medicines are neither too hot nor too cold, and you apply a stranglehold of oil or any other substance, then let it go gently; Then the surgeon takes his two hands and assembles them tightly, as long as it is still alive. And if he can't remove the clothes any longer than that; And if he sleeps through the night, then great help is needed
If the abscess is in the belly, and the medicine has already been prescribed for him to drink, if his pain increases so much that he becomes sick
And if their roots are pulled out at all points, or from an abscess, whether it be done with subtlety as when the child
This is the form to apply in order for it to hold fast.
We have spoken of curing wounds in the previous passage.
Or we will discuss treatments for hands and feet depending on completion.
I'm saying that wounds are different depending on how they were made, and whether the wound was a cut or an arrow wound for example
The things done by wounds are done with a knife on the thigh and buttocks or the arm, leg, foot, or anything similar.
Or they are done according to the openings of the groin, if there is a wound on the neck or chest, abdomen, or liver, and similar members.
I will discuss curing of each type of wound, and how to treat simple wounds, for they remember it in their chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes or head, and it's not broken off, if you gently pull on the base of the hair, then your eye will remain steady until it grows. if a vein is close to the head and it has an abscess nearby, then apply pressure on that part of the face instead.
And make sure the wounds are soaked in wine or large pieces of meat.
If that is not enough pressure, if you use meat for the bandage and do not drink any wine or eat any bread.
Apply something to the wound that causes pain when it is pulled tight but can be eased by rubbing with oil or wine.
If the wound does not take pain when pressed against it, and is fresh all over its surface, and does not move with air or dust, I will say a little later.
"And he will have his arms restrained if any harm is caused to him.
"And if the wound is large like a spear or similar, and they cannot be stitched together by forceps because of their size, then stitches will need to be used instead.
If the wound is from the bone, and it hurts, but only for a short time if they pierce. Then treat the wound with medicine and restore the hardness of the flesh in place of the skin, and command the patient to eat large amounts of meat if they are and come out cleanly without further treatment, as we do.
And if you throw off the skin through corruption and it is not to the bone, then pierce it with a sword.
And if the artery is in the wound or vein without any doubt and cannot be treated with medicine alone, then you must remove it by piercing. If not for the fire cautery.
And if the wounds are small and simple, then a light treatment is given. And you apply this powder that will help heal them quickly.
The way to use the powder is as follows: Take a portion of incense. Two parts of dragon's blood. Blend three parts and apply it lightly to the wound, holding it in place until it heals properly and adheres securely to all its cuts.
Then smooth it out well, and leave it to dry naturally if it does not heal. Because you do not want to use the medicine until it is completely healed.
And once this occurs without incense or a healing balm, but the sores will not heal.
And if the wound has been closed properly and is already healing, then you do not apply this powder.
But if the digestive symptoms persist or if you use a mixture of equal parts egg and honey until it becomes better. After applying other treatments as well
And a fracture of the bone comes with small wounds and they are slight if the stitches are fine.
I will tell you after the fractures what to do next
of the sore
If the sore comes from a cut and is mild, but do not mix with the other sores unless they are treated separately.
If there is nothing else except leaving the treatment and not putting anything restraining on it because that causes harm to others. Do not put anything cold onto the wound, as the blood of patients is cold and continues with the brain which is the most important part of the body.
But if you have medicine that is warm and soft, or mixed with rose oil, or any other ointment in this way, and many more injuries will follow according to this method, and wet areas.
"And if the wound is large, as long as it remains clean.
And if the wounds are full of pus and there is a hole at its base as well, if you pierce or penetrate it further down low.
And the artery is opened up, and bleeding occurs, if there's a burst or hole in it, and cautery must be used to stop.
And the nose of the throat is cut open or pierced through, and held tightly while it heals to prevent movement when the meat comes out from under the chin, preventing one's finger from touching their throat but resetting them back into its natural position. And then the bandage is applied tightly, and left alone until healed;
If it happened on bone tissue. If it happened on bone tissue, if the veins are torn apart and you don't sew up any of them unless there is enough skin left to cover over the wound, then make sure to clean it thoroughly and dress it properly.
And if the wound is fresh, with powder as I've said. "And if there is bone in the wound and it has a fistula, as well as performing cauterization as I mentioned before with my previous text.
"The lancet is sharp or pointed; if you look at the wound closely, the pain will increase. "If the wound is mortal.
"If it is not mortal and fresh with its wound to the core if you do not apply powder immediately upon the wound then tie a bandage on top of it. "But if it's attractive, and you bind it twice tight.
"If there is no attractive appearance and you apply the wound with wet cotton to remove moisture. And if it does not go away after three or four times, put it under a bandage for five more times. "If there is no spasms and trembling of the body nothing to remove then the wound will go away on its own. And when you see the bones are injured but not too badly. Cure all injuries, no matter how severe they may be
And if it is not healed, and there's still pus, then open the abscess.
If the treatment should proceed as follows. And if the wound is one of a spear or a bullet, and it's not too deep, then it should be treated on the side where the treatment was first given. If it is large, cauterize.
If it's large, cauterize.  If it is small, powder, and if the wound penetrates bone and requires suturing, then treat with sutures. And if they are not healed, let them drain pus, or else risk infection from extractions.
And other injuries are similar to joints, just like what we have said before.
Abdomen rupture
The abdominal muscles are large and powerful.
From no wound does the intestine come out or the bowels burst through entrance of any such thing;
And the seams are harder to heal and no wound is as small as it should be compared to large wounds because when they do burst in, they will not stop tearing inside, unless they are stopped with great force.
Because the intestine swells so much that it feels like frostbite when they burst and because large wounds heal slower than small ones, which is why we must reset the intestines back into their original position after each exit.
And the way of making an incision in the abdomen is different from other incisions;
The common seams used for the abdomen are used on wounds elsewhere on the body and other private areas have their own stitches.
And every way they are cleaner with a double seam on the belly, and I will say one word
And that when a wound is small, and nothing of the intestines comes out, it's best to remove it by one of the following ways Or through a small incision, as we have said, or because the intestine is inflamed from frostbite.
And when it's cold, freeze in the following way: moisten a sponge or place it on ice for only a short time, or you can soak it in cold water and squeeze it gently to cool the intestine.
And once done, remember that any swelling will go down as long as it remains cooled.
And when you see the swelling leave, if moist or heat are applied and cooked properly as described in previous answers, because this method is reliable to prevent more coming out.
And if it cannot enter, then apply some oil to lubricate the place where you can ease the swelling.
The first remedy is to cut off part of it while leaving enough for need and not to have excess that will cause trouble.
And these are the instruments needed for cutting open:
If you prick at the base and do not remove it promptly, then And when a wound is healed and the intestines return to their normal form in their own way, if you allow it, for this matter
If the wound is large and in the lower abdomen, you should have the patient raise their legs higher than their head. If it is in the lower abdomen, put your head and buttocks higher than the other parts of the body, so that the opening towards which part you want to close should be on one of these two parts.
And if it's a great and many bleeding wound.
"Your wounds should be closed as quickly as possible with a strip of cloth placed on the wound and held firmly by your hands.
"This is the common way to dress a wound. You would either use one or more stitches based on the size of the wound and allow it to heal completely, leaving only the stitching in place. "Secure the two stitches on top of each other with four stitches.
"Secure the two stitches with one or more strips of thread and then close the wound completely. Then remove the two remaining stitches.
"Continue stitching until all of the stitches are in place and all of the wounds have been closed.
And have thin needles between gentle and large ones, as the small ones pierce right through to the bone, while larger ones may not be able to enter well. for that reason it is necessary they are fine
and you don't want to pierce the bones too hard or break through the skin so they cannot penetrate into the wound before closing it up.
And then remove the needles from the wound so it doesn't bleed while sleeping, and cover or bandage over them until the wound is healed.
And this method of stitching with needles is more convenient in small wounds because it only takes one needle or two.
The second stitching method is common and consists of sewing the two outside needles through to one inside needle or using thread that is very fine.
And when you have gathered these dislocations, if you put the needle on to where you had previously started, in this manner it will cut through the tendons.
and between every two ribs a shorter distance
This rib cage was a severe injury to the abdomen, which extended beyond one palm's width and involved two or more intestines of significant size, and it caused an abdominal cavity wound.
"I removed his intestine, then he lived for 40 more days, and the wound healed in 15 days, and it was cured.
They realized that he was going to die, and there was a miracle.
And they could not cure him by bleeding, as no medicine was available in that place. They treated the wound with honey three times per day until he recovered
"Here are two different ways to cure:
To remove the thorn from its upper part and near where it is dense
If the thorn has pierced through both sides of its place or if you have pulled it out from near where it is dense, then remove it completely from that part of the dense area.
And you should follow this method as closely as the barber follows his hair, leaving it once trimmed on one side and then retrimmed on another until the cure is complete.
The second method of cure is to clean and neatly arrange the two sides together naturally as if they are already connected, then shave one side of it off and leave it to grow.
Shave only the part that is in the way or pierce through just that alone, leaving the other two parts untouched. Then twist the arrowhead and pull it out from between the feathers of his wings, removing the arrow.
Then pull out both sides from between the feathers of his wings, in two separate shots.
And that is how it must be sewn and done properly.
If anyone doubts this statement, sew the belly with two arrows, or it may pierce through flesh.
And when you are sewing an arrow in one side, and the other side as well, in the manner that archers sew arrows.
And it is important to note that when removing an arrow from the belly, if there was stitching on other parts of the belly, then that stitching may be more pronounced in those areas as well.
The people with the wound are like the people with all the other wounds;
And if you cleanse all of its wounds when it is clean, so that the arteries are cleaned up, and the blood vessels.
Then apply powder in advance, so that when it is cleaned up, if a wound appears before this, as long as the wound is clean. And let it breathe, and keep its skin soft and supple. Then treat the wound as you would any other, so long as it is clean.
And if you have no medicine, as long as it begins to bleed, keep it covered and move it twice in the morning until it is clean.
But if you don't have any other medicines for these wounds,
and if you doubt that the wound is spreading to the main parts of the body, it is advisable to massage gently with warm oil or rosewater until the wounds are closed.
If there is pain or bleeding in the bowel, and it often happens if they make incisions with a blunt knife, then the pus comes out into the intestine.
The bigger the bowel, the more difficult it is to heal if there are incisions made.
The small intestine is called "young" and cannot heal as long as it is inflamed, due to the inflammation of its lining, through the subtlety of its course, and by approaching its nature.
If the abscess ruptures and it's treated by reinserting back into the intestine while it is fresh;
If they are thick and dark or blackish in color, it is recommended to tie off the artery which has not yet closed as it will cause bleeding.
After that, tie off the part of the wound between the two cuts to stop the bleeding and make the extraction easier when it bursts.
from the course of blood
When the bowel is small and the wound is small enough to be healed without stitches, for this reason that some men have died or suffered from a lance.
This is a stomach ulcer that became fistulae over time.
I used my best efforts to heal him until he was well enough to move around again
When I tried to make his hair better, I doubted that his belly would be okay. And he wasn't ill anymore but remained stronger and started eating and drinking again;
And no one could say that when there was just a small hole in the intestine, he should be sewn up in this manner After removing the top layers of the wound, the surgeon should close it with two stitches, if it's strange for her mouth to be above them, and sew her mouth below;
After closing the top of the wound, it should stay that way until all layers are stitched up, and then close another stitch after in the same manner as you did before, so long as there is no hole or opening in the wound. and cut the wound
If the injury occurs in the intestine, and no harm is done to the body as a whole, you can sew up the intestine with a thin thread that runs through the intestine of another person.
Take the thread from another person's intestine that has been sewn up, and then tie it to one end of your own thin thread, then sew this thread through an opening in the intestine and stitch up the wound.
This manner of stitching wounds is never used unless a more gentle and patient approach is taken instead.
And if the wound is great and wide, especially when it occurs in one of the larger intestine segments, even with patience and gentleness may not be enough to prevent infection or save the patient's life.
of fistula or when wounds that occur from fistulas, and especially when they are open or exposed to the air
And fistulas are characterized by painful and bleeding ulcers that do not heal well or at all, which cause the patient severe pain as if they were a thorn;
"And every time you have a clear view, but sometimes it is thick. "Every time or once in a while, depending on the situation.
"In the treatment of wounds, any wound that does not heal and has no cure is only curable by one of these seven methods: "It's to know how to cut or sew. "Or through the application of oil and vinegar. "Or by using heavy weights to compress them so that no longer compresses. "Or if there is too much swelling and weight. "Or the limb may be paralyzed and its matter of poor quality. "Or the medicine is not enough in curing it. "Or if there is a corrupt condition that leads to plague. "Due to an obstruction in this area, digestion is delayed, health deteriorates. "Or it may be due to internal issues such as
"I have already mentioned all these causes and symptoms in the previous paragraph.
I will tell you the treatment for fistulas which is performed by hand surgery.
"Skin abscesses occur in all parts of the body except the head. "Because it may be due to abscesses occurring in the large veins, arteries, nerves or organs such as the sinus, intestine, bladder, or any of the limbs. "And if it occurs due to an internal member, and there are lesions on this part.
"All the abscesses that occur in this way cause pain and suffering, and do not heal quickly or with proper care.
"And if there is no abscess mentioned that I have already spoken of, and you did not mention the treatment or know how to treat it, then please specify what kind of lesion it is.
"The fistula is closed when a search for a subtle touch succeeds, as the long process of closing it may cause pain.
"Do not try to open the fistula yourself if you cannot find a skilled professional. Moisture can harm other body parts.
"If you suspect it is touching your nerve or eye, hold the affected area firmly and ask if they are feeling any pain in that spot.
"If you are sure it is touching a joint or a nerve or an artery or a vein, then do not hesitate to seek medical attention and report any worsening conditions that may arise.
"As long as the fistula is closed and located in a suitable place, you can gently touch it. Make sure to wash your hands before touching any part of it, so that no germs get into the wound.
And then I will send you sentences one by one, as fresh as possible.
And if it is not safe through fire, if the cautery method as we have described does no good and if the abscess is corrupted by a fistula, then cut.
Arm or leg bones do not move, like we said;
And if the eyes are swollen and it has become corrupted from the abscess as much so that it is all black, then treat for eye things while being safe.
And if it's not safe and the abscess is severe enough so that you are making things worse, then do not attempt healing;
If the cure has been discovered and will be at its deepest extent, and all corruption is to have been removed, then restore the limb.
And if it's safe to do so, then you may proceed with treatment; "If not, then you must endure this corruption. "...or any other remedy besides letting nature take its course...
"...and if it is due to a small amount of corruption, then you must restrain them as tightly as possible until they die...
"...and if the moisture is against it and there's no fear or pain, then you must let them be free...
"...and if you do not cure the disease before the wound is opened and begins to rot until the bone or flesh has healed...
"...and if it is a large bone such as the leg or arm, only cure the corruption while allowing no movement until all the flesh has healed and you have restored the wound...
And if there is a large part of corruption to it comes out of bone. If the corruption is treated and healed completely, then he will be cured as soon as he arrives.
And if you have an example of one that happened in his leg, please provide it and assist him with your knowledge.
He was a young man of about 30 years old who had pain in his leg due to swelling of the veins, while he lay on it, and there was no apparent reason for opening up.
But they thought that opening up the veins would help, and so they ruptured many veins and became fistulae, which caused much pain due to swelling of the body.
And the more they tried to cure him for two years, there was no improvement in his condition, and he kept complaining of pain from swelling of the body. And became reddened were the cheeks of youth, and had a hue of yellow
I saw a tentacle of these worms, and then tried to pull them out with tweezers, but found that one worm would come out opposite the other at all points on his leg.
I immediately suspected, and in one of the cuts as much as I discovered a part of the bone, and found it corrupted and perforated, and came from corrupting the dense bone.
I saw that which could reveal the corrupted bone, and cared for it to ensure there was no other corruption, as such.
And coming to restore the wound with various ointments, without success;
And then I came back, and saw the bone as it was before, and found the corruption still in the bone, and she continued, and I took her out, but could not remove the pain. But I couldn't as much as I pressed on one side of the bone, and it was all over its surface, then I tried to remove with medicines; "And he was healthy and strong until the wound became infected, from which he could not recover, causing great fear of death for me. The extraction of blood was frequent, but it healed completely and left the leg uninjured, except for a sharp pain at one spot where there were no further injuries or consequences of any kind anywhere else in all that time.
And if you were to break it in any way as follows: If he is to strain the muscle at the end of the bone that you stretch upwards. If you were to use another joint that is larger than the first one at the end of the bone and tie it onto the tendon which runs along the bone, stretch them both upwards.
If you were to use a strip of cloth tied around the bone to cover the stretched tendon.
And it is good that one can see and feel the corruption, and again another time.
"The eye is inflamed, it cannot open fully, the cornea may be torn or partially torn. If you find a full tear:
"Then apply ice and gently compress the affected area to the other side, until the tear is healed or the eye is fully closed.
"The cornea may be torn in the joint of the eye if it moves out of place and causes tearing. Apply ice and gently compress the affected area.
"The cornea may be torn in both joints when there is no other cause for pain or redness than compression. Apply ice and gently compress the affected area.
"The cornea may be torn due to injury from the hand or arm. If it is very painful but you want to treat this tear, then gently compress the affected area so that it can open. "The eye may be torn in any way at all times, but not by nerves or muscles.
And if you cut through the bone and flesh to expose these bones, according to their size and shape, and their strength and subtlety, and their magnitude and smallness, and their hardness. In order for him to resemble the same limb as his instrument.
It will reveal the instrument you have mastered according to your knowledge of this art and testimony of its methods. If that is the instrument you master, then it serves well.
Dislocations can occur either due to swelling or freezing.
And when you have medicines that cure the corrosion by treating wounds, and it does not help if you cover only one limb until the corrosion is gone, whether from death or malice which is greater, of a member's defect.
And the limbs become black when they become burned, and after being burned appear to be in flames, as soon as you blow on them
If you apply heat compress and it is by the percussion of certain venom stings, like those of a scorpion and water and similar ones, the corrosion begins at the site where the sting was applied, unless you give them space to come back into contact with your hand
If it comes in contact with the hand or if there is an open wound near to where you applied the compress, then the corrosion will not stop.
And if it gets on the arm, at the site of the sting.
If it passes through the body, that is death and nothing can save them from their wounds.
Until you know where the corrosion has entered or exited. "The first joint has dislocated after another one.
"It has come out or to the side if it is complete and whole. "If the dislocation occurs in the arm that shares with another joint, then it moves into the leg at the base of the other joint.
"If there is no other cause for dislocation and only tearing occurs to tear off the arm, then it comes out of the socket.
"The manner to reset or straighten the member is by lying it down and fixing one end of it on each side. Then stretch out another member in front of it as far as possible.
"Then apply a compress to the other side and fix it with something solid if it should not touch the healthy limb, and prevent further damage and abscess formation.
"And when you burn it," if you apply fire to the wounded part, or you put on any unguents restraining them;
"After performing your treatment as much as it is done," then bind the limb with a suitable bandage and treat it while it is sound;
"And I will tell you what happened at home:
"He had a burn that seemed to be an injury from fire, and the damage was worst in his right hand;
"When he felt the burn, if you covered it, then it healed.
"After that he came to me and I put some poultice on it after the wounds were made, but they could not stop the burns.
"He said that you should cut off his hand and I did as he asked, thinking there was no hope to stop the burn. And doubt there is such a thing as the elbow moving, because its strength was weak.
It relaxed and returned to earth, and tried to cover its head with its hands, and became calm;
I do not know how one can treat this, if it is known to someone else.
No time comes to me empty-handed and stays longer than necessary for the gathering of many people; It runs and jumps, leaving behind its bow and moves on with its eyes open, just like a servant. Its skin is as subtle as the feathers of a falcon, and it does not hurt when touched, unless specifically mentioned as dangerous;
But if it is too short, it becomes dangerous to touch and is considered harmful.
"And if it's cooked thoroughly so to speak, then hold tight until everything stops, even the smallest movements. And do not let go because of its corruption
If the cautery's heat has caused corruption and no bleeding is observed despite applying pressure to stop it, then cut into it.
See that the hairs are large and do not move, until a cautery with Egyptian medicine is applied. Take it, oil and vinegar, gently, and apply the cautery with a heated iron until the medicine turns red, and becomes thick like honey.
And then take what you need according to your situation, and the make it hot and sweet, and cauterize his forehead, and hold steady its movement. After two hours of treatment, it will be removed by pulling.
Do this method repeatedly until the skin is completely healed and smooth.
Do not use this method if there is still burning sensation when the medicine is applied, and do not apply it to any other part of the body.
The patient should not experience pain or burning sensation from the medication, and if there is any itching, it may be due to a skin condition. Or you can apply honey and vinegar mixture, as the honey has properties to soothe and heal wounds, and the vinegar is antiseptic.
After you have done this and are sure the skin is fully healed, if there is still burning or stinging sensation from the mixture, it may be due to an allergic reaction. At that point, apply aloe vera gel mixed with olive oil and vinegar as a remedy.
"Instruct the patient to use all necessary ointments and dressings for wounds.
"Hold the patient still to prevent them from bleeding if a small wound is inflicted.
"If the wound is too large to be treated with a single dressing, hold pressure on the wound until further assistance arrives.
"Do not let them remove the bandage if it covers their chest or neck and they start bleeding; as any application in such a manner that the bandage covers the base of the wound. "The bow is straight but not loose.
"The bow is straight but not loose. Take conservative medications to strengthen the skin and ensure that all wounds heal. Follow the same force when removing the bandage from the second part of the wound to ensure that all wounds heal properly and do not leave any loose pieces that may cause infection or further damage.
And the one who is on the wound should gently remove it and check that nothing remains of the bandage. If there are any pieces remaining, they must be removed or digested as necessary.
And the patient should report any pain or discomfort they feel and whether there are any wounds present. If medication has been taken in such a way that its effects have diminished, observe how the skin appears around the affected wound if it is healing well and approach the healer for treatment.
"And then you wash it in the morning or at midday, when you apply the dressing if there is any other drip and re-open the wound.
"After long periods of being closed up tightly, the veins become subtle and if proper circulation is not maintained, they approach closer.
"And it has effects that are contrary to those who do otherwise in their wounds;
"and after every meal, its taste leaves his lips dry;
"and it makes his eyes dry and sore, as well as the ears, if there are medicines that soften in dryness and harden with virtue, until healing is complete, for it has great acidity, and this is detrimental to treatment.
"when the wound finishes, they treat with rose oil, and apply ointment rich in wine on top of it;
"then apply a poultice and wrap.
"and when the wound is finished and healed, you put honey on it if it's dry or moist, if there are no blisters, and you scrape off the scabs, powder it with flour while it is still hot from the fire.
"And then you put it under the arm and extend its shoulder, never let a doctor examine it for too long, and roots should not be pulled off or torn out, which are similar to pulling out one's hair. using simple or complex solutions. break them and make powder from it, put the ointment I have mentioned on it, and apply
the treatment is continuous until the impurities are removed completely, and it will press upon the bones or limbs, causing pain. if the cure for the fistula has already been mentioned earlier.
Panarice is a stone which lies in front of or behind the fist, and may be found elsewhere.
and when it is removed, if the stone comes out of the fist, it will roll away until its root is pulled out completely, or in any case.
"And come dislocations at the bone; when it comes to pain so great that it hurts both ends of a limb, and is the shoulder dislocated.
When treating it as we suggested in the previous section and the treatment doesn't go well, then you should proceed to cauterize the wound afterwards. The cauteries are most helpful if the body is in good health.
and it presses the eyelids, makes them open, and blots out what is below, if you remember to put on strong and corrosive medicines after all. And then the treatment of wounds while in good health.
And the cauteries at the bone if it is a fracture or a sprain, because as long as the bones are corrupted, they cannot be healed.
and if you see two corruptions when it is clear that one of them must have caused the other to be in this place before now, then treat until they are healthy.
"If it's dislocated, set it back into place, as you may experience great pain.
"After checking for any sharp objects in the area around where it was dislocated and making sure there is no damage to the joint itself because of too much pain.
"If this occurs, apply ice directly to the affected part.
"The second joint was dislocated in his hands; and often it is out of place, or the bone does not come back into alignment with its root.
"Neither should it be moved without consulting with someone who is knowledgeable about joints, nor should you move a dislocated joint.
"The size of the person being treated must be known so as to administer treatment appropriately: "Take it from its base in a long strip.
"If you reach the root of a joint, there is risk of injury: "Be careful when touching.
"For the one who has or must endure pain, it is advisable to apply gentle pressure at first and then gradually increase it until he feels relief.
"The others who come together are born that way or they unite in a fight, or through the use of fire, or through similar things.
"If you encounter this southern accent, then they must correct themselves as naturally as possible; "Hold tight with the ropes or rope ends to prevent them from slipping loose. "Or hold tightly between two thin pieces of wood as long as they remain steady, if necessary.
"If they come together at one end with the palm, then treat that sore spot if necessary.
"The veins filled with melancholy fluids come out more than twice in a short time from the members of the body;
"And often occur in the legs when they are walking and working hard or carrying burdens.
It is important that you do not administer any purgative without consulting a doctor first, and then cleanse the base of the skull.
"The treatment for this ailment is done in two ways: "One way is to burn the blackhead with a cautery, and another way is to drain the blackhead. "The other way is to tie off the vein, and remove it all at once.
That size must grow according to this manner: The first foot to become warm and large as it gets without being subtle is then restrained by the ankle against its base with a piece of iron on the heel of the same side.
And then apply the vein in the left hand, or the right, or the third as needed with a large size, and remove and tie off any black veins that are seen by holding them between your thumb and finger on one side of your mouth, from each to each, until you do not suffer any more than what is felt at the time.
Then continue with that and instruct him/her to pinch off all black veins as soon as they appear.
And start the evacuation again when the wounds are clean, and stop on the patient.
The arm is restrained according to this manner: "Take the leg of the patient to the fire, if they have short hair then apply oil on it and hold the leg steady as long as it remains red and the veins are inflamed.
"If not burned already, apply oil to the vein near the shoulder and hold it steady until the redness fades away.
"Then cover the wound with oil from close by, and clean around it as much as you can until it is healed.
"You will see it red and black like a fresh rope.
"Then bandage the wound with oil until it is covered by clothing and then bind tightly in another place above.
"Then clean the cloth around it until it is healed and then remove it to another place like you did before.
And after that, if it moves more or less, you should gently guide it towards the second position.
Repeat this process until all joints are aligned.
If there are any doubts or fears, and if an arrow pierces through the bone deeply twice, and the limb swells and hurts, and tears itself in two parts, then you should gently pull one hand towards the other as much as possible. Keep it still because if it moves, if it cannot be held in place or lifted up, and many die.
And when you have treated all wounds with rose water and oil applied, Treat it as long as he lives.
And if the veins are cramped and tight, and the limb is bent, and it is not straight as we have said, then you must gently bend it but do not stretch it excessively. And if they prick at their base
The fire cautery is to instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, and if they prick at their base, hold steady so that movement stops until the hair grows.
And there is a large fear if it were subtle because they could move the vein, but severe if we have described, and that's what happens.
The vein is inside the arm or leg, in hot places where there are no plants or trees, and on earth where there is no moisture;
And in another place is not inside the leg, and there is a fear that comes from the body itself, such as when it goes down the chest towards the heart, going between the skin and hair.
"The sign of the beginning of this vein is that it comes into a leg with a very large inflammation, then cuts through the flesh and begins to open as if it were the root of a plant.
When dislocations occur, it is advisable to roll the joint gently from two and a half times in one direction at 2.5 seconds, then back, leaving the ligament loose on the leg, and every time that it doesn't move away immediately after the roll, if you roll over the ligament and the new.
"If she is too long, if a part of her is cut off, and the rest swells up around it, do not touch anywhere near its root while it's in that state. "If you cut her off, if she enters into the wound, and causes injury to the flesh or limb, and causes great illness;
"To ensure that nothing remains of her after each treatment is done gradually from time to time.
"There are no occurrences of this vein when it has been treated with palm oil or X, and one time brought harm to me at which it was inflicted by X palm long, and if you cut her off, if you approach too near the bottom or top, she swells up as a result;
"And there is a substance that is dense and brings pain to the patient if taken in large amounts before any treatment can be carried out; then treat it as prescribed by the doctor.
And once this bone is injured, whether from striking it or not, and if it falls out, then it will be in vain.
In the treatment of these things as we have described before.
between skin and bone This disease is called 'bone fever', because it often occurs between the bones and flesh, and goes up and down through the body from head to foot, causing great pain in each joint as they become inflamed or irritated.
And it is preceded by the discharge of various humours if they come out and go through and liver, and gallstones or belly.
And it causes doubt about its nature, because as it goes through the body and rises to the head, and comes down to the oil, by chance returns, destroying the oil. And this occurs many times.
When curing or treating it, if they cannot be held in place as soon as they are
If you fix it firmly and tightly with a strong rope, then tie its end securely and make sure it is not moving before applying heat.
And the larger the wound, if it occurs through oil as we have said.
If you see that it is coming in close proximity to the oil, tie it tightly and then fix it, and apply heat.
It is to use remedies for the cold, wet diseases of the humours and wounds, and be careful with foods that can cause illness.
"The pain that comes from swelling This disease is known as "wakirir" in our land and it is a pain that spreads to all members of the body.
"And I know what you've done. I went to ask for help from an angry woman and she revealed her breasts, and saw a small bruise on her chest.
Then he noticed that it had grown to the size of an arrow, more than anything else, as if silver were being drawn out from its base.
The pain left his shoulder, and then spread to the chest, as it moved towards the other breast.
She told me that she was tearing at her chest as I saw.
I was amazed by how this disease spread from one part of the body to another as she kept moving around like a snake; because there's no way that this disease could be treated in such a manner. Everywhere, I wanted to make sure that everything was in good order and that the pain from there did not move elsewhere, but I didn't want it on her as I saw it with the woman.
And I thought that this was because of how strong her chest muscles were and the breasts revealed, as well as what seemed like restraint.
And they do not see as to this reason for those who are delicious, and have soft cheeks and rounded noses.
And when you have cured this disease and the patient's nose begins to hurt as we have said before if it opens and the doctor holds tightly so that breathing is not obstructed. Cauterize the eye
And if you do not see your eyelids as the treatment causes shortness of breath, as with bitter pills and pills of serpents, and similar things.
Arrows come in various forms based on their shape and location where they penetrate.
The dislocations occur when there are some joints that have large points, small ones, and crooked ones; And those that have two holes, and those that have long tongues, and those with pieces;
Those who move in any member by the same method. "The body's main joints include the spine, shoulders, elbows, wrists, knees, ankles, and many other parts. "If you see any of these joints in the state of death, I will tell you what to do after this. "It is advisable that you remove an arrowhead because it can lead to death more quickly. "If the sign does not move and is still in place but you think it's a splinter, try to remove it gently.
"The sign that means the splinter has pierced and entered the bone. If it is seen on the shoulder, hold the eye steady so it does not move until it grows. "And if you notice anything unusual in the nose or ears; And through this ordeal comes the loss of speech and voice It is accompanied by a white pus-like fluid discharge, and burns similar to those caused by fire.
The wound will be revealed if you apply the treatment without a bandage; however, do not leave it exposed for too long as it may become infected.
The sign of the sickness when it arrives or is caused by a blow to the head, are that it occurs near where the brain is located, and similarly as if it were inflicted in another part but still causes damage nonetheless. And with the sickness, the hair grows similarly as if it were from fire, and cuts off black blood vessels, causing coldness and sores. There is a sense of doubt that many will die.
The eighth sign indicates that the patient has a high fever and their face turns pale; their lips turn blue as they lose consciousness due to shock.
If the abscess bursts through the skin without a bandage in place, it may cause injury to smaller vessels. And he gets great pain and difficulty breathing They dislocate their limb from its place.
The tenth sign indicates that the patient's stomach is upset; due to shock from injury nothing can be eaten or digested properly.
The patient's stomach is upset and they cannot eat or digest anything properly; there is no hope in treatment, not even the extraction of an abscess (i.e., surgery to remove it).
And the patient vomits and urinates forcefully, and great pain comes to his limbs The wound is mortal
The other limb when it is cut and colled by the neck, and the throat, and the shoulder blade, and the elbow, and the wrist of both arms, and the ankle, and the calf, and the legs, and the limbs similar to these are affected in various ways. When the aneurysm is in the nerve or artery and it is not venomous, if you know what I am going to say next, because that's what you did instead.
He had a large abscess that hurt or burned his nose, causing him to I tried to drain the other parts of it with olive oil, but was unable to succeed in relieving the pain of my ear fat.
And to another abscess he applied olive oil that burned on the fat of his ear and paper, and it was healed, but no more pain could be found except at its tip towards the head, and it was large in circumference like an arrowhead, causing great injury to the ears.
The wound was healed, and there were no further accidents.
"And tying a knot around one's neck to a strangler," they say.
I tied the bristles, and gently as I could, I bound them tightly; and thusly my master was pleased.
And tying one around the neck at home, whether it is head or belly, I thought he was dying.
and then passed away with great difficulty, if his disposition could not be changed; I loosened the knot around it, and pulled hard, and tied again, but there was no mistake in it at all.
And if one around the neck is tight or from above, then it is a swelling caused by that;
and he loosened the knot tightly around its base, but could not change its natural disposition or find any flaw in its natural works.
And another man to whom one was tied around his face, and it swelled up the swelling occurred there; "and he will suffer great pain;
"but also others like it.
And he will have a disease that affects the eyes of the king who is blind in one eye and has a cataract in the other. It was a very severe disease.
I called upon the remedy after having tried it for three times. If you find a deep wound
I put it to her with great subtlety and she did not feel anything; And he felt no pain or discomfort on his right ear.
I thought it was from the disease itself so I put a strong medicinal and digestive substance on his left earlobe in order to prevent its swelling. And as soon as he applied it, it caused him no swelling of the ear.
And as soon as he applied it, it caused him no swelling of the ear. Then I put on a poultice and quickly healed the wound with its healing powers and made his ears long as he felt it.
"And he lets go. I applied the corrosive wound dressing with rough hands until it was done peeling off and feeling the pain from the swelling of the area.
After applying the corrosive dressing on the wound, I waited for it to reveal the abscess clearly.
And waited for three months and then pulled the bandage off, looking at it from all sides but couldn't see anything.
Until I used more and different methods of treatment until the wound was well healed, according to which it would be in shape at the end of this chapter; until then, I kept pulling at the bandage.
And his eyes were blinded due to cataracts. "I will heal it completely when I find it, because I have found a solution to the wound.
"I have described the quality of the extraction of any arrows when you put your treatment where I do not say anything, because these books cannot take care of it.
"The master craftsmen do best when they are in good health and fail otherwise.
"I say that the arrows only occur on members or where there is a different manner: "or by one way they enter into it, or by another.
"The arrow that enters through the way of itself becoming infected will be within the bones and not leave now.
"And if it does not enter now, as long as its course is smooth through the pores of the skin, or through the other ways.
And if it's fractured or broken inside a bone, it cannot be set back into place even with force.
And if she jumps around and cannot stay still, if you gently touch the bone with a very small force, then it should be stretched out again afterwards.
And if it cannot be seen when it is restored to its place, then try everything that you can do. If it does not respond even with the use of any available equipment.
And if it does not respond to the stretching of the wound and its firmness due to lack of nerves or veins even when the wound is large.
And stretch the wound if you can, and if it has ears that are not fixed to two parts as required by your method, and breaks or tears the ears of the abscess while stretching it, until you have stretched it enough.
And gently stretch it so that you do not break it, but stretch it harder and harder.
"And if it fails once due to tearing of the ligaments, then the treatment is immediate. If the remedies for the abscess contradict what we have said in this chapter of medical treatment.
And instruct the patient to make a cut on the nerve and vein, making sure they do not move while cutting, whether slowly or quickly, firmly or gently.
And make the incision in line with how it was when the arrow entered, for that is where the greatest help comes from, and be sure not to cut if what you see does not show you should move.
The arrow came from another direction or did not go through anything at all; in any case, if you see the arrow enter somewhere else.
until the tendons allow it to be released and then stretch. if that happens now
"If she is held firmly in the bone as your hand goes into it and stretches it out, then treat her.
If it does not loosen up, keep applying pressure and continue the extraction until it loosens up.
When the arrow has entered all of its shaft is treated
"And you will administer promptly if the instrument is present. If not, then prick at its base.
"Then apply the tool and pierce it in the direction of extraction to alleviate pain.
"If the patient's finger is bent or twisted, then you should apply pressure and correct it as much as possible.
"The abscess may be on any part of the body - head, shoulder, belly, arm pit, etc. And it's painful, and you should apply pressure to extract it.
"Do not press on veins or nerves, and then the wound will heal. "The treatment is complete.
"The shape of the bandage that is applied for wounds are similar in appearance to bird feathers,
There are many ways of treating it. "Big, small, and in between, according to the size of the abscess.
The shape is done similarly to when holding an object by its handle or tip, depending on the situation.
What does that mean? After removing them from ears, you remove the two external earwax plugs. and the second pair of arteries in the temporal region. and two veins in the eyebrows, which are called "eyelashes". and the vein that runs from the forehead. and the vein at the top of the head, which is also called the ophthalmic vein two gutters which are present in the ear canal. and the two veins above the mouth, which are called "jugular veins". and the two veins below the tongue.
The veins commonly known as the radial artery, which is in each arm
one is called the cerebral vein and runs from the forehead to both temples, it's commonly referred as the "foramen magnum "The joint becomes inflamed, it is composed of the skull bone and the base bone, and they call for assistance from those who know best. "The base bone is to the left or right, and they call for assistance from those who know best; it is located at the navel, and that one who sees clearly above the belly.
"The salvetella is between the auricle and the naricle, if it has two ears;
"In the leg and in the foot there are three veins: "One is at the shoulder point of the elbow on the right side, and the second vein is at the knee on the left side; "The vein that is called 'ness,' it is in the valley of the other side's elbow.
"In the other leg there are also three veins, as well as those.
The patient is instructed to clean their ears after using ear drops or ointment.
And gently wipe the eye with a soft cloth if you remove the eye drops. Then apply pressure to the eyelid towards the nose as far as possible, until both eyelids come together behind the ears. When you are done with one eye, if you feel that everything is clear in that eye, stop there.
Then take the lancet and apply it to the skin just below the eye, then gently press your hand down on the skin all the way back, making sure there is no pressure on the eyelid itself, until you are satisfied.
Then strain and hold it tightly, as long as possible.
And I have just said the incision and the cautery of the first book.
"The veins of both arms, when opened, will cause bleeding and the eyes to become inflamed.
"The quality of blood vessels is such that if you say... "...the hairs stand up when the veins are opened very quickly. "And the two hands lose their grip, and one falls forward.
"...then gently pull your hand up to the vein on top of it and prick it with a needle, then gently move your arm back, just like you would do if there were two veins.
"Then release the vein and place one hand on top of it for an hour, then put a bandage over that hand. "...then let the formation sit until it is healed.
"And we have heard and learned their method of treatment from them, as well as their incision or beginning of a book.
The vein on the forehead is equivalent to the facial veins that have become diseased and inflamed.
Its quality is such that it strains when pulled apart as long as a vein is exposed. the instrument referred to as "pumpkin," its shape being
and hold it steady against the vein while applying pressure with your fingers or whatever else, allowing some to come out according to how much you squeeze. Then apply the burn treatment by pulling it off while keeping the vein steady and smooth, never letting go until a wide flame is extinguished.
In all cases, only allow the flames to be too high; And also in a crosswind as it is close and breaks when it is subtle.
The veins of the two arms are to be inspected for any injuries such as cuts or bruises, and in checking them, one should pay attention to their appearance and condition.
The qualities of the veins that need examination are whether they show signs of injury such as tearing or any other damage when inspected.
Then check the veins closely for any tears that may indicate injury; also look carefully at their color to see if there are any signs of bruising or inflammation. And if the vein is very small and bursts easily.
Then apply pressure to stop it as much as you can, and then hold a bandage tightly over the area until further medical attention is provided.
The veins in the arm are to be inspected for any signs of injury such as swelling or other problems that might appear on them and cause discomfort.
And the quality of the blood vessels is that they sting when touched with the fingertips, and hold tightly to the hand immediately thereafter, and gently blow out the flame in between the two nostrils, as veins do not open right away, and begin to contract now.
And don't apply too much pressure, but correct it according to your need, and let it rest for a night, as it is most likely to be restored.
The blood vessels of the two fingers help in swelling and beginning of fever, and many diseases, and poisoning, and corrosion, and herpes sores, among others.
The quality of the blood vessels is that they pinch at both ends simultaneously as we have said;
"And the master's arm should be placed on top of the shoulder blade, and the shoulder blade should sit in front of the elbow joint. Then extend the arm fully and quickly as possible.
"Then repeat this with the other arm. Lift it up and down gently, so that the shoulder blade does not get in the way. "Let him rest throughout the day until the pain is relieved.
"the liver The liver helps digest food in the stomach, and causes indigestion, and sores of the liver, and is responsible for hiccups and restlessness.
"And qualify for healing by making sure the shoulder blade lies in front of you and holds its side as I have said. "Then raise and look at the two wounds. One will be to your left side, the other to your right side, you can identify them by their color, as well as by how short they are.
"If one and the other are not clear to you, then there is doubt; if one wound on your side seems bigger than the other, and so do both wounds that are next to each other, it's a common way.
The liver's qualities are to make you ill when it is in front of you and hold its The sick person's mouth is the first place to check after checking the nose, and it includes diseases of the ears, and ailments of the throat.
The physician should examine the patient's tongue between their fingers in front of a mirror with black cloth to observe any sores.
Check both ears and nose together, but do not force them too much because they are the arteries
The wounds that are commonly treated by two methods:
either you can burn with the entire flame in one go, or apply a fine powder as prescribed to treat it; And they are large and fine depending on the size and depth of the wounds. "The shape of the fur is important; either way it is named or not. It should be long if you see it that way.
The best method for treating those that have flat and deep open wounds containing large and severe wounds and problems; And this is how you perform a flame cure.
"And it is more subtle; to make them even and fine, or if there are subtle ones hidden within.
The gallbladder disease, which is one of these veins, if it helps diseases that are located in the throat, and the nose, and the stomach.
The physician should ensure the artery is clear, and the patient must stay away from it as well. And if he copes with the artery, and the wounds come down to that extent, as I have said. And it must not prick the fire so severely but mildly.
The gallbladder does not open completely if convenient that you extract and change another one. You can either remove it or sew in a vein near the arm instead. It opens completely. The fire cure is complete as we have said.
And if you feel pain when straightening your arm, as long as you can straighten it completely. Then release the joint and tie the arm down so that only the elbow moves freely. And be careful not to cause any harm when straightening your arm as you may cut into an artery. I'm done.
And if it swells up like a child's urine and is red and subtle, then you know it has cut into an artery. Do not do this again, lie down for a while longer, and put your arm up so it can stabilize without moving much. Lie down the arm, and leave it like that, don't move the limb.
And hold tightly but not so tight that you can no longer move it at all.
"And when there is no artery present, And the artery is absent
Take a fist-sized incision and make it deep enough that you have one sharp edge on each of the two sides.
And when there is no artery present, When the cure fails, as we have mentioned before, with powders that stop bleeding.
and there is no longer any desire for more treatments due to the small size of the wound and the strength of both arms.
The vein that helps in treatment of the abscess and both arteries are present but combined from the basilica and the cephalic veins as mentioned before.
And it is advised that the patient should rest after the nerve is treated and if not too much force was used, and hold the nerve tightly to prevent swelling and ensure healing, but in any case may not heal.
And if it does not open with any force at all due to its subtlety, then you should apply a healthy dose of the instrument around. and this will help him/her?
And if there is a vein between the two nerves, at that point they should perform the procedure
The healthy dose of the instrument around helps with headaches, which it treats in particular, and also helps the eyes.
And it is advisable to apply a healthy dose on the cheek or chin, as this is the most effective for all veins, because it does not cause any burns in those areas. Overall, you should try to use a lighter dose, and do nothing if it's the first time, and repeatedly. And in case swelling occurs with no harm done at all, there is no need to apply again from the start.
The quality of health is related to one's thought.
The first thing you should know about applying this treatment is that it must be done gently to maintain health and prevent future ailments.
"And [make] one of them cuts on one of the three veins, which are... carotid, brachial, and basilic. And they should hold the eye steady when bleeding begins and continues until the signs of exhaustion appear.
They should hold it for one hour or two hours after the third cut is made.
The medical treatment provided does not have a specific cure, but when bleeding occurs or injury is inflicted in any way, within hours and without delay.
And it does not matter whether children are between 12 and 14 years old or older than four months; what matters is that they receive treatment within seven days. They are no longer capable of caring for themselves having passed 60 years
And if any are treated for internal bleeding, in whatever manner that may be, whether by holding the veins of the neck closed or by applying pressure to them from without on all parts of the body.
"Do not apply heat to wounds unless instructed otherwise.
"After a colic attack and vomiting and stomach ache, and multiple times of passing urine, and lying down to sleep with the body bent forward or on its side is beneficial.
"Then gently regulate the humours by means of food and drink, and medications. If you do not, you will lose.
"Then between a hot bath and ice, do not let go of the pain or prevent it from spreading to other parts of the body as we have mentioned.
"And keep in mind that work and leisure are two different things.
"And lie down and rise as often as possible, so that the hair is longer than on average, and pull the arm up twice or three times every time you get out of bed, then stretch it gently without causing injury because if it is too rigid or stiff, it will not straighten itself.
And then he takes hold of the loose skin with both hands while the veins are inflamed and feels for them.
Then he applies a small amount of heated oil to the vein and places his finger on top of it while feeling for its location so that the vein does not move or tear when moved
Because it is like feeling for strings in a violinist's ear, and if the vein is too thin or easily torn when touched, then when one puts its finger over it, it will remove heat, and cannot open up veins, so this occurs. And if the vein is broken or very thin, then it is advisable to make sure that the veins are not easily torn in these things.
But when the vein first opens, this is good; If not, if there is a recurrence of that same thing or worse later on, the veins will become inflamed.
And his limbs are inflamed, they swell, he lies on one side or the other, and does not raise his arm because of this occurrence
do not enter or bathe him while continuing to treat the wound
and if his pulse is weak or he has no faint pulse at all, then you must gently massage him until the bleeding stops completely, as vigorously as possible in the area where it occurred.
and apply some heat to his limbs so that they are inflamed. because this occurs frequently when the wound is small.
If you see the limb is inflamed and cannot continue treating it without pain, apply some olive oil. Olive oil helps reduce swelling in this area of the wound and it soothes the skin.
"And instruct the patient to keep their veins open while performing the cautery, by holding down the artery.
"Then when they are placed into the liver and spleen, "This is why it's important to be very gentle with them, as any excessive force can cause injury.
"If the abscess is large, which can often occur when performing the cautery, but only if you are extremely gentle and it takes place at this time of opening the vein, so that your haste in placing them into the liver causes a small amount of blood to come out quickly. And they will be held steady for one hour.
"After evacuating the vein and if there is no bleeding or discoloration after a short time, then they are not needed. "And you see them removed gently without any fuss; if there is nothing to be held back calmly and easily, then they are finished.
And many times there is swelling and appearance at the base of the hairline.
when your hand is loose or if you use too much force in applying pressure to the palm, it will cause swelling and appearance of redness on the hand except if you do not follow everything we have said, due to an accident without a vein.
but the patient must endure for a long time until it is healed.
"And if there is any doubt about its strength or color of the wound.
But if he does not bleed excessively when letting off blood as much as they are red; and if you see a large amount, if you let off enough so that it is subtle. And if he has too much pain, if he lets it cool down.
and for those who are plain and skilled at the extraction of wounds, they will make larger ones too, and also have wider flames.
"For the weak one do it contrary, but let him stay quiet and still, so that he does not move in pain.
"This manner of healing is saved from injury and excessive nerve damage, and it ensures that the healing takes place smoothly.
"And for one whose veins require healing, let them be given gentle pressure in the groin area; "If he is exhausted from three or more times of bleeding and cold complexion, let him be given gentle pressure in the groin area with honey syrup, or aromatic honey syrup mixed with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chicory, if necessary.
If you touch the sore after it has healed from a blister, then it is advisable to apply a warm brown syrup and also an aromatic honey as mentioned in the previous paragraph for the extraction of blood.
If the sore reappears and gets worse, then it is advisable to apply a warm brown syrup gently and frequently as mentioned in the previous paragraph for treating sores by its virtue continuously.
If the sore reappears after the first one and is severe, then it is advisable to apply warm brown syrup gently and frequently as mentioned in the previous paragraph for treating sores by its virtue continuously.
"And who shall heal him from another place if he is to heal his second wound.
"Because he has dense pain in the chest which is exhausting him, it causes fever; "If it is desired to draw out a large quantity and expand the opening as much as possible. "And ensure all the body's conditions are maintained as well. Keep your hand steady when the healing process begins, so that death does not come in place of healing and this happens often times.
"And do not worry about seeing the second wound and making another incision. Once closed, press firmly into it. "If he is very sick, let him extend his arms, as this would be bad for him;
"And leave it at that second time. "Or if you prick at the tip of the flame until it burns out and closes its vein opening, place your finger on it gently and press firmly.
"And if his vein is open, do not close it yourself; rather let it be closed by someone else as soon as possible.
And if you need to drain a second abscess or vein, whether it's in the arm that was operated on or another limb.
The arm is healthy and whole because of what it contains.
"The healing method is to hold his hand in hot water until the boil stops being red;
"If one wishes to do this, first ensure that the vein is held firmly in place. Then gently move it slowly back and forth, avoiding both ends and the middle.
"Or if the vein is large and close to your hand's joint, hold it firmly with your other hand but cannot remove it otherwise. If you bring it back gently hot and leave it in its own heat as long as you can.
"And if holding onto the vein with hot hands is not possible because it would make your hand too numb.
"The vein of this kind is more effective than any other veins and does not cause pain or numbness.
"This remedy for the hand affliction can be applied to all ailments of the liver. It is this way:
"Hold your hand and bring it into hot water until the vein is free from obstruction if you can. and then, it will heal itself
Do not apply excessive pressure as the nerves may become damaged; instead, gently warm up the affected area and hold it steady to prevent movement of any pain.
"Once you have treated the sore as much as possible, if you hold down the limb tightly and let it rest constantly, then make a fist.
The disease of the hand is better when it attacks the hand itself; and do everything as I have previously advised on the other side.
The disease of the finger is better when it attacks all other diseases that are on the body; such as joint pain and swelling, and leg cramps, and old age ailments.
And the quality of his healing will increase if you gently warm and massage the affected area while holding it steady to prevent movement until it heals. The vein must be held still when massaging at the shoulder region as otherwise blood may drain out of the wounds.
If there is an injury on any part of his body, including the shoulder or elsewhere, this must be attended to.
And if you apply heat to any wounds that are open and exposed, it will help the healing process along with rubbing.
And he must hold his breath until there is no more pain.
If it cannot be done, if you apply healthy oil and leave the vein well moistened.
"And if he sneezes for the first time, after sneezing again a little while later, as his nose is sore.
"Do not doubt what has been said and proceed with the healing of the other wound immediately.
The dislocation of the shoulder joint is at its base and causes great pain when it occurs.
"The quality of his nose is that the hairs between or on the chin must be trimmed, and if he sneezes with a sore throat, it will open.
"And when it opens in all the ways you mention, or through its passage. "You must heal this wound with great care because it is severe and comes from the nose itself which can be easily closed by hand.
"You must heal this wound with great care because it is severe and comes from the nose itself which can be easily closed by hand. "And if you do not heal it quickly and the nose does not open or close correctly when opening any of the two wounds in quick succession, beware of the consequences.
"And do as much care to these wounds that you see and then take away their link, and tie them off with bandages tightly. It has now become clear
The veins are made of sinew, or iron, or leather
and the extraction can be done in two ways Either by cutting through veins and arteries, or through opening sores
And the extraction that is through opening wounds can be done in two ways: or she is through fire, or by means of heat.
and the extraction that occurs when cutting and through drawing blood can be done in twelve ways, depending on whether it is drawn completely or just partially out of one vein. And other things are made from collagen; and the second thing, which has two costs from collagen. and veins of these men. And the veins of the two spaces; And the veins under the eyes. "And they (the dislocated joint) make both arms tremble. "And they make both legs tremble. "And the buttocks make both cheeks tremble.
"The dislocation does not cause injury to the tendons that are sparse in the thigh, and because of this reason it is feared that if one makes an incision into a vein. "And this must be done slowly and carefully without any sudden movement in order to prevent the fire from spreading anywhere, as long as you are visible.
"It is necessary to treat the wounds as soon as possible, or when you see that they are already there, and may apply it at any time.
"Because it has such an effect on the wound if you delay treatment for too long.
"And if they prick at their root (base) or tip, and on their face, and in the corner of their eye, and under the brow.
"And if they prick a vein in their mouth, causing them to lose consciousness. "And if the patient faints, sees nothing but darkness and dies, similar things happen.
And when we see these signs, and especially within the first month, our commands to attend them after three hours from now
"The healing of the wound depends on how long and thick they are. Once removed from all flesh, it is best to wait for their removal after evacuation.
"The operation to remove the cephalic abscess is different. Only those with a cold complexion or who have already had scars should avoid this as it would result in great discomfort.
"For these reasons, it is best to wait until they recover and those with cold diseases are healed.
"And those who are about to undergo this treatment should first place a bandage slightly lower down towards the armpit in case of dislocation.
The dislocation occurred in the shoulder joint due to damage from above and below, which caused it to swell up at its base.
It is important to gently push down on the arm, so that if there is stiffness or swelling in the elbow or stomach area as well.
The dislocation occurred in the collarbone so that it caused pain at its base and numbness and paralysis of the arm.
It is important that you instruct the patient to raise their hand so they can put it down without causing an artery to rupture and bleeding.
The dislocation occurred in the jaw, which caused mouth diseases such as tooth decay and other mouth ailments. It is also causing damage to other vital organs.
The dislocation of joints is an illness that comes from heat and filling
Dislocations of the thighs are similar to those of the arms because they cause large bruises.
Instruct the patient not to strain too much when coughing, as it may tear the lungs and vessels (arteries).
The dislocation of the shoulder is particularly severe at its base and causes damage to organs or vessels (arteries). And if it were subtle enough, it could cause tearing. It can lead to severe bruises.
Dislocations of the legs if severe can cause damage to all parts of the body and lead to ancient burns or wounds from fire.
They are in lieu of the second phalanges and second toes, and they tend to weaken the body after a long time use, causing numbness more pronounced.
This passage describes the method to apply a tourniquet. The first step is to tie it tightly around the wound and secure it firmly in place until bleeding stops or there's no longer any need for it as soon as the bleeding has stopped.
Then remove the tourniquet and place the patient in a recovery position to ensure they are comfortable. If only one artery is severed, it is advisable to attempt surgery immediately, but make sure there are large wounds and some perforations in the way as well. Gently.
If not all arteries have been severed, it is advisable to perform surgery a second time. The first time by making the cut smaller and more precise.
If it is too thick for a third attempt, surgery should be performed immediately.
And when we only want to cut small and small, if we perform the operation just once. And if we wish to heal a wound, when they become inflamed
And if it is swollen and painful, let it be wrapped in a poultice made of oil to soften and dissolve. It can be with olive oil or with almond oil, or with the juice of mild cucumbers, or with sesame seed oil.
And it can be made from the juice of onions, leeks, or chamomile, among other things.
And if it has excessive swelling, cold, or if it is filled with marigold oil, balm oil, or any other oily substance, and the rest.
And if it has tender and large pores that need to be washed after using a warm washcloth or a cold washcloth, or after applying rose water, or cold water, or watermelon juice, or porcelain-root water, or any other similar substance.
And those with dampness who remove it gently, or of mint, and sumac, and other similar things.
And those who have too much swelling should be bathed with a strong wine infusion or from strong vinegar infusion, chamomile tea or other similar things.
And it is not advisable to bathe the wound in hot water immediately after washing but wait for about an hour or two after washing.
After a dislocation occurs, it is important to remain still until further notice, so as not to worsen the condition.
And remember those who have colic pain, and stay away from foods that are too spicy or inflamed if you want to drink cold things like green beans, lentils and lettuce, similar things; And include meats such as chicken and moist vegetables.
And include meats such as chicken and moist vegetables. And those with a cold complexion should drink honey syrup and scented wine that is between sweet and sour, including water, pork, chicken, fish, and vegetables.
and for those who will become thirsty if they drink more than necessary;
And it is important not to scratch the area or massage it after a dislocation, in order to maintain alignment of the joint. And let them rest quietly, but it must always drink something.
The veins that are to be cut are those placed in the liver, and under the tongue, and behind, and beneath the belly button, and between the thighs and buttocks, as well as below the ribs on either side. As for this member it cannot harm itself by piercing another part of its own body;
in order to increase the blood flow into the member when we place veins beneath the belly and buttocks in order to strengthen the member;
And hold pain when you prick or pierce it through its own virtue by attraction with the needle on the extraction of hair, or to cut off part of itself.
And it stays still when placed beneath the liver and tongue as they retain freshness for so long. "The patient must have their own fire cautery to ensure the hair grows long and even, as well as any other remedies they may require.
The form of the venipuncture is as follows:
"And in opening a vein or extracting arrows, the patient must hold their breath for as long as they can.
"And in passing through veins or with a needle, the patient must hold tight and steady.
"The veins of children are different from adults, and small ones from large ones.
"And when to apply this cautery to a limb:
"Take a piece of fat or twine and wrap it around the vein, making sure not to burn the hair. If you see that it is burning the vein, do not remove it immediately.
After placing it on that member, if you look at its top part which we have mentioned, if there is any crack or opening between them
And if the separation is visible and the edges are smooth, it should be fine.
In the case where it is caused by a disease of many types, and there are no cracks or openings, and no edges to be removed.
It means
It does not matter if the joints are still intact or not. And in the eyes of those who have been blinded due to illness and injuries.
It means that if you remove the sutures gently and carefully so they are soft and neat when removed, but it is not advisable to remove them prematurely.
"And hold them steady with gentle touch, as long as they are growing, and do not have any roots. Then you should apply a poultice to the limb when it is red, and hold them steady.
When they are flat, meaning no longer growing, then you should apply a poultice and hold them steady; because it is then too late to apply anything else, as this may cause further harm.
If you loosen the bond between them and gently separate them, properly, then bind them again securely.
Then you should hold them steady when they are too cold to touch directly with ice, and apply something hot to bind them again securely.
Then you should hold them steady when there are blisters or sores, and until the wounds heal completely.
"Or as you lie on your side with a pillow between your knees, leave them there until they stop hurting.
"And if it continues to hurt more, please take other measures.
"If the pain doesn't stop when you prick your finger or hold it steady as long as you can, then put them down and let the pain subside.
"Once they are cut off or fall out on their own, if you pinch a little and hold it steady for a moment, or burn them with fire.
The book begins with the explanation These chapters are essential to the art of medicine and explain how to treat fractures and heal wounds.
"Take care when following this chapter that you do not follow any previous books or letters.
"For this reason, the art of medicine is now extinct in our land because I could find no book about it.
"And knowing no better, having studied the ancient books and practicing for so long that I have mastered this art, through experimentation and experience.
"In this chapter I have described what is contained within it and explained it at the end, so that you understand completely the forms of the remedies to be used in these chapters.
It is convenient that we begin with the prologue of this book and discuss the authors or those who have mastered it, so as to deepen our understanding and learn more about what follows.
"I say that if a fracture or dislocation or sprain occurs in any limb, and you want to heal it from both sides without causing harm, then be gentle with the part on one side and hard with the other. "Or if too tight or too loose.
"And if the fire is too hot or cold, that you must find the right heat and adjust it to prevent harm from occurring in any part of your body.
"The patient must lie still while the procedure is performed.
Once the dislocations start to improve, it is advised to gently stretch the affected muscles as needed, and do so gradually; avoid sudden movements or forceful stretching that could cause further injury. "The head must be held steady.
"And it should be made clear that any wounds or injuries will not easily heal because of the nature of the limbs, and those which are too tender, like infants' flesh.
"But there is no cure for dislocations, and must immobilize the dislocated limb so it can be held together as before. "And nothing more of its own flesh, because that is what we have said.
"Dislocations come in many ways.
"The dislocation of one arm is different from the dislocation of a leg or any other limb; I will discuss all types of dislocations in this chapter. "There is one type that occurs suddenly and violently like writing with a quill.
"There is one type that occurs suddenly and violently like writing with a quill. "If there is an associated dislocation with injury,
"And there are different ways to restore the engine and equipment in repair depending on how much memory it has.
"And if a dislocation occurs through this, the patient must lie still and hold tightly with their hands.
"And when dislocations do not occur at the joints or near the tendons, they cause great pain for the patient and there is no relief.
But it can also be caused by twisting movements, tearing or small fractures. If it is not convenient for you to move your arm now but rather apply your medicine right away, and then gently restrain it afterwards
And for the breaks that happen at the joints themselves, they should be immobilized immediately as possible to prevent further injury.
If the arm is held in place with a splint or brace, and if there was no significant joint dislocation, it should be immobilized until advised otherwise.
Afterwards, they apply a splint or brace and encourage light movement gently and gradually as the healing process is easier than fixing broken bones.
After that, if advised to do so, it should be immobilized for further recovery.
If there are fractures in the bones themselves, if they try to move their hands or feet, or even both at once, use one hand or two hands and legs, or an arm with one hand.
"Ensure that when the parts of the member are severed and reconnected with appropriate tools, do not remove any part of the limb during reconnection to avoid injury.
Ensure that all joints of bones align properly after reconnecting them.
And make sure both hands are in the correct position if you suspect there is no mistake made.
If the swelling is significant and not too much restraint should be applied, do not push as hard as those who come by their own effort to tighten and pull on the limb if you want many times experienced.
And when limbs are in place and the wound is well closed, do not hold tightly or relax, do not twist, nor anything else. Ensure that the limb feels no pain. When there is no pain, it's best to put him into a comfortable position so that he doesn't feel any pain.
Ensure that the limb feels no pain. When there is no pain, it's best to put him into a comfortable position so that he doesn't feel any pain. And keep them in place while you straighten them as much as possible without causing further harm.
And make sure both broken limbs are aligned according to what I just told you.
The limbs are different in size, shape, and extent.
Because he has two broken arms, one on each side and so forth. It's best to gently wrap the limb with soft and gentle cloths. And those that are large, like an arm or a leg
If you need to wrap around something big and hard because the bigger limbs will grip all of it tightly, and prevent any movement at all unless there is no pain.
Then wrap around the smaller limbs in three or four turns according to the size of the limb, and hold the hand close by it all, then go over the break and hold less as you move away from the break;
"And moisturize it gently and gradually, as long as you apply a significant part of the skin, then reapply every hour, and turn off the heat when removing the bandage.
"Then reapply to the bruised area and gently hold it, not too tight nor loose. As we have mentioned in the previous paragraph.
"Then put between the layers of gauze or cloth as tight as possible and hold it in place until there is no longer any bleeding.
"And if there is still bleeding or an abscess, apply gentle pressure until the bleeding stops and let it rest without any further action.
"Then hold your gauze tightly with a wide strip so that it seals the wound well, or you can fold it into a cloth to stop the bleeding. And apply this shape:
"The bone must be slightly larger and wider than others.
"Or as long as it is convenient for the affected member to be small or large. "Then hold it steady with the same method you used for the first incision. Then tie it tightly when making an additional cut. "Make sure to tighten it up as much and as little as necessary.
"It should be just right in size, not too thin, not too thick, and be long enough.
"If the thread is too thick and causes threads to tear through or if it is not tight enough, then that particular cut will not be steady.
And the veins are closed after removing them from their wounds if they prick or pierce through the flesh, unless it is bleeding heavily and cannot be stopped.
When a wound has occurred with an abscess, I will provide instructions on how to treat it later.
And it is advisable to break them at their first joint. "For when the members are large, it is not advisable to use sutures or stitches after 3 days, or 7 days depending on your personal preference.
"And regarding dislocations, sprains, and twists:
"And regarding sprains and twists, it's important to use flour paste applied evenly around the stitches, not too thin or too thick, and apply this mixture; this is how the plasterer repairs a broken bone in more cases, especially with women and children, as there is no pain nor discomfort.
"Another way to fix dislocations, sprains, and twists: "Take barley meal, dates, honey, aloe vera gel, and gum arabic, then mix it with water; "Mix in the aloe vera; "After that, you have a paste to apply evenly around the joints, not too thin or too thick, and then apply it; this is how the plasterer fixes dislocations, sprains, and twists. "And when you have powder, mix with some flour; The skin on that arm is hot if you apply this plaster because it has good composition and can heal broken bones quickly but may cause burns
Another way to castrate (castrate meaning 'to neuter or geld') would be through twisting. Pour one ounce of sugar and three ounces of vinegar Mirrors and aloe gel This is six ice cubes. Boil the aromatic X ingredient until it's well cooked and mix with oil or fat to taste, then serve.
Another way to castrate is to tie and stretch the skin tautly so it feels tight; then apply a pain reliever, stop any swelling of the joint, straighten out the bones, relax. Take new linen and boil in oil until it is cooked through, then lay it on the shoulder.
Straightening devices do not cure dislocations themselves, but they can help alleviate pain by gently pressing on them to release the dislocation.
"Another way to straighten broken bones Soak dry leaves of fig tree bark and the ground, grind all together, then plaster.
Another way to repair or fix a broken bone is by removing the remaining part of the arm Take root of thyme, chamomile flowers, violet petals, wheat flour, some cheese, and mix them altogether
Then grind it with wine, and apply to the limbs, or mix it with fresh ginger juice, or any other kind of moistened vinegar, and you are good to go
Another way to fix a broken bone that is more severe than the first one when an arm comes off restoration of the member. Take root of thyme, and flax seeds, barley straw, mallow leaf, and chamomile flowers, from all or a part thereof; Then grind it with salt water, or sweet vinegar, or wine depending on the limb's need and rest period.
When you have finished your book on how to fix a broken arm by using wax and oil, then put it between two pieces of soft cloth or hard ones, according to which one is warmer than the other.
"And it seems strange that you should put them back together again, for a quick restoration, if they are injured and inflamed and similar things, as we have mentioned.
Another way to straighten broken bones when in pain and suffering "Heeding his physician's advice and following the prescribed treatment plan, he will improve rapidly.
After a short time has passed, his limbs should feel no pain and the eyes of their sockets. If he does not follow through with hands as directed. His pain comes back in the form of numbness or weakness if he does not follow through on this treatment.
and gently wipe the sore, soak it with clean water, rinse off the dirt, and lift the leg as long as the pain continues to subside, until the soreness goes away. Then let the member rest for one hour, then apply dry cloth soaked in clean water or oil, and tie it with a bandage while waiting to see improvement.
"The inflammation of one member causes pain in the other. Gradually increase the heat and intensity until they are both inflamed, at which point you should not apply so much pressure. "Gradually, as it becomes painful.
"And you see that the eye and brow and face are swollen with pain and distress, I have healed all of it, and you should also cleanse your hands and nails if there is any injury, as in the first time.
"If the member does not react to what we have suggested at all after three days or two days or five days or seven days. "Do not let it go for twenty consecutive days. Leave a break every so often to check on how close it is getting.
"If the restraint exceeds what I mentioned before and the member grows in size as I have suggested, then...
"...you know that it is not going to come out. "You always use the same level of heat regardless how long you have been doing it. Gradually increase the intensity until every day.
For this injury to heal properly, it is important that they stop doing whatever is causing the pain and rest their limb gently.
It's bad news; if there are doubts or fear arises, I will do nothing but wait and care for the wound properly
The main methods of injuries include various factors that contribute to it.
if the injury was caused by hitting or stabbing that part of the bone where it is now causing pain and discomfort. To heal this type of injury, we must follow a specific method of treatment "heaping.
Or if the bone is being pierced with such force as to cause death, we call this absolute dislocation.
And there are both large and small wounds from these injuries.
If the impact is from above, below, front or back, or other sources of stress on specific areas; these are also considered fractures.
And if the break occurs where it touches the bone or is close to it, and this injury may be large or small.
And if there is a wound that has been healed in this small bone, and it bleeds slightly, then it is called a "hairline" fracture.
And if the wound is made by a piercing of bone or from a sharp object, and it enters through the bone, then you hold tight as when you are holding fire. If between bones
And if this occurs in bones or those with more moistened bones as children;
and there are all these ways of fractures that small pieces become separated when they occur; I will talk more about it in another passage.
"We know all the ways of fractures through examination and questioning; and through investigation into it.
"Hairline fractures are caused by the fact that when you discover an injury to the bone and look inside of it, if you see black cracks.
In the treatment of a fracture, be careful about the swelling and pain that may occur after injury; if you see any bad accident like vomiting or loss of consciousness, then apply cold compresses, regain control over your thoughts, extend it gently, prevent bleeding, and let the eye remain still to avoid further harm.
If you do not see any bad accidents immediately after treatment, then continue with the treatment.
When you've held it in place for as long as is comfortable without causing discomfort or pain to the patient, then proceed to apply a plaster bandage around the joint at its fourth quarter, making sure not to cover any of the previously mentioned injuries.
And if you've held it in place as long as is comfortable without causing discomfort or pain to the patient, then proceed to apply a bandage around the joint at its seventh quarter, making sure not to cover any of the previously mentioned injuries.
And if the bone fractures come to a place where you can grasp the brain stem, then you must hold onto the separated part tightly;
And you shall first straighten the arm in all directions that it is able to do so, and search for the bone beneath the wound in every way possible, and apply pressure over the abscess as well, until blood stops flowing. And keep applying pressure to the wound until the bone is straightened out completely and stabilized. Then, after you have applied the necessary pressure on the arm, start working towards straightening the bone in every possible way.
One method is to gently squeeze it tightly at its narrow part first, and then continue on with other methods.
"And then you apply another dressing that is larger than the first one.
The second method is to have multiple different sizes of tweezers or needles at your fingertips, some narrow and others wide, sharp and blunt.
Gently handle the joint without hurting it.
"And if you wish to straighten the limb as well, also stretch the tendons with rollers and do not let it pass over the bone point, so that...
"...if you wish to have more, if someone old in its bone of the arm, so that you apply pressure from both sides of the joint...
"This is one of three methods for treating:
"...the quality to straighten the bone is that you apply pressure directly on the joint, and hold it for as long as you slowly release your tension from both sides of the joint...
"...then remove the pressure to another part for a short time afterwards, and keep doing this all over again, then gently stretch out the space between your knuckles, and do it more subtly than you did before, and lightly if at all, while keeping hold of the bone in one hand or none of the other things you have as tensions...
"And remember to avoid touching the forehead or scalp.
"And when you have broken the bone and stitched it up, if necessary, make sure to use stitches that are more delicate and subtle than others used for cutting.
"If there is nothing wrong with the other bones, it's okay to gently handle those as well; "Then treat the wound with whatever remedies we have suggested.
"And another way to heal if that is how Gauls do it, which is more straightforward; "But be cautious and let the healer's word guide you. "First it is important to cut away a part of the bone where there was a break and if once you have cut through that part then apply the thread which cuts deep like this.
"And do not cut on one side only if there is another area that needs attention as well;
"Then, with a small hammer, if you gently strike the entire bone without missing any part and take care of the stitches as well;
She is at rest with her arm, if it moves gently because she feels no pain, or fear.
"The bones of the arm should not be stretched out in front; instead they are supported only by the muscles, and it is necessary to have a small opening through which you must pass various instruments for making any incision conveniently along with the most suitable angle according to the shape and size of the fracture.
"If you are dealing with larger or more delicate instruments, after which there is a need for even smaller ones; do not stop doing this until everything is done properly.
For other hairstyles and subtle splits, make sure to adjust the position according to its direction
This is what makes those who practice this art stand out from others.
And if it is swollen, you must apply a compress of damp linen according to the size and severity of the wound, and move it towards the injury. Then apply another bandage of a double or triple fold, moistened in vinegar and oil, and place it over the first one. Then proceed more gently than before, so as not to disturb the bandage, then apply another one and do not restrain it from moving only as long as the wound is healed.
And let the fire cure continue as long as the patient's eyes are closed and then remove it, and apply medicines such as root extracts, flour of saffron, incense powder, aromatics, and similar things.
And with these powders applied to the wound and administer other medical remedies for pain relief.
And remember that the wound should be cleaned well and not left open, nor should it be bandaged up tightly, as when the bandage is tied too tight on a burn, which can cause additional pain.
As for when an acid is applied, then it must be neutralized by another substance. "When one of the joints dislocates due to an injury, if what we have described is true, then it is doubtful and full of doubt.
And if you want to avoid blisters from the acid, then apply a medicine that has been prepared with honey and three parts of rose oil mixed together. In order to perform this treatment method, ensure that everything is in place as much as possible.
The two bones are broken and cannot be put back together again, only one may remain unbroken because it is a bone.
And their cartilage is flexible, and does not break if they are bent or twisted properly.
And if one of the two bones is broken, you should straighten your other arm to support it and keep its alignment as much as possible according to its natural form. And perform this treatment gently, making sure the patient doesn't feel pain through your arm.
And if it is on top of the knee, then you should try to straighten it a little bit.
And if both bones are broken, perform this treatment as described before and try to restore the first joint if you can.
If not, after the eighth or ninth time when the eyes are closed and you try to move one of the bones but it still doesn't move, then that bone is broken in half.
Or you take another part from the other side, it is broken. And may they be so large that they fill both ears with sound but do not hear.
There was no improvement so you should try to loosen them up more and move around some joints. I think this is right, but it's best to use a mixture of flour and meal powder. Then let the tent be open until the ears are fully healed; then close them tightly.
And never put the ears against any other ear while they are still sore and swollen, or if there is a rash on them. Or if you do not have one available
And if you are sewing it up and there is a risk of tearing the eyelid, or if they become swollen from oiliness or dirt, then you must be very gentle in your movements.
And hold them steady if you are not near one, using flour and meal powder mixed with incense powder, put it on lightly, do not cover the ears lightly.
And when the injury is small, and it has been broken into many pieces, if they are unable to remove them completely, then cut off what can be removed, and deal with whatever remains separately.
And if there are no more small injuries to be treated, and the treatment is complete, then let him rest as much as possible.
When the jaw is dislocated without any prior injury and it only moves in a single direction, do not attempt to realign or reposition it forcefully, as this can cause further damage if done incorrectly
When dislocations occur in the right arm, you should bite your left index finger off. If the dislocation occurs in the left jaw, bite your right index finger off instead and switch hands to treat both dislocations simultaneously.
If the jaw dislocation is severe on two sides, you should administer two doses of medication as soon as possible to alleviate any discomfort.
And if the movements become too intense or violent, then tie a silk thread around their neck and use two towels to hold them down. And place the strip in a proper position, or a leather strip long and wide following the jawline, and lay it along with the muscles you want to massage, and command the patient to lie still, and eat light foods.
And if you see that his face is changing, if the disease worsens further, then stop and consult with your doctor. And apply a paste made from flour or cornmeal after you have applied the poultice;
And apply a light compress and let it stay in place, the condition of the patient does not change, leave as is. Do this three times daily.
And if you want to prevent dislocations as mentioned several times before.
And if there is a large crack and injury to the bone, put some of the bone from it on; "When there are subtleties of the outer garments, they can cause confusion.
If the wound is very deep, you must open a flame to help treat it accordingly.
Once you have all these items and there is no need to reapply them as the wound heals, if it's large place some light bandages over it so that any infection cannot enter until it is healed completely.
The wind blows harder multiple times against his shoulder, and it breaks in three pieces.
It is broken into two pieces, but the repair work is lighter compared to the first one.
Or it has a fracture with an injury
And the shoulder joint may become unstable if the fracture is accompanied by an injury, and you need to perform two treatments, especially after the bone breaks; It extends towards the side.
Then you should put it in two parts if its shape is as good as can be expected, and there will not be any appearance or smoothness.
And if you need to extend it further, by wrapping the shoulder in a tight bandage or linen, and make sure that it is large according to your needs. And gently apply force to it, and hold steady its base with your hand if you break off any part of it as desired.
And if you don't want to move the elbow any more after it has recovered fully and is strong enough but still wants to keep it immobilized, put a pillow under its head so that as soon as the elbow lifts itself up, it will be held back down by the pillow.
Then straighten the fracture by placing it in that position and secure it if desired
And tie them together with thread gently, but they cannot be joined by any strength, unless one of the incisions has been made. But you must hold firmly this instrument to maintain it securely
And use a spoon instead and do not worry, and make it as long as desired according to the size of the bone and the strength of the arm;
And make it crooked if you wish and put some wide ones next to each other according to the wound that was made when you treated the bones;
And when you apply an ointment and press gently on the abscess, if it does not burst immediately or with a small squeeze, then you should doubt its effectiveness and reapply as needed.
"And if you have stitches that are coming out, do not squeeze the bandage tightly while holding it; and let them fall in place.
Joint dislocation occurs when the joint becomes painful and swollen. To treat it, apply a poultice of ground meal mixed with water to the affected area gently, and wrap it in light gauze or cloth. If you feel better after applying this treatment, continue using it regularly. Then take a very wide band of gauze or cloth and wrap it around the affected area twice tightly. Then take a very narrow strip of gauze or cloth three inches wide and long, and apply it over the affected area if you feel pain during wrapping. Then wrap it around your neck and tie the strip over the collar of your shirt or jacket to provide warmth. And when you see that the lower part of the chest is being pulled forcefully and you see clearly that it is no longer moving its bones, if there's a severe sprain, and as soon as the ligaments are stretched too far
And when you feel both legs move independently of each other due to a severe sprain and lift the arm upwards If the dislocation is caused by a strong pull on the shoulder joint or pulling one arm across your body, you should not allow any further bad accidents to happen.
Then repeat the traction and hold it as long as possible while allowing it to heal.
And she was restored in 28 days, but less than any other.
The dislocation of the shoulder
"The shoulder blade breaks or dislocates, and it is unable to return to place by touch alone.
"If the dislocation follows a certain form of the fracture and is consistent with its natural shape, in all ways that you know.
"Then put a bandage soaked in water over the dislocated limb and gently support it with a second strip. "Then apply a larger and more delicate strip, just above the shoulder blade, making sure it does not cover any part of the shoulder. If you want to support with straps from under them, make sure the strap is securely in place.
"Then firmly hold it with a large bandage, so that the strip does not move from its place and look at the joint.
"And every time you massage it, hold the bandage and adjust the strip as needed from its place, making sure not to move it on your chest.
"The shoulder joint is dislocated for 20 or 25 days.
When it's completed, and the dislocation occurs, then you must stay still because it is not easy to move afterwards
"And the arm bone is connected to the shoulder bone
And the elbow bone is connected to the shoulder bone
The patient experienced no harm from this procedure but did experience some discomfort. And it will break apart due to excessive force.
If the leg bone is broken at its base and it declines downward, causing great pain to others nearby and breaking into pieces, then it will damage those in the vicinity of the break as well.
Then the dislocation will be corrected by pressing between the spaces and straightening them out, then pressing on them, and assembling the bones of both arms into one hand as you please.
And hold the eyelids and eyelashes with gentle pressure to prevent them from moving; Then press the eyelid firmly down and hold it tightly, and repeat with the other eye every hour until you lose consciousness.
"And if there is pain or an abscess coming to the head of the arm, whether from corrosion or pruritus that comes to it, or any other cause, then you must apply a poultice made with remedies.
"Then hold the poultice steady until it is solid.
of the break of costs
"The veins that are pricked do not burst until after a while on the back and at the root of their origin. "And it is good to perform an incision for this purpose.
And if you reset the dislocation as needed. Then apply an ointment and hold it steady with a bandage so that you can treat it properly.
"If the veins that are pricked become detached from their base and cause great pain and bleeding, causing loss of blood. "And all the above causes pain, suffering, and great injury to the body; it is also very harmful.
And if those who say that it is necessary to administer foods that inflame the stomach to ease the break of costs.
"We do not interfere with this matter as long as it does not harm others. If you have done something that may harm someone else.
And he said it was due to something swelling up against his liver Certainly doubt arises that the swelling is not causing damage to the liver itself by reason of its weakness
And they will cover the arm with a warm compress soaked in oil to help them breathe easier and then give them medication for wheezing, coughing, and pain relievers as needed.
And the joints feel great pain that they cannot endure by touching it with their hands without injuring themselves, and doubt arises to the bone if it is cut through its fragile part, as a result of which equipment should be used in order to heal.
And if the bone is broken and treated gently with a splint as long as it remains healthy.
And those who get frostbite should cover their ears with heated oil cloths and put them on the bone;
And as long as it is healthy, one should be cautious about how much to apply the oil on the bone;
And similarly to the spine's bones.
And when there is no break before it dislocates, and you know if it will be alright or not, if pressed gently with a needle to move them, they cannot be moved nor stretched, and when they are pricked by an arrow, do nothing.
Then you know he is mortal and many times are lost, but if they cannot be moved when held steady, then the bone joint is saved, and wounds heal as well; so it's best to treat them right away.
And similar things happen to the spine's bones as well. If you see if they are broken or not, and whether their pain is severe, and accidents occur where they fall, and in jumping, bending, and stretching.
And when it happens to the stomach area, as with any other injury. And if it is dislocated on the back and cannot be restored by itself, They are mortal wounds. If they do not recover from their treatment.
And if the dislocation occurs lightly, it may not be as severe.
And the cure is to hold it steady if you prick at its base when putting in oil from a good source or bad one, as long as it remains still.
Then apply an unguent that is soothing and healing, bind it with thread or some other material, tell the patient to rest. "And he shall not sleep where there is such pain, as long as he lives.
And if any bones are broken, it should be treated with a knife. And then close the bone with stitches when it is large enough, and treat the wound by first cleaning it out.
And if the bone is broken but you call it "bone of the arm," then apply an external splint to your hand and put another one on the other hand at that time.
And then hold it in place if there is another bone broken as well, and treat the wound while it is still fresh.
fracture of the arm bone
And if the bone of the arm is broken as well and it has caused some discomfort in the upper part. "And then it becomes painful, and drops to the ground, and strikes at a nearby limb, causing injury.
The reattachment is done while holding your hand steady, as long as you are steady with the stretcher. And what about the fractures and the shape of them?
The only fracture is at the end, if there are any, as long as they are of their natural form.
And if the fractures are long or fall from a distance, as you pull away the bone with your abdomen, until the restoration of those fractures is complete. And when you will have made the incision and then put on a strip of cloth or gauze, and hold it steady, so that it does not move.
Cut off any loose ends as long as they are tight. Instruct the patient to sleep with their head resting on a firm surface, or on their back.
And if there is a problem with the stitches, so that it does not move, as long as the stitches are tightened and hold what we have mentioned earlier. And then come to repair it if necessary, holding tight as is convenient until no more accidents occur.
dislocation of the shoulder
The adjutants are those who are between the lower arm and the shoulder blade, if it is dislocated, then you should restore in one of the following ways:
One way is to gently pull your hand away from the injured area, like this shape.
And the other way is to hold it tight and keep it in place, while pressing into the sore spot.
Then hold your injured arm tight until it feels stable and straight again, then support at any point or where the elbow bends.
Then place both hands on the ground in front of you while holding onto it steady as possible.
The other way is to hold the dislocated shoulder against your chest with one hand on its collarbone and instruct the other hand to touch it gently at the dislocation point and the others to extend outward towards their side.
And if you see that it is necessary to extract further, hold tightly the edges of the wound while extracting through and across them towards your side.
"The dislocation occurs when the shoulder blade is dislocated and you need to immobilize it as much as possible by keeping it in place.
"And also when the dislocation occurs towards its base, you should gently stabilize it by keeping it in place as much as possible while ensuring that the shoulder blade is aligned with both upper and lower parts of the arm.
"Then, immobilize it if necessary by putting a bandage over it and making sure to keep your hands still.
"And then hold the arm steady if necessary by placing a cloth roll on it and keeping your hands still while you continue to support.
"And then hold it steady and immobilize the arm as you put a bandage over the dislocation and support with your other hand on the shoulder or side.
"And hold the arm tight while moving it around, and keep the shoulder in place if both arms are out of position, so that nothing moves them unless they move.
"If you doubt that the eye does not move unless it moves itself, then hold one eyelid open and steady while making a cut through the other, which should be larger and stronger than the others.
"Then hold your eyelids tightly, as I said at the beginning of this chapter, firmly but not too tight.
"And if you see the seating of the eyelids and the closing, as we have said in the previous chapter when resetting the arm after it has been dislocated, hold tightly so that the eyelid does not separate completely, unless it happens on the ninth occasion as we mentioned.
"The third joint of the limb, which is too stiff to move, will not come into place or join with its member. If that happens as we have said.
"And if nothing else happens after the third joint or more, and the limbs become numb from holding them against their body, then they put their hands on their stomach;
"And continuously stretch the shoulder joint and watch it closely every hour or as needed to ensure that the limb does not become stiff nor misaligned;
"If this is by virtue of medicine, then it applies to the meat we have placed before us in a manner that the meat should be cut into small pieces; "And when he starts to restore, let him do so slowly and carefully.
"It is customary that the shoulder joint and the limb should be restored in one piece; And afterward, he will lie down and administer ointments and remedies for healing purposes to the affected area.
The tightening process may cause soreness or bruising if done more than two months later.
fracture of the arm
The arms are composed of two bones called the forearm and the humerus, which extends from the elbow.
And the other is large, and that one is distal, toward the little finger;
For example, when a large bone breaks only or both bones break together.
When the forearm bones break, the recovery is light and healing occurs quickly.
And when large bones break, if both are broken, then healing may be harder and more painful than when only one breaks.
The patient must gently stretch and straighten their limbs as much as they can comfortably do so.
And for the long bones, if you need to hold it even tighter.
And extend your hand to the chest and pull it up higher than the other arm, and make sure you hold the wrist tighter than on the other side.
"The arm extends downwards towards its opposite side of the body or to another limb.
Then place the patient on their back with their head slightly elevated and support their neck to keep it in alignment.
If the dislocation occurs while sitting down, and if it is necessary to reset it in its place, then you should sit it back into place slowly but firmly, as we have said before.
And when facing an abscess, I instructed this single physician. take the remedy
And in the beginning of restoring, if the incision is made with a small amount of wax and warm oil that does not burn excessively or too soft. It should be applied gently as long as the wound is healing.
Then apply the powder from the mill with plenty of water to make it moist. Put a small amount on your finger and feel how dry it is before applying it, so that you don't put too much or too little on the wound.
The number of needles should be adjusted depending on the situation "So if the dislocation is caused by a break in one of the bones or two.
And it holds tighter than any other place, and less so at joints. The dressings on the dislocation should be soft and moist, but not too tight or painful.
The dressings on the dislocation should be soft and moist, but not too tight or painful. And the strings that hold it in place must be neither too loose nor too tight, as we have said before.
After healing the limb, you may continue to care for it as needed. And if any pains occur in the member, as long as you apply warmth to it, until the pain subsides.
Allow the member to rest and not be confined or restricted.
"And after extraction, sew up the wounds, and remove any remaining parts, and similar things, if necessary.
"And if any nerves are pinched so that they cannot come to the member due to its tightness, it is advisable that you loosen it up and let them recover slowly, until the pinched nerves are healed, then tie it off.
"None of these things that we have said come to harm, unless otherwise directed by a physician.
Or if you find yourself prone on the ground with your arms by your side and your head down between them, so that no motion or shaking occurs, and you rest on your back.
And the dislocated shoulder is reset every three weeks or four times a week depending on the composition and consistency of its healing properties.
of the arm
Pain in the arm and there are two fractures, it does not come back but just a few times.
And if the hand is bruised or swollen, it should be held tightly to ensure that no blood vessels are damaged and aligned correctly.
Then place the hand on a flat surface, extend it out so that its fingers are spread and aligned correctly as long as they remain connected together.
And then place the plaster on it, and apply pressure to keep it in place. Then wrap an ice pack around it if necessary.
And the dislocation should be gently pressed into the belly of the patient if a bandage is used. Then tie on another strip of gauze and apply it gently to the back as you would to a hand, and hold it in place if necessary.
And if the hands are stretched and straight, then tie them together firmly, and place one in between the two.
And it will come to none of our two, if it is cut off, then let us hold the eye, as required. And holds it with a finger, and you must view if it is not a little crooked to raise the dislocation, and does not move.
And it will be other two fingers if one or the other is broken, and then let us hold with both hands that are after. Or tie them together in a loop, as tight as you can, or put it through one eye, if desired.
And seek the cure and location of an abscess, and see this as I have said.
The veins from the wrist are often broken, and one can see when they turn forward and backward;
And the treatment if it is on the hand side of the dislocation, and another from above. And the muscles stretch along their sheaths towards each other.
This is when the bones break from within the bone.
When the dislocation occurs near the root of the arm/leg bone... and if there is an injury from the side opposite to the point where it was dislocated, and on the other side there will be another injury.
When it's stuck in a groove or its extensions are closed up,
Then puts the limb back into place naturally and securely, making sure that its natural contour is restored, then applies a dressing to cover any wounds, seals it with sutures so they cannot be reopened.
And if there's a cut on the arm then let it heal and come back to our treatment session. The dressing is applied in one way.
It is important to straighten the bent knee two or three times and then apply padding, then roll it from the foot up towards the root of the leg. Separate any fat tissue between the thigh and the calf, remove any excess, and wrap it tightly across
After setting the bone back into place on the arm, put a splint around it and put one end of that splint against the shin bone.
Then wrap some adhesive around the joint between the leg and shin to hold it in place. Start by wrapping three or four times around the splint As you go further out from the splint and less tightly bind it.
Then put another three strips between the leg and shin. Go back to where you started with each strip until you've placed them all around it.
When that is in place and the joint does not move at all, then release it gently without causing any harm to the patient. And if there is a swelling that occurs as you described and we have said many times before;
"and if it moves its own accord "if they cannot stay in place when the limb is moved forcefully, "as we have said, as long as it is not dislocated.
"and no joint may be broken when the elbow or arm are lifted,
"always in restoration of a dislocation is made without striking the bone.
And it is necessary to reset the joint as soon as possible depending on how much or little tissue damage there may be
It is necessary to treat wounds on the skin carefully as it often heals well but may heal with many cracks.
And if it breaks into only one small cut or tear, and has no deep wounds, and all is well.
"and the restoration that takes place when it is moved again will stay in place as long as the two are aligned,
"and when the arm is stretched and returned to its place, if you maintain it properly, and hold steady as we have said in other dislocations, and straighten everything that has been mentioned. "and when there is an accidental dislocation, until the limb stays put,
The break of the leg
"The second joint of the leg is called the malleolus, while the other one is called the fibula.
"When the second joint of the leg breaks like when it comes to the arm, and because that is how it heals just as with both arms equally, and its fractures are all healed together, but if one of the bones breaks completely.
And if the small bones break, it will happen first.
"If the big bone is broken and there is great pain, and you see it clearly; "...and it will be like that.
"After applying the remedy and giving it to drink, let them stay still as they were;
"But if you want to prevent further breakage, and there are more pieces than the remedy is strong enough. "...and make it in accordance with its virtue;
"When you have done all of your treatment and put on two strips that stretch the leg from one end to the other, so it heals completely from start to finish;
After wrapping around the second joint of the limb and applying pressure at both ends, you then release it gently.
And nothing was applied to the end of the limb, and it was released, so that movement could be observed in the fracture or wound.
And remove any dressing on the arm to see if there is another injury. If the treatment was successfull.
"The bones break easily.
The shoulder does not come out of joint, but the bones in it do break occasionally and with little force, unless there is some other condition present.
And if there is a fracture present too, you will see the bones moving against each other, as they often do in cases of swelling or injury. Then press firmly on both ends to hold them still until they stop moving.
Then apply a bandage around the abdomen and press down firmly with two fingers in case of any movement inside. Hold it steady until you remove the dressing, then loosen the bandages gently while maintaining pressure on the abdomen to prevent internal bleeding.
And when three or four of them have been passed through if there is a delay in healing because you will find the bones broken either or not completely healed.
And if they have any of two breaks, if the rest stops, as we have said those two from hand. Then it applies both breaks according to the length of two fingers, and slightly more on each side. Then apply a plaster that I have mentioned, and hold tightly until the swelling is gone.
And if there are 2 or 3 or more breaks, hold one according to the quantity of fingers. Stretch out one finger and tightly bind a plaster on it. And if there are any breaks at the bottom of the bandage, where they may be painful, hold them very tight to alleviate the pain.
And it is important that you do not forget any other things I have mentioned in these fractures or others we have spoken of; Also make sure to take care of the wound itself as well, if necessary.
joint dislocation of the finger
When a woman's uterus is dislocated if it is elongated first, then hold the two sides together with a cloth.
Then wrap his body with cotton and put something heavy on top of him.
Then remove the woman and gently pull her body part by part as she is pulled back in with something heavy.
And when it wants to urinate if the cotton is still on and when it has urinated then she will be removed and her vagina will be cleaned. If it is dislocated again then take a bowl of honey and bind her feet together with a strip of cloth, fill the bowl to the brim with honey, and throw all of it into the vagina. Then gently apply the honey mixture inside as long as the vagina is empty. "The body will heal itself.
Until it is healed with cotton and left undisturbed as much as possible.
And when the eyes are pricked on either side of the body or a woman if it is done as we have said in the case of the elbow joint.
And those pricked eyes will hide from one who puts his own study and work to an end or turns away from this book.
Because the dislocations indicate more strongly the right way of treatment. That is all
In case it is broken, take a strip of rawhide and wrap it around the break. Then you cover them up with strips and let them rest for as long as possible without further movement, until they heal completely.
"The breaking of a bone with an injury.
"It is advisable for those who have a fracture with an injury to be healthy now, if the wounds we mentioned testify.
"And if the wound is healthy and there's nothing else to do but reset the dislocation right away or in another hour, hold it steady so it does not move.
"And the arm should be immobilized at any joint that is dislocated, so it doesn't move around anymore or cause more harm.
"And if the dislocation is accompanied by pain in the shoulder joint itself, you should gently support and extend your arm slightly.
And if the extensions are pricked by touching them with your hands, as long as it is done through an instrument made of iron that has seven or eight edges and its size depends on the extent of the wound. "And as for which is better between three or four, whichever one he has had the most experience in, that should be used.
"And if it is small and light, then the limb should not be squeezed too tightly at its base, but held firmly forward instead; in other words:
"And please call a physician when the dislocation occurs near or at the top of an arm. "And once it happens, if they become entangled with each other instead. And if they are very small and the bones cannot well grip it, if you hold tightly to the joint itself as long as their strength allows them.
"If you cannot put the limb back in place as we mentioned before and it is not feasible to remove or treat using an instrument that exists.
"Then proceed with the removal of bones and any other fractures as needed.
And once the joint is held back, after a while it will again naturally straighten itself
"If it is in its original position then moisten a clean cloth with black wine and gently apply that to the eye. "Do not put anything more over or above the wound except what is necessary to prevent dirt and contamination.
"Then apply a dressing over the wound as necessary to cover it completely based on its size and ensure that no separation occurs.
And many times this happens with fire, causing burns or death in some cases. "And the pain may be more severe and longer lasting than other injuries.
"And if the wound is large or deep and you doubt that it will not heal without treatment, then consider taking action to prevent further injury. "But instead of stitches, use strong bandages and bind the wound tightly.
"And when you see after one or two times the wound has not stopped bleeding if all that you have done is to apply healing salve and similar things.
"It is necessary to keep the second limb still three times a day, morning and evening until it is firm and healthy.
"And make sure that the limbs are held in such a manner as to gently hold back any movement.
"The joint will continue to move and cannot stay in place unless you want the wound with your hand, and remove all those fragments that bring on pain.
And a fistula comes to light, or another way of corruption, if it is appropriate that you cure according to what he does in his treatment today
"If the limb is broken and presses against another bone or joint, as with the elbow or shoulder, if you do not treat immediately because of fear that it will die, but leave it as long as it can move.
"After putting oil on it for 10 days or until it heals completely
"And if it doesn't heal, then leave it.
"We often come after the health of the bruise, especially when it is close to the joint, and we can see the shape of the member. "And due to this, the limbs cannot be moved naturally.
"When we have found it: "If the patient is given a strict diet without any of these things, or all together, and they are cooked with strong wine or with abundant oil, or with anything else: "And the patient is held tightly in place by the neck until it heals.
"And the patient is held tightly in place by the neck until it heals. "Then remove them and apply another one while holding it tight until the knots are gone;
"If you prick one side of a joint well made, then they will swell up in all the joints.
and it becomes harder to move them as they grow more rigid, and it is painful to the touch if there are many. Or you shave off all hair that is long or uneven, as well as any stubble;
The second arm was weak after surgery
When the break in the bone has healed and mends itself after weak and delicate bones have been strengthened or supported by treatments. if one is too tightly bound, it will not loosen as intended. or because it has too few threads and cannot allow the tendons to move within the member. due to excessive rubbing "Or too great a movement will prevent him from moving at all. Or due to having little blood in his body if he is weak
And the remedy that you should do is make the hair grow long and even, so as to not multiply in him. and administer cold water and vinegar;
Then apply ice to the affected part if it causes great swelling and redness, as long as the swelling is still there. And restore its natural shape naturally.
"The second member after health After the restoration of the limb and it is removed from its place, all that remains is to return to its natural shape.
if you do not believe the people who say it must be removed entirely and many people have done this in our world.
And so forth it is, pains great come on, and by chance death.
Wherever you go, the cuts and tortures are fresh, if they come from hot water or moist herbs, as well as the delicate things like veins, roots, and similar things.
and the pleasant mallow, if it is well made, and you take a mixture of veins with fat from the liver or oil of sesame seed, and use it in place.
Or you can take figs and grind them with a fine flour, and similar remedies that help soothe the sudden pain.
"There should be no constant or prolonged touching of the dislocated member with wet hands. "You should prevent any movement in the dislocated member for as long as possible.
And the torture will be smooth and gentle, as well as the incision of bones, if it is necessary to cover with the bone, gently cutting. And place a cushion and study on the couch
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place and is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
If there's no dislocation, then you should now shift your focus to treating it as needed.
If you fall asleep while lying down or if it is pulled by accident when resetting
Because you do not want to move your arm when it is paralyzed Many times it brings pain and other pains;
Always, when this occurs, if you see a vein or abscess then release it, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Then apply heat and oil to the limb, then gently massage it, and treat with a bandage if necessary so that the treatment is applied uniformly across the limb.
"The physicians have treated dislocations by making them immobile.
If both arms are dislocated similarly, then the treatment methods are as follows: Or if they are only a little loose from their roots, and soothes gently. When they are dislocated completely and then fall towards the floor, closing their mouths so tightly that they cannot keep them closed, causing them to open their mouths with speech
"If the dislocation is minor, they can be treated with more frequent adjustments.
If they are entirely dislocated and complete, if you must reset it immediately without hesitation
So that the surgeon holds onto the patient's jaw with one hand at the base of the dislocated jaw and gently pulls it back towards itself to realign the dislocation. And they should be free so as not to interfere
Instruct the patient to soften their jaws and move them in all directions. "And they are straight when she first awakens.
And as they are moved gently back and forth, so that the lower jaw is aligned with the upper one if there is heat or oil.
"Do not touch me unless you are prepared.
And when they are tightly bound and the mouth is to be moistened with oil or wax in order to soften them up a bit so that they can then be gently peeled off.
And let the fingers remain between two cushions so that they do not move and are held steady, but gently hold them with light pressure as long as the pain is tolerable and the jaws are open.
And then gently remove what needs to be carefully and do not force the jaw open or close as long as it is well-nibbled and healthy.
"And the second molars cannot be removed from one hour's worth of effort and are only converted to their place, if feverishness ends and normal sleep comes, through adventitious solutions for the belly, and through adventitious vomiting of pure cold.
And when you realize this, just know that these are mistakes. Many times may have died because of it, in the eighth hour.
The pulley cannot be released from its own weight or effort to continue moving forward and backward, and it is never released once in reverse direction; instead the force is lost.
And the restoration is when his limbs are stretched out towards their right side. And then press on it with your palm and it will return to place.
Then hold the elbow tight along with the band.
The veins that need to be opened cannot be reopened. No more and if it dislocates no matter how gently you reset it as we have experienced.
Then hold the elbow tight along with the bandage and instruct the patient to rest as much as possible.
And if you suspect a dislocation of the shoulder, then reset it gently when its dislocated.
"The dislocation of the shoulder.
The shoulder should not be dislocated unless in three ways;
One way is to dislocate at the bottom of the arm near the elbow. And to the second part of this and from time to time, with pain.
and not from the back of the shoulder, or from the inside of the arm.
And more often dislocations occur near the elbow, especially those with little strength because they can easily be dislocated.
For those who have enough strength, it only moves back and forth.
And by accident, there may be bruising or fracture of the shoulder blade, and it is dislocated because of that.
It is important that you practice this as much as possible until you are certain of it. And then apply the treatment.
And it is clear that dislocations occur when they are near the elbow and there is a difference between the affected shoulder and the healthy one. And you will see that in both cases there is a pit or depression at the top of the shoulder. "The arm cannot return to its normal position without any movement.
"If dislocated at the top and is not hidden, you will see it clearly on inspection;
"This method of dislocation cannot be remedied when new, or if the tendons are torn.
"The method is to lightly massage the arm above and put on the back of the elbow, then gently loosen up the joint at the top with strength. "And you should gently massage the hand, stretch it upwards, but never apply too much force; "This will lead to temporary relief.
"And if not as described earlier, you should apply hot water when the tendons are swollen; "And gently warm and soothing, like with decoction of willow bark and mallow in hot water, or soothe it;
"Then, if the limb is placed on its side and not too tight nor too loose, put a mirror to see the arm clearly, then gently raise the shoulder blade.
"And other measures for the arm with dislocation when it does not move up, "Now if you see that the shoulder is dislocated in this way:
"And it should be less than the width of the bone. "Then gently raise it and hold the shoulder in place. "Other measures: take the arm down from over the belly. "The joints are too rigid when held still for too long, causing the dislocation to occur now.
"Or, if you see that the shoulder is dislocated in a different way:
"Then press down on it firmly and steady as you would with the pommel of a dagger. And then bind tightly with thread or ligature the wound so that it does not move.
Then loosen the other end of a cord and knot it securely to return the dislocation to its proper place.
And if this does not work as we have described then do this remedy With a pair of wide and long tweezers hold the abscess firmly in place with both hands; then make an incision as described above.
Then hold the abscess firmly to its place with a thumb and forefinger of one hand so that it does not move, then put the tweezers in place over the abscess.
And extend one arm to the long finger of that hand and place it over the joint, then put the other arm on top of your head and stretch them out in front; The sentence translates to "The connection returns now.
"And when it has been bound with ropes of flax and covered in powder from the mill with incense and saffron, then you should put an elbow brace on its shoulder and train the arm so that it cannot move freely.
And it is advisable that he gently moves his limbs as much as they are comfortable, because the healing will be faster.
and then move them after seven or more days, and you should move their joints again And if they are firm but not soft, it is advisable to massage them gently.
"If the dislocation is caused by moisture or any other reason, then you should apply a third set of restraints if it is possible.
And if you do everything as advised and the dislocation doesn't occur after seven days, but it is held in place and cannot be lifted up from its arm, then check whether there are any issues with the nerve at the base of the shoulder or if they are stiff or elongated. And you should know that the dislocation will never occur in its place
The dislocation which occurs at the wrist or hand, or behind it if it is made by force and stretched out with hands, and another healer should be consulted.
"And keep still until he feels calm.
"After healing comes the restriction of motion in the affected member, and after that, if there are persistent movements, until it returns to its original state.
"The cost of treating a dislocation is high.
The dislocation is caused by the looseness of the joint and its loosening back up
And it loosens all over, front and back, and the dislocation is not easily resolved because one can clearly see and feel it. It loosens regardless of which direction. "When joining a dislocation with an abscess, if one looks closely. "The joint may become tight and not loosen the arm, touching its shoulder in any way.
And it is advisable to reset the joint in this way so that when you move it again, if there was pain from moving it before,
and because of its looseness all over, especially when at the back, This dislocation causes great pain and is more dangerous than others.
The restoration can be done if it is this way: you hold its hand with two hands. "And when the arms are stretched out and hands down towards it, he is torn apart from his body, and loses balance completely.
And if there are dislocations directly in front of the shoulder, firmly hold both hands together at their base and tighten your grip on the root of the arm tightly until you feel it is properly aligned again.
If they cannot return to their place even with strong effort.
And when the minister stretches his arm and strains it strongly if he does not move towards extension.
Then tear off one corner of the cloth with a long and wide strip;
And when they tie the joint to their hand if there is no oil present to lubricate the joint, then tie it firmly until it straightens.
And when it is at rest if he places a plaster soaked in oil gently and holds the arm, stretches it out and pulls the arm by its sleeve tightly, until the arm straightens, then loosen it.
And if the joint is firmly attached to it, loosen it up a bit,
And if you see that the joint is not tightly attached, loosen it up a bit more and let go of the link as soon as possible while keeping it firmly in place. After loosening it, release it.
And if the joint feels loose after releasing it and becomes movable when wet or rubbed vigorously, press down on it as much as you can. Or if you put a wet cloth around the joint and let it soak for one night, then remove it, and finally apply some oil to help lubricate and ease in when bathing. And if you rub the joint vigorously, loosen the cloth around it first, then remove the wet cloth, and finally enter in a bath. Do this as many times as necessary until the joint is healed.
"And if you see any moistness between the fingers of your hand with burns and blisters on it, hold tight to it.
It will return to its original position.
"Shoulder dislocation
The hand's joints are dislocated and the movement is light (not very strong), compared to other joints. In any case, it is advisable to return the dislocated joint to its place immediately, even if only a slight movement can do this or if bleeding occurs from an artery near the vein.
And if you put the arm in a sling and stretch out its hand and mirror it as much as possible, so that he can see his palm's reflection while wearing gloves to show him how it should move smoothly
In any case, you should check if it is correctly in place. And once the arm is in the sling and stretched out and stretched, And a dislocation occurs on the back of the hand, as he puts his hand over the table and looks intently at its appearance.
Now she comes back alright If not then, if the pain from pressing on abscesses is severe and unbearable, let it be as bad as possible to endure.
And if he cannot suffer or stay in place after some time has passed without relief from the pain, then it is necessary to make a cut.
and do not worry about any discomfort as long as his hands are in the way, and cannot hold anything at all because if his nerves are damaged or he has an artery
then there is no other remedy but to restrain by fire cautery the case and by experience nothing else is worth it.
"When both hands are at rest as we have said before, then strain it and let it go loose.
"If he cannot move properly, if his veins are opened by hot blood or any other cause, then tighten as much as possible.
"The dislocation of both arms must be attended to separately.
There should be no pain from any part of his hands on or off or in the belly
except for the second, hold it steady as long as you can and then let go of both arms until he is done, and move towards where there are joints.
and let it go to this joint, then move it to another
and hold it tight as we said, and loosen the joint, and make it movable, and bind the parts together
And do this until it is straight, and always do so if it is crooked, and if you have done so before, keep doing it until it is steady
Do the same on another joint as well.
"The dislocation of the shoulder joint.
When one or both shoulders are dislocated, if there is no treatment available, as the patient may die quickly from dislocation of the shoulder joint.
If one of the fingers is swollen and cannot be held, or many times they lose a member (hand), this joint must be loosened
And every time it moves in four parts.
And if one dislocates at the back, you say "gobblize.
The treatment is that you correct the dislocation as soon as it occurs from childhood. There is no treatment nor healing to speak of here.
And that which has been heated or struck by blows or similar things, they gave the same manner of treatment with great words, and he has no benefit in all.
But I cured him according to my intent, and put ointments on his wounds in various ways.
I say that the swelling which comes at this time before, has neither treatment nor healing;
and these which come straight to the second joint, cannot be cured except by that which comes from behind, as I said.
and it is that the hairs should be stretched upon his back in the lower part of the body, and hold them steady so they do not move;
Then you tie it to the top in a loose way, and another around it so that it holds tight against the hair of the head, and one above its ears, and one below its cheeks, and one behind each shoulder.
And they shall bind their wounds with linen strips among the second stripes.
So that they are tightly bound as we have said, and their edges lie close together on the spine so that it straightens out completely when extended.
And if it doesn't work through this cure, then take a strip of three long arms and wrap them around the abscess, and bind with thread from its edge to its opposite edge. And place another strip over the other edge of the bandage, and press firmly until it straightens out to its full length.
And if you see that it does not work when tightening with the hand. And when you have tied the bandages to the base of one abscess with a strip of long linen and for each other limb, and put between them strips of linen or skin from the same length as that of the bandage.
"And hold tight to a tight grip while letting go of it when corrected.
"And between the two grips when one is being pulled or corrected while letting go of it to turn it.
"And then the link is among the joints of both arms towards one elbow and another to the other elbow; between them they straighten their elbows so that it can be seen.
"And when she is healed with a good ointment made of three ingredients in long amounts, and then the stitches, and after that the part of a tablet of three inches long to repair the ligament, as we have said, and use gentle movements so that it can be seen; while using it, do not move around too much.
And at the end of health there are no problems if you administer mild and fast acting medicines like those we have mentioned here. And there is no issue when administering a potion and it never comes back from behind the spine or leg bones. It's important to be cautious because one may have doubts about whether it could lead to death.
Only dislocations of the wrist and shoulder come back only if there is no dislocation in other joints.
The joint of the arm is dislocated into two parts. In front and back, and inside and outside.
And more so in the front and back.
And the knowledge of dislocations is that when a leg bone is joined with a healthy one, it becomes longer and enters into more bones than the healthy ones, and cannot double its growth by fire. "And if the shoulder joint dislocates from a blow to the arm, then that is how it will come.
The sign of that which comes to light, is that it often happens contrary to these things ahead.
And when someone has signs of this on their arm in front, they know to have their leg straighten out. Always bear in mind not to make the wound bleed and if it does happen before doing so, hold tight until it stops bleeding, and apply pressure, making sure that you don't let go unless necessary; when you are ready, then proceed with your foot.
The signs of that which comes from behind are that it cannot spread its joint and is unable to straighten out, while the limb is more tired than the other arm, and the pain is eased off but there's swelling around the knee.
The limbs of this type of dislocation should be treated immediately and the sooner it is corrected according to its positioning, if there are no other treatments available. And only then should they have a suspicion.
And in the case where it is fresh and there are four dislocations at once, if you quickly straighten out the joint, then rest its bones and cover it with both hands and the arms. "In case of recurrence," no other treatment is available.
If not in this way, then it is advisable to have the limb held firmly and stretched out with both hands, or if you can only hold one hand against the bone. and other treatments stretch their arm out in such a manner that it touches the elbow joints, then apply pressure to one of the bones against the bone. and others cut off the head of the limb from this place;
stretch up and down once as long as they are kept above ground and move downwards while holding them in that position.
"This manner of stretching is common, but if a dislocation occurs, like we have mentioned, it's alright.
If not, it is advisable to apply treatment to the limb.
When dislocations occur on the lower part of the body, it is advisable to hold the limb against its side bone and then apply pressure onto the base of the arm.
After applying a tourniquet to the arm with a large vein, and applying pressure to stop any bleeding from that area. If it returns to its place now.
This method of dislocation is less severe than others.
If you do not apply pressure in this manner as we have suggested, if it is necessary to bind the two hands together with a strong tie at the wrists, and across the elbows, and so also the legs, may one or both of the limbs be extended by more than others.
Then hang it from its top on a long branch, and lay them down upon the ground.
Instruct the patient to bind the arm's top tightly, and have others ministers holding it with the bandage, who are binding the wound close; for this dislocation is now properly set.
And when dislocations occur on the lower limb, if the bones are separated and strange to their place, he must gently straighten them separately, one at a time.
Then apply ice packs, on the injured area and between the joints of the affected limb. And apply moistened bandages to hold it in place; and put ice packs between the joints of the affected limb to reduce swelling.
"It returns safely.
"If not, press here... and push it into its socket as we have described in the previous paragraph.
Then when a dislocation occurs at the front, it is best to straighten the affected leg immediately and according to what I have said. And apply ice packs on the injured area and between the joints of the affected limb; press against it with one hand, then stretch away from the pain with the other arm.
And when dislocations occur at the front and cannot be straightened immediately, do not lift it off the ground. If this is so, as I have described in the previous point, you should immobilize it by holding the affected limb still with both hands. And then hold it extended as we have said before, and must press against the joint at the table. Once his muscles stretch out his legs, they will become straight Unless he clenches the fists and stretches a tendon, which prevents it from moving. Then rest for three or four hours, then relieve, and stretch as follows;
And you can see that they are straight if the tendon is stretched properly, as before, and let it rest for three hours.
Then relax, and do a thorough stretch while your body is relaxed.
"Of a dislocated limb
The veins are cleared according to three methods; This means drain and blow, and then apply heat.
Do not remove it before.
"And if he commands the patient to bend his leg at its joint and he does not straighten it immediately after bending, then he should be considered dislocated.
"And the restoration of all dislocations should be done as follows: Have him sit up straight, and extend his leg if he can, and put your knee on top of it, and put his foot on yours.
"Then take one hand to the other, and pull between them. Then bend both knees outward. "And continue to stretch your foot as the joint straightens out and it is seen that he has properly bent his knee.
"And hold the strap in place, and bend your leg towards the joint, and lift it high enough to touch or nearly touch both knees. Then let go.
And do not move your arms while they are healing.
And if the limb is broken but managed to stay still during treatment as described in the previous text.
of the shoulder dislocation
The arms are never completely straight or bent; and they can be straightened out when necessary.
If the sign indicates that the hair is loose and it's on the part where it was damaged or cut off
The patient should gently stretch his arms while being extremely cautious only when he has finished using them.
And if the abscess is completely healed, you should sit on it with your right hand and hold it tight while pressing against it with your left leg.
Then take the pain to your right hand and hold it tightly for two more times, then stretch out above it strongly.
And do this twice as we have said, avoiding and pressing against the pain;
If it comes back, that's fine.
Then if it returns after a while because of the wound, come again.
And if it cannot come back in place, then firmly hold the patient's hand on the ground between their thighs, and cover their eyes so that they do not see.
Then gently place your hands on the patient's chest or back, supporting their head with one hand and holding onto the collar of their shirt with the other. Then firmly hold both hands gently between the legs to support the patient when they are being extracted from their position.
Then place both hands gently on the dislocation and support the affected limb with your other hand, ensuring it will return to its original position when released.
And when she reaches her limit, then put on the splint and support, hold onto the foot and bend it in such a way that the knee is not too bent.
And let him rest for two days or three, and make his bed smooth if he is straining.
Then loosen the bandage on the third day at the most, and apply fresh one every four days. And if it starts to heal before that, you should continue to treat him as needed.
And the bones that come loose should be held steady as they may dislocate again and cause further injury if not handled properly.
The two of them are plural When the two are loosened as much as is necessary for work and it's a light thing to do.
And if the dislocation is due to any of two things that you should apply pressure on the dislocated joint directly and hold it in place tightly until it settles.
And when it is dislocated and does not move at all, apply firm pressure on the joint with one hand, then strain it gently with the other hand for three days. Let him rest until he is healed.
"The wound and dislocation come together
When a wound comes with the dislocation and it seems to worsen, many times there will be that the patient dies.
If you are not cautious in the treatment, you will not succeed and waste time, and if you are foolish and compassionate, late may be slow.
And at the beginning of things in an abscessed area, hold tight to prevent pain and injury. If you see hope, when you reset the limb back into place immediately.
And when limbs are in place, if you administer treatment gently to the abscess and treat wounds as necessary.
With dislocation and fractures, attend for relief from pain, and do what we have said in simple ailments.
And guard against entering into a state of fear, as I have said, for it is to your own worth and by the goodness of your creator that you are protected and sustained in this manner
