"Oh, dear friends! I have completed this book which is the beginning of medical science and the foundation for its growth, and it has come to an end with all its explanations and through my statements. I had a vision that this book will be completed by another treatise which is part of the art of surgery.
Because the art of surgery is greatly valued in our region and is esteemed above all things, it may be that no one seeks to learn from its secrets except for the few who have studied anatomy in books. Because of this there was an error and a controversy, which caused it to be closed down, and the science had ended.
I think you mean, "I believe that this treatise is written by someone instructing on how to treat injuries and ailments in the 12th-13th centuries. And come to terms with the forms of fire treatment and other treatments for wounds along with the application of the proper instruments and their cleaning as well; this is how it's done right.
And for the reason why no great masters of hands are found among our people, it is the physicians who elongated their studies. And he who enters into the science of anatomy, as Galen says, until he counts the bones and veins and nerves and brains themselves, and their nature and their connections and separations, and has knowledge of the bones and the nerves and the brain itself, its movement and rest, its life and its limbs moving and at rest.
And in doing so, Ypocras understands not to do without the proper preparation and cleaning of the instruments before proceeding with them. And moreover in the art of healing itself.
In the introduction to this book we state that you must avoid doing certain things if one is not capable of understanding them and may commit an error or offend others.
So, it seems that many people are eager to learn about this subject but when they abandon their knowledge and sense of experimentation.
"I see a fool who looks at breasts or the body of a woman, and he does harm to his eyes. "Because such wounds are outside her control when she is dead between her hands.
And there's another example where the base of a vein was large. "He took it with him and died three days later.
"And I had to go through the treatment, which included inspecting the wound and size of the artery, making sure everything was in order.
And there is another example where the patient had a broken leg, and then the breeze caused an injury.
And these examples show the ignorance that restrains them from healing properly and not allows for rest of the wound, and he leaves it at the end.
"And they tell him to avoid getting wet.
And it was his leg which was completely free and the eye, he went into destruction.
I am calling to come here for him, and I have to come and untie his leg. And when I untie it after it has been injured and there is no pain felt by the patient.
But all the joints were already corrupted or damaged in some way, so they could not be healed.
And as long as the corruption continued within a member it would continue to spread throughout all of them.
"And also note that if it happened in front of a mirror, then it causes inflammation around the area of injury.
"And when it is purulent and melancholic, then only a touch with iron should be used if not in that case nothing else will help to cure what has been corrupted.
Therefore, three fingers are necessary; in two divisions the thumb is used. this means that there was an additional danger involved here;
And I will show in the next chapter of this book where there is fear and danger.
It is important that you remain vigilant when looking at a wound so that if it were to speak ill words about your own self, they cannot do so.
"Take your weapons for healing," you'll do everything gently and firmly, using the best way that may please God and be good to health.
"Let go of troublesome diseases and let peace reign in tranquility.
"And take your weapons away from what causes you to doubt and from being divided into the glory of another.
"There were no other witnesses among his acquaintances: "Do not take ill medicine that causes harm to your body.
I have read through the third chapter of this treatise.
"The first chapters are of fire cauterization and the cauterization of wounds, and the chapter ends here.
"And there is everything related to cautery, as well as anything necessary for its practice.
"The second chapters are of tying and cutting, and stitching up wounds, and extractions from arrows, etc.
"And are you ordering chapters and forms of the streams.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and sprains, and similar things;
And the order of the three main parts which are.
It is also necessary that you consider the quality of the help and the degree to which it will be given.
I said that the quality of care and compassion is more long, subtle science and secret wisdom;
And they speak more often about success, and agree on it;
My words become shorter because I understand the length of them.
I said that care should be universally applied to all types or matter, whether they are dry skin type matters and wet skin type matters.
The warm and dry skins come together as one matter, and they said that care is a great help; "And they said the opposite: That fire cautery is of no benefit to someone who has already contracted an illness caused by heat and thirst. As the body becomes hot, it should not be treated with fire for a heated ailment brought on by heat alone, but rather with water to cool down.
And those who say the opposite that fire cautery is great help for hot and dry ailments that come from outside, like the plague. When you purchase clothing for the body and its moisture at high temperatures, you should apply cold water to cool it down
And I give you this word. Because I have tried many times and failed each time.
And all of that matters little for those who have already experienced it, and if they practice correctly using the treatment method in its various forms on different types of wounds, and the reasons behind illnesses, and the healing of wounds.
For others, we have no fear, except for cold and wet ailments. And they assemble themselves and agree on the cautery.
And you must know
The procedure is simple, and it only occurs in the member that is injured, and does not spread to other members
The hot treatments bring about the healing of different parts of the body, making wounds better in different places on the body. And by chance he has an accident
He is weak from his head and the quality of his body prevents him from doing so if there isn't enough strength
And by trying experiments and through the long time of service and study that I have put in practice, there was wisdom in it.
and for the length of my words I apologize, because it does not please me to reveal what is hidden or fire, and the quality of his heart, but if he speaks about diseases that torment people, as philosophers say when they demonstrate. receive in your thoughts.
And note, dear reader, to have them all done as instructed
And I say that the cautery is useful to all, because those who have undergone its help are spared from other treatments. and furthermore the cauteries are for necessary pains, and do not treat those that cannot be treated with other remedies.
And you think no more than this because the illness treated with cautery has no cure it brings pain to them
it brings pain to them But it brings no comfort unless they are used properly, as cautery is not a cure for the illness itself but instead dries the humors caused by the pain and helps to heal quickly due to its value in preserving one's complexion and appearance
And sometimes it is that illness comes back once, taking with it the beauty of the skin and its health.
and all the extra things are taken away by acquiring food and similar things, as if cautery is administered incorrectly or there is too much fat and moisture, if cautery for pain brings back more pain, and the same things, and no cure comes. But what happened?
Because many people call upon the healers of medicine for help and that is why they come.
But people do not believe that the healers of medicine are valuable after healing, but their intentions are false, and the healers call upon those who practice medicine for this reason because when we administer treatments to cure any illness they are not worth anything, until we administer our own cures and it is worth something.
"However, after realizing that cauterization is used in medicine, they do not follow the intentions of those who practice medicine anymore.
The previous one said that the healers of gold are most useful because of their worth and for the quality of its substance.
And they said that the healers of fire do not cause harm but are not seen because I have tried it and found it to be true in any case.
The healers of gold are most useful when compared with the one who said that. And whenever you touch with a tool of gold, you will not know how hot it becomes when put into the fire, and so it will be very cold.
if you heat it too much in the fire and when heated enough
Or you have ordered the first chapter to be read more slowly, so that it may be easier to find its meaning.
"The cautery of the liver is painful and cold, due to one disease called 'soda', and by the cause of many humors arising from two veins, and from ears, and through much pain in limbs and throat, and especially for all diseases that come from a chill as paralysis, stroke, and similar maladies.
the fire cure is that the hairs are burned away by a solvent ointment that makes the skin insensitive to pain for three days or two weeks depending on how often it's applied, relieving the itchiness and easing the soreness of the affected area. after which the affected area is treated again with an anti-itch cream.
and then hold it between your hands so that it is neither too hot nor too cold.
after putting the base of your thumb against the base of his nose between his two eyes. and if you squeeze it too much then apply the cure which is called "olive oil", of course this is how it works. And let your left arm rest on the ground gently and gently remove it. Then take your hand from there and see if you can feel the bone just a little bit If you don't feel it, then apply the cautery as I have told you to do, so long as you can feel the bone as I instructed you.
After removing some of the outer layer, place a warm and soft cotton cloth over it, then put on top of it and leave for three days.
After placing the cotton wool in the burrow. And let it be as dry as possible. After treating the wound with Tetracin, until it is healed completely.
And they realized that if you delay treatment for a longer period of time, the infection will spread more rapidly. 
And they said none of these that one should apply the cautery so much that part of the bone is burnt, and then seek healing for what was burned from the bone, or both.
And he also said that one must apply it gently against the bone and hit as hard as possible to break away a large part of the flesh, like how women do when they shave their legs.
And you should hold onto the wound for a long time after applying it. After using it, one must rest and recover.
And these two methods of cauterization do not seem to be good for everyone, but rather only in people who have experienced fear.
I think you should leave it as is.
because the dislocated joint may be further injured by continued natural treatments, like how our other joints are affected.
And I mean that when the dislocated shoulder joint is weak by nature, and the first step of treatment seems gentler and milder for me, then you should use it as well.
"When chronic pain arises and lasts for a long time, it's advisable to use creams and pills known as 'chouches', which help alleviate chronic pain. And when performing the fire cautery that we mentioned earlier, they will not move until they grow. When a dislocation occurs due to a strong force and it is too cold If the fire cautery does not work as we mentioned earlier, perform another one slightly later. After performing the fire cautery on a joint near to the bone as mentioned earlier, perform another one using 'vassels'. And once in while we put bandages around it. And gently hold your hand when you're near the bone so that it doesn't move. The hair on the patient will hurt more in this fire cautery than in others and I will speak to them later.
And it is preferable to use more subtle cauterization than that used for the main vein.
The first sentence translates to "the fire cautery. When one part of the chief comes with sudden pain and spreads to an illness near by, and dislocations are purged through multiple remedies, I have described the treatments in the section about diseases; nothing else matters. However it is preferable to use more subtle cauterization than that used for the main vein.
If you want to treat a dislocation by using cauterization, first make sure the abscess and wound are clean, then apply it in such a way that you can straighten out the dislocation without causing further injury.
Once it is properly set, if both the fire and the patient are calm for twelve hours; Then treat and heal the dislocation in three days or less. As soon as you put it in a barrel, pour water on it until soaked through.
After the application of ointment when it has dried
And if you have any other medications that I have written about or remedies to treat the burning medicine, please do tell me.
The fire cautery is as described. "Fire it up!
And you call "close" because the shape is that of a cloth or it has a small appearance;
And put some oil on the sore place and hold your hand steady while gently rubbing it a little bit until you feel that it has completely dried off.
And gently wipe away any remaining oil that may still be there and treat the wound with plenty of ointment.
After putting cotton on it, put some on the sore place by rubbing it a few times; "And when healing is complete, keep the affected area moist.
"You should burn the wound with a cautery at its tip and be careful not to cut into any nearby arteries.
evacuation
"When treating an abscess as we have described earlier in divisions of illnesses, and don't worry too much, and remember that the cautery used for medicine should not harm you. As long as it is applied gently.
"And when healing an abscess as we have described earlier in divisions of illnesses, and stretch it gently for half a day, then apply pressure once, and make sure you do not cut into the artery or the bone.
"And remember to close the mouth when you get it, and if you sneeze or cough, keep your mouth closed so they do not damage the artery. Also, be careful of any pain in closing the artery, as there may be great fear and especially for those who are inexperienced. And let loose your grip
But I will tell you how to cure the wound when it is burned, and show you where it hurts in this book.
And if the cautery does not help to relieve the pain or wounds have already festered, then cauterize it as we said and treat the wound until it is healed.
And if you see that the cautery we mentioned in the chapter on the artery extraction with its attendant pain is not working, It would be better to use a more effective cautery.
Of pain from the ears of hearing loss
When the ear comes to pain from cold, and one applies remedies of solutions and other treatments that we have mentioned in this division, the pains cease, unless there is a fire therapy that is called "pins," where it forms like this.
After puncturing the ear canal all the way through or puncturing both ears at once and feeling around for the root of the ear, then you should remove it with tweezers. It is important to do this puncturing in each ear separately.
After curing the wound as soon as possible
Of mouth torture
Torture that needs to be cured by fire is not among those that move blood.
And do not perform any cauterization like those that come from burning and tearing of the nerves.
When curing this type of torture that moves the veins and the abdomen and the throat, but it is not worth it if you do not cauterize the third vein. The first one in the root of the ear, and the second a short way from the temple, and the third between the two veins;
And place the fire on that part which is open and make a burn at the base of the ear next to some hair by the corner of the nose, another in the temple as far along as one inch. And let the fire cure as long as you may, whether it be short or long.
This is how the cure works:
And there are also differences in cutting techniques we have seen before, but it is slightly more subtle and the incision should be a bit wider.
After applying the cure as I said earlier, until he is righted.
When a stroke occurs and you treat it as we have said, he does not benefit immediately, and the limbs do not recover until several cures are performed. And in the two ears of the head, and in the ear that is called a "shell," as we have said earlier, and the doctor performs the cure on the mouth of the stomach.
And it should be performed like what we have described before.
Of concern
This ailment affects both men and women, causing great swelling of the head.
After removing the main abscess, then perform an excision (surgical removal) of any remaining abscesses.
This is how to cauterize: If you have done as I said.
If it's healthy and stable, good; And if it is not healthy and unstable, perform three cauterizations.
Treat this as you would with the others, if you see it again and again causing harm, perform one cauterization in each place. And if two others appear on the second horns and remain healthy;
If it is a cautery that is called "olive," perform as I have said before.
It is advisable to check if the head has been moved correctly or not.
After removing the abscess and cleaning all the wounds around it, use a cautery to burn off any remaining tissue on top of the wound.
And if it seems too painful and the face is swollen and the wounds are infected, then use a second cautery on top of the previous one. Let it grow as long as you can hold your hand steady while doing so. After the treatment is complete and everything seems alright, call upon those who are called "oliveiras" as we have mentioned before.
of the elbow
The elbow joints should not be treated with fire until they are inflamed, and it is advisable first to massage the area around them and other treatments as mentioned in the previous paragraph regarding large and swollen tendons of the arm.
And if someone needs to be fed and cannot swallow, feed them with boiled meat.
After removing the abscess from its place, use a cautery similar to what we have mentioned before and another one on top of it. And the patient's eyelids should be kept open and soft, as I advised those who had paralysis of their eyes to keep them open and moist, with two drops and two cloths, and let the cautery oil be applied according to the manner in which I have described it.
If the tendons are inflamed, you should apply the fire treatment gently in this manner:
For the melancholic's ailment, apply the same cautery that we have described to those paralyzed by paralysis.
And when the cause of melancholy is declining with melancholy, and the body's hair becomes moist, causing it to become dizzy as if spinning around; this may occur due to the division taking place within.
After removing the eye patch. after making sure everything is in order as described, if you put on the new bandage
and make sure both eyes are kept tightly closed to prevent any leakage.
after applying the new bandage, you should remove all old bandages. and quickly apply fire to the forehead so that it does not hurt those who are being treated for burns after securing the new bandage with two layers of cloth on top, let it cool down.
and do so to each eye patch every week with another application of ointment, as long as they are healed.
"You shall burn through by piercing it more often than not.
This manner of cautery instructs the patient to let their beards grow long and even.
And then it applies a layer of tallow or grease in order to protect against any slippage during healing.
from the eyes When the first signs of doubt and fear occur in the beginning of treatment, as soon as blood is lost or there is excessive bleeding, and if the wound worsens over time, it must be treated more often.
After instructing him to recline his head and perform the fire cautery on his scalp, it then applies a second layer of cautery to both temples in order to hold them steady while they heal.
And covers the cautery all over the veins and arteries which are exposed by shaving them close to the temples.
And beware of excessive bleeding, if you see too much blood flow like this.
I will teach you how to extract veins and make incisions in the cautery as well, so that you may hold it steady.
And no matter where the cautery or hemorrhage occurs, do not cut off circulation of the legs at all.
And it is observed that these are frozen and milky fluids which indicate the cautery I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter. Cauterize his head, then both temples, and lastly cauterize behind each ear. And if there is one more, if necessary, it should be cauterized at the very edge of the wound in small areas.
When administering these remedies as we have explained, he will not benefit unless there is no bleeding from the third wound. After cauterizing his head, cauterize both temples. And perform cauteries on the two branches called "clavicles" behind each ear lobe just above the ears.
And guard the artery so that you do not touch it.
And this form of cautery is called "clavicle":
When the paper of the oil becomes softened by disease and moisture, then apply the cautery that is called "olivary": This form is:
And if you see two ulcers, treat them as described above in the text:
Do not let go of your hand until another part of paper is burned according to what I have said.
two hairs that touch oil There will never be a time that the hairs of the eyebrows are shaved and prick at the eye; it is done according to two ways. This refers to cautery either by fire or by burning medicine.
The fire cauterization instructs the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; And if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so that they do not move until they grow.
When they are newborn and blind, apply the medicine to their eye After applying a bandage with bristles as soft as those from linen, or with feathers for the hair:
And then apply a fire-cautery paste made from flour and pitch on the wound area.
After cauterizing it once or twice, ensure that the wounds are well sealed off in their place;
And then apply a bandage to cover it and pull the hairs back from the wound area.
Once you've finished applying the paste, let it sit for 3 hours, then apply a bandage as described previously. After performing the incision treatment until it is healed.
And after that, if the hairs and bandage soften up again with each subsequent application of the paste:
And let the hairs grow long and even, if the fire cautery is applied as it should be lifted to its original state, whether long or short, and do not prick at their base.
The treatment of this medical cautery is to instruct the patient to let their hairs grow long and even, then make a bandage in the shape of an onion leaf.
Then apply French soap and live vinegar, one at a time, and grind them together well; And apply it quickly, if it does not cool down, then apply it in the shape you have made as a leaf of an onion, and put on top of the bandage. And hold the disease only if one burns it, or both at once; Then apply oil cotton moistened with vinegar in a bandage.
And the dislocated shoulder is in its place and holds tight to both arms as it receives treatment from a doctor, pressing tightly against everything that feels like fire because of the pain
After completing this procedure for a prolonged period of time if the patient still experiences pain then medical attention should be sought And when the burning sensation is gone if you release it and see the paper moved as though it was released either by the heat or an incision If true, then good.
Then continue with the medical treatment for another joint or if the previous one did not work and your wounds are still inflamed and you cannot move them anymore.
Then apply pressure with a bandage tightly until the affected area is numb and after treating one of the joints as described above, keep applying pressure to all of them until they are numbed up.
This sentence translates to: "And it is better if you treat your wounds properly with great care, so that they do not become infected.
And when the paper becomes soft after and the hairs prick with oil, if you resume treatment for that joint properly, similarly to how you have done it before; After the cure as long as he remains sane
This is the way of death's fall
And each one of these is different in size and extent, depending on how much they constrain you.
Do not take the right way for those who have mastered this art.
cure for fistula by cautery
When curing a fistula as we have mentioned in previous lines of treatment, and your treatments are not effective, it is advisable to perform the cautery in this manner.
Instruct the patient to put his head in a straight position and tighten your hands around his head so it does not move or cause discomfort.
After placing the cloth on a hot surface, or the heated oil of the stove;
after burning the cautery that is over.
and hold his head steady as if holding a piece of wood, tightening it if necessary.
If you see that one side is hotter than the other, and if both sides are equally hot as a tent;
But whenever there is doubt or fear, many die
After pressing the fistula it should be opened up and treated with care And if closed again, sew up the wound carefully
After applying the caustic poultice, hold your hand steady on it in order to avoid touching any other part of the body with your hands. And apply the caustic poultice over fat or skin, and soften
At the beginning of the cautery procedure for the eye, it would do well. But if you suspect another lesion has occurred while still holding it in place, repeat the process a third time.
After washing the poultice with vinegar and allowing it to dry, cure the abscess as long as it remains intact, passing three times if it is torn. "And let him rest according to what his physician advised.
And there is a manner of fistula cautery which none of them knew before. "He opens the fistula, and cleanses it. "After cleansing, he applies a bandage in a gentle manner as to what kind of form this is. "And then puts on the amount of one bandage. "Then hold your hand tightly or firmly so that his eyelids do not move and remain steady until the base of eyelashes is reached.
"And then he covers up the eye with moist cloth, or if it burns, in oil.
"The fistula is left open and kept clean as possible.
And if you prick at their base If not, administer a numbing agent to the area and bring the fistula back into place as soon as possible.
incisions There are often multiple cuts in a vein that are referred to as "hairs," and additionally at birth.
After cutting these veins according to what we have said in sections, and after treating them well but not excessively with a narrow cut like this one
"Then he keeps it moist until it becomes dry, so to speak.
"After the healing process is complete and fistula is healed.
When an abscess is opened or pierced through the root of the tooth, after doing so there will be pus and discharge and it becomes inflamed and forms a fistula. And you treat him as we have described in sections, but he does not benefit from it unless you apply the cautery according to the size of the fistula; After piercing or opening a fistula, hold your hand steady until it grows larger than that which you see.
and do this once more after the treatment as described in healing, as long as he is stable.
If it becomes stable then that's good And if not, find the source and remove the affected part according to what is written in your medical book.
When the gums are softened by moisture and they move, and you treat them with medications which do not work, then put a cautery on the affected part. After applying the cautery, if you find a vein there after some time in any manner that you cut it off with the knife.
And keep applying the cautery gently until all the hairs around the base of the tooth are singed or burned off
After gently holding your hand and repeating the cautery as per your will.
After the patient has opened their mouth widely, they hold it for a short while to allow the cautery's heat to singe or burn off all hairs in the mouth.
And in that way you make the limbs stop moving if they are softened by moisture and the veins stiffen up
from the pain of the limbs
If pain arises from coldness or chilliness, whether it is due to the cold itself or from another cause, and medical treatments are not effective at this point, then apply the cautery in these ways: Apply burns or fires.
Cautery of fire should be applied so that it leaves a charred mark on the skin and the tip in an iron or steel blade. After wrapping cotton around it and tying a knot at the tip of a needle, and putting it into the painful tooth that stings until it's cooled off
And as long as its bristles grow to the base of the tooth and you tie a knot at the tip in wet cotton that shivers, then put it into the pain-causing tooth that stings until it's cooled off.
The fire cautery is assembled so that you use either iron or steel as long as the bristles don't grow into the mouth of the patient.
After applying the fire cautery, after which it is applied and held against the tooth and you hold your hand as long as the cautery remains cool.
You do this because the pain will be worse if done now or tomorrow.
And it is recommended to place a bandage over her mouth when performing the treatment, as well.
The form of the treatment is:
And perform the treatment in the way you choose and according to your ability.
The form of the cane is:
"softness of the ear When the scalpels are of cold and moist origin, and do not absorb nutrients through medicines, after the treatment is complete let it be treated with fire to dry off, as well as covering the wounds on both sides by applying the fire from another part.
Apply fire to the abscess once, or until it is completely healed in front of the abscess.
The abscess will be measured and left open for three times if a treatment is applied according to its quantity, as well as the number of times it was opened. "Instruct the patient to keep their hair long and even, while...
"...and after curing any wounds or injuries.
When the veins are pricked by moisture and especially when it comes from a cold object, then you must first cleanse the area with cleansing solutions.
After applying fire to the base of the throat and ensuring it doesn't touch the throat itself, you must guard against touching it with anything else for a short time only.
After applying fire to the joint of the thumb and forefinger, also called "clavicle" as we have experienced.
"...and after curing it as described previously.
When all the diseases of moisture are cold and the hairs are dry, and they have no fever or sore, then apply fire to the affected areas. And another cautery for the fingertips between two nails
and those who are called 'clavicle' according to its shape that is in front of it.
And if you see one, perform the cautery by puncturing through to the cautery called 'pricks' as its shape is in front of it on the disease of the ears.
and those pricks at 'XXX', or wherever.
After curing it according to what is shown here, and perform the third cautery where this form exists
And because they are more severe, I will make three attempts to cure them
the shoulder
When the shoulder joint dislocates due to moisture and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movements as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. After having shaved the hairs on his back and chest; after gently removing any remaining stubble that itches your hands will be left.
and the connection is dissolved if you remove the cautery whose shape is in front of it;
And cauterize this hair as long as you pierce through to the chest area and will come together with all four cauteries.
"And because it is done with the fire cautery as there are three needles, each cautery has three needles.
"The nerve according to its subtlety and shape of the cautery needle as it has 3 types:
And once dislocated at this time of nerve
"After placing the cautery, burn with oil. "After putting down the patient, do not let his limbs lie stretched out as long as he is comfortable.
If dislocated, you should apply a cold compress to ease tension on the affected limb and then reapply heat as needed for a broken bone or other pain
The joint is reset, and it relieves moisture and soothes the muscles.
When the stomach is full of cold and moisture, it causes shivering and increases heartburns; and the usual methods for treatment are not effective, until the muscles of the abdomen are supported with its back, extending its legs and arms. "After doing the three needles in the hollow of his elbow for the amount of two, all the clavicular cautery and two cauteries on either side as long as the figures of the needles are at 3 angles, and there is space between each other so they do not join together when they get tired.
"And the cautery needle should burn equally on both sides of it, and its shape according to this form as mentioned earlier:
And if you apply a large cautery to the stomach in this manner
If someone is afraid of the cautery, apply it gently and hold their stomach in place according to how much you applied Then continue with the points called "cauteries".
After curing the illness we had previously experienced, as long as they are healthy
The liver experiences pain from fruit and moisture, especially when it is exposed to its natural environment. The wounds are treated with the same method we have mentioned in sections, and it is not beneficial if the wound is sewn up. Apply the third cautery in this manner and form and quantity to the liver, causing pain that makes the patient cry out loud.
And also between each cautery there should be a pause of two units; "And let them grow long on both sides, do not force your hand to touch it at all.
"And only have the eyes stay steady and do not move their eyelids.
"If he is unable to control it if it seizes him up, extends his legs, and gently stretches his arms.
"And if you become entangled in the fire's fire and find yourself struggling to escape, be subtle and use your wits, and remember that you should not try to escape at all costs as it will cause great harm. "And if he has lost his wits because of the smoke and is becoming disoriented or can't see clearly.
"When you hear it being pulled at the liver, be sure to determine if it's in the vein or out of it: The shoulder is dislocated with great pain, causing it to move too much.
And if it's in a sling, the pain subsides.
When this treatment is applied to the eyes, they must be covered with gauze or bandage.
Then seal the wound where the abscess was, and then apply the fire cure as described earlier The burn treatment should be applied until all wounds have healed and closed properly.
After applying the fire cure, apply the treatment for sores as long as necessary.
It is not suitable that the fire cure be used on any patient who has not studied extensively in the art of medicine, and through whose hands these diseases have never been cured.
"And when you really try it, everything seems to indicate leaving it.
several
The physician said that many fire cures should be applied separately, one at a time in this manner Take a root from a long and tall tree, make it dry, and cut it into smaller pieces that are all the same size as your two. And anoint with oil and set it on fire, and cauterize between the roots of the hair itself and the scalp (forehead), so that you burn only the hairs, but not the scalp.
And cauterize between the fifth part and sixth, receding from behind a bit; And I cauterize the middle one between the esophagus and stomach, and at two spaces (intercostal), making a space for another cautery that is between these spaces;
Do not press your hand too tightly here as you would when smelling.
And no one before mentioned that anyone uses the fire cautery similarly to shaving and putting it between the lips until it reaches the head. And if they prick at their base
But with this ointment it is fear or the sores die now, or a fistula comes and cannot be healed
of mice
When curing the disease of the mice from what we have said about various treatments, and it does not work at all unless you use the third method of fire which is beneficial.
"If you are performing a fire blister treatment, or if there is a doubt and fear of death, perform the procedure with three cuts instead of four.
Do not apply your hand all over the blister at once, but rather place it on one side.
"Another way to perform the treatment is if you suspect that there are two dislocations in the shoulder.
"And gently lift the arm where it is dislocated and let loose any tension that may be holding it in place; then hold down on both shoulders as you stretch to release pressure from them.
"After performing the treatment on both sides until one arm is free and loose from tension, then perform it on the remaining side.
"And if you see blisters when cauterizing with the third degree fire.
After the treatment with long tongs has been applied and it is evident that another dose of treatment will be necessary.
The cautery should not be applied to the eyelid because it is done in this manner called "asclytes.
"And when you perform treatments in the manner we have described in sections, and your treatment is not helpful, then it's advisable to apply four cauterizations at once, one on each of: the stomach, the liver, the intestines, and two behind the back over the spine. "And make sure they are well pressed near the esophagus as well.
"After removing it from the affected area, do not allow the patient to continue with any other treatment after the cauterization. "Surgical intervention will be required and there should be an assembly of all necessary items under God's guidance.
"The form of the cauterization for the abdomen can also be applied to the collarbone as we have previously mentioned. And when you put him on his side as he lies
When the toes are swollen on one who is dropsical and painful to touch, it's advisable that you cauterize between the auricular and ulnar nerves. And gently hold your hand with the cautery as you apply it.
And do not enter me too quickly; if the bleeding is severe, then burn them according to this shape.
After applying the second cauterization to both legs at the point of the sciatic nerve; and have one done facing forward on the left leg and another backwards on the right leg.
And let the cauterizations stay on for quite some time so that they heal properly, as it says in your text.
After applying all the other procedures we have mentioned.
When stomach treatment comes from cold and moisture, so long as the heat-retaining and digestive functions of the stomach and intestines are active, it cannot be treated through curative methods; "The patient should feel the stomach burning fiercely and intensely if they are undergoing a stomach fire treatment, whether that is externally applied or internally. "The second part of the sentence translates to: 'And for the stomach and gallbladder fire treatment, apply it gently on all surfaces; also apply it to the fingernails.'
If you see the patient with abundant moisture and pain, if one applies fire on the fingertip, or on each eyelid, then apply two fire cures to the stomach; for this treatment is beneficial when it has some effect.
The cure of hemorrhoids
"When the hemorrhoids are deep and numerous, old, and filled with cold and damp phlegm, treated like division wounds; it is a painful treatment if done incorrectly. "The third part of the sentence translates to: 'For the spine, do it slowly over time in a zigzagging motion on both sides.'
"And if you think the stomach is cold and feels numb, and see swelling in the face, then apply fire on the stomach as described earlier, or to the liver, and another to all the surfaces of the gallbladder. "And let the patient endure the fire for a while. After curing the wound as much as possible
When you apply the ointment that seems to be strong, and then wrap it around where it was applied. And let your hand stay as long as the fire takes hold of the vein until there is no pain.
Do this once or twice, and if it happens to any other place that was also mentioned earlier, then cauterize there as well. After treating the wounds, hold them steady until they are completely healed.
And if you use a strong fire cure on both ears, it will have much more help.
If the wounds do not respond to treatment and are causing illness that cannot be cured through cautery, then we will discuss its nature in our next chapter, as this may require additional treatments
If no fistula comes out and is inflamed and infected with corrupted fluids, then try to gently squeeze it until pus pours out and the tent remains tight as possible.
After applying the ointment that seems to be strong and then wrapping it around where it was applied in a certain quantity of times, repeat the cure as long as blisters and sores are red and inflamed.
"And hold tight to the nerve endings,
"It entered through the fistula in the chest and abdomen. If you feel it coming, hold tight and do not move until relieved, understanding that it may be dangerous.
"After healing has taken place as much as possible, the wounds should be healed completely and without leaving any trace.
"And if the matter is not entirely resolved, it may cause further harm to the patient's body. And in that case, we will speak with one of our doctors about it.
"When pain from fruit comes and causes great swelling, do not press on or against anything except the painful area of one side and the other of the shoulder as we have mentioned before.
"In a heated environment, if there are three cautery sessions, they will provide greater assistance.
of "If the bladder is weak and fragile from fruit juice and moisture, if urine adheres to the hairs at their base, then when performing a cautery on that part of the bladder, where they prick with a needle, both will be done with great effort and struggle, or if there are three sessions.
"And if you perform the cautery on his back, then he is in distress.
"Or do the cauterization of the arm according to the form I mentioned.
"When the marrow is cold and moist, it cannot conceive and its flowers are corrupted and nearing death; "And when they come, if great pain is felt. "Then you should perform three cauterization sessions for the bladder and one on his back;
And if you're referring to the dislocation of the shoulder?
When moisture accumulates in the joint cavity, and as a result of this, it loses its place, and the sign is that one arm is longer than the other when measured together.
And if you want to cauterize the abscess in the arm cavity, cauterize the same spot on the neck as well, and ensure that when tightened, the circle is closed so that there are no gaps between them.
And if you're referring to cauterizing the stomach?
And if they are not present, you must perform three additional cauterizations on the greater omentum, and do so in exactly the same manner as all previous ones.
Treat it until it is healthy.
From the pain of the limb "The pain comes in the wrist of the hand, and it is from coldness and moisture, and the muscles are treated with what we have mentioned in the previous paragraph. "It's important to cleanse the large and fatty lumps that come from pills or other similar pills. "After the fire treatment
"and if a fire treatment method is used, it should be as follows: "This involves using burning medicine to treat the cautery.
"The fire cautery may be performed in various ways, one of which is:
"You may perform the triangular cautery on a wrist by making three incisions in that shape and performing it deeply and strongly. It is between each cautery to find the depth of one and if you do an olive cautery.
In the case of any dislocation due to loosening or overextension, when the joint is out of place,
if you apply fire cure as described in resetting the dislocation.
But do it in such a way that the circle covers all of the joint and any surrounding areas.
And this is how it's done in surgery, when the pain persists at the incision site, and cannot be controlled by just using the wrist or the leg.
And if the dislocation occurs in the shoulder and arm, then apply two fire cures at points where they hurt most, and also cut into the elbow area.
Either perform a superficial burn or cut out some surrounding tissue.
And if the pain spreads to two or more points on either side of where it started, then apply fire cure at those three or four spots called "points". But when healing is slow, do as much as you can.
And make sure to apply the same caution as in all your previous burns that you do not let go of it until the burn has healed completely and no longer causes any harm or irritation.
"And I myself have experienced many who underwent cauterization on their shoulder, and it let the hairs grow until the leg was completely shaved, and pierced them so, and they were burned up to that point. After a belly incision which led to death
The pain was in two parts that were both cauterized separately according to this manner.
And when performing the cautery on a vein, whether it is large or small, make sure to do so carefully between two points, and avoid puncturing them simultaneously with equal force, lest you cause damage.
And when performing the cautery on both arms or legs, make sure to do so in exactly the same manner as before, making sure that each burn is performed correctly.
It's done like this
And after applying the cautery ointment as instructed earlier, apply a bandage over the burned area of the vein.
Once heated with fire, once cooled it remains And leave the wound open until it heals. After cutting an abscess as long as it is healed
It says that we use this fire cure with caution due to its harshness, and we want those who do not
Those using the fire cure should be cautious as it can cause suffering, and may lead to death if used improperly
Cauterizing with extreme heat should be done when you have between the thumb and forefinger an inch of space to spare on one side either iron or steel for a long time, until the flesh around it becomes white in color, as this shows that the cautery is complete. And they should be applied evenly and together in this form:
After applying the ointment to the burned area on your hand, press down firmly onto it with your other hand. After applying the hot cream which is both on fire and soot-covered to between the two circles of your hand, let it rest for an hour then wash off the heat and redness.
For a burn like this one with fire.
And when the burns have healed enough, gently wipe your hand with a soft cloth and wash off the soot from the burn as much as possible. Then let it rest for three days to prevent infection in it;
And afterwards, you would give them the best care after the treatment of wounds as long as they are healthy.
And if the pain extends to your shoulder or leg, use a cloth that is warm according to what you did with the burn previously;
"The matter of cautery is to instruct the patient how to let their hairs grow long and even; if they prick at their base, hold them steady so they do not move until they grow. Break it gently and crush all together, then put into new pots "If a needle is inserted into it to pierce through the skin.
"If a needle is inserted into it to pierce through the skin. "And in the second place, he should make a small incision to get at both the white and black powders separately, as much as it is necessary to take them out with your own hand.
"And once that is done and he has taken out both the white and black powders separately, then take all of them away, and place them with the salt if necessary.
"And when that is done, he should continue to administer medicines as before, and practice other cauteries on different parts of the body.
"This treatment is for when the other medicines have not been effective; if you should cauterize the vein along with these and meanders of the heart and vessels mixed with soap, all of them combined.
It tells of a remedy that someone had tried for the pain in the stomach and veins; he said there was no other remedy, and when it was done once, they were washed as instructed afterwards.
And place it in a manner that the left leg presses against the chest and shoulder, and the right leg also presses against the back of the body.
And leave it for three hours while making sure no pain is felt anymore from that point on
And then let them enter into a hot bath until their nerves are calmed and relaxed.
Do not use such fire cauteries after the evacuation of wounds.
If a vein has been cauterized due to injury, if necessary
It must be done in that manner. Take a thread soaked in oil, and place it between the finger that is closer to your thumb and the one closest to your index finger.
After removing the burnt flesh and applying fire until it is charred completely, then place it on the linen cloth and leave it for as long as it remains burned.
And repeat this process until you feel that the flesh is no longer stinging or hurting.
The method of cauterization mentioned as 'cautere de fiens' refers to cauterizing with a heated iron tool, often used in medieval medical practices.
from the two pains
When pain comes to the back, whether by sprain or impact, or from excessive cold evacuation, or from exposure of cold material, none of these pains is worth cauterizing because one who has just suffered from exposure to cold matter.
After applying a cold compress to the area where the pain arises from, if the pain persists for three lines after that, seek medical attention.
And perform the cauterization as described in "pricks" (puncture).
And if you see it frequently, do three or four prickles to the corresponding area depending on this way.
This disease often comes in children, and the signs of its onset are that it causes paralysis when it strikes, or fear. You treat it by applying a cold compress to both ends and observing the appearance of other sores.
When you see this and it seems to be cured after cautery for the cautery of the flesh according to that form If only part of the skin is treated with the red cauterization
And if you see that cautery on an area of skin for two or three lines and have pins pressed to one another's sides.
After the treatment as much as it is sane according to what we have said, and be sure not to administer any cautery in excess which may cause nerve damage.
of joint pain
When pain arises in joints due to moisture spreading throughout the limbs of the body, and when pain comes from piercing, they call upon "podagre" properly. And if it is a cold cause that cannot be cured by medicines, seek treatment with cauterization as follows:
"Fire cauterization" for the joint. If it is performed correctly like this way
If you prick at its base, apply the cautery over it. And if the pain continues to grow and in other joints as well, which often happens, then perform a fire cautery on every single joint.
And if you do better and continue to apply it more, then hold your hand steady only until the swelling is gone from that area.
If the pain continues and on either side, apply the cautery as we have instructed in this chapter.
If the pain lasts longer than two hours.
And if there is no more pain after doing this on all joints and pulling out your hair from the hand,
And if the pain continues to increase or spread out over time and you perform a fire cautery on each joint and apply tight bandages and take medicine.
"If you apply pressure and the bleeding stops, only then will you have God's help.
When anger arises, it causes the veins to swell and is painful, so if you want to cure it, don't make moves until then. And if the belly becomes swollen because of abdominal pain, then hold off on making any movements.
After getting it between your hands, command him to squeeze its tail as long as the swelling is repaired and you hold on tight. Then release one hand and check for any further swelling or injury in that area.
After performing the fire cautery, remove it from there.
While being blunt and sharp he feels pain all over his body And release both hands and allow them to heal naturally. And command him not to move his hand back until it returns on its own.
And well heal the wounds of his legs, and place a poultice on top to help with swelling and pain in the thighs. Additionally, give him something to support his hands so they do not become cramped or numb due to any potential injury healing process.
After applying the cautery to all your fingers and toes, you should hold them tight and keep them that way until you straighten out the joint for the first time if it happens again, continuing as long as they remain attached to the bone. And gently remind yourself not to release your grip while performing the cautery. that you don't let go of them. And make sure they do not lose their grip, or sustain further harm.
And ensure that when you are performing the cautery procedure, your efforts will be in vain.
And it should be applied gently according to the size of children and firmly with larger individuals in mind.
After three or four days, remove the burn-like feeling from the cautery as it appears.
After treating other wounds until they are healed, and hold the area to be cauterized tight for a few more days as long as the wound is well-sealed.
"And it is advisable to keep them moist as much as possible so that they do not come out when he pulls them out of the chamber.
"After 40 days, when he wants to stand up again, bind his hands and feet securely with bandages.
"And if it becomes apparent that he is working too hard or becoming too thirsty and hungry from drinking excessive amounts of water and meat.
"When he completes this lesson, then completely healthy.
After the treatment is over
"When openings come in other areas and are inflamed, then bind them with a second cautery according to their size. And if the third one does not work, use another. "After the cure as stated before:
"And none of the old ones have said that one must cauterize at three points according to this shape.
First sew up the opening and place one line along the length of the incision; then another on the other side, cover it with cautery cloth all around
But first things first
The first thing to do is treat any injuries or pain that may already exist in When pain occurs in any member, whether from a scratch or a wound, and the pain continues to grow longer, so that cautery is recommended, and it is called a 'point', either cauterize the area thoroughly with a point of cautery such as those used for hemorrhoids, or cauterize smaller areas according to their length and thinness and tightness and weakness and location of the torcs and pain.
'If you have the first fire cure, then it is well.'
'If you are sick from one fire cure and want to try another, start with a second application on the same part of the body where it was applied earlier, so that all wounds may heal.'
The meshes are often treated with a cautery by great help, and most especially when disease comes from the putrefaction of blood and melancholy.
'Can you view the cauterizer? If it is a disease at the beginning and if it has been cured according to what we have said in that division, do not doubt or become weary, as you know that this wound will be healed without any difficulty provided you apply more cauterizers on its source.' 'We treat the head first and the other towards the forehead at the end of each side;' 'Then we apply to both ears, then behind it on the back.'
'And we hold so tightly that the cauterizers burn to the bone, and as long as the sores are kept still they cannot let out any of the large humours.'
"The patient must apply the cautery directly to where it is supposed to go.
"If there are no sores present everywhere, "then you must apply the cautery with these cauteries as described, or else hold it steady while applying it to other areas such as the eyes, nose, collarbone, and groin. "Apply it to the cheeks, temples of the ears, hands, fingers, and face, respectively.
"Wear a mask while applying it so that you do not burn your face.
"Do not apply the cautery to the bone of the arm or leg, nor to the stomach bone, nor to the liver.
"The more cauteries you use, the less you'll need help, and the greater your profit will be.
And if the hairs are pricked at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow
It's important for the fire cure to be both large and small depending on the size of the body parts and joints, as you will find this in various different ways.
After curing the ear with flour and honey and other remedies until it is healed.
And if the swelling comes in any limb and is treated with ointments and plasters, but does not subside, then an incision must be made into the member according to its size and smallness.
And if the cauterization continues for a short time inside the vein? Until it is healed.
And no cauterization should be done at the hand or back of the patient, and to any member that makes the limb stiff; except for when swelling occurs.
And no one should attempt this if they are not experienced with limbs and the veins moving, causing harm to themselves.
When the disease known as "albaras" is inflamed and the physician cannot find any relief through medicine, then cauterization with a small application should be done according to the quantity of the vein, until the swelling subsides and its color changes.
After applying flour paste and lentils with a mixture of onion and fig leaves, and cutting open abscesses and draining abscesses, apply the incision at the base, hold steady. Bind it all together with bandages or strips of cloth and keep it tight until healing is complete.
Treatment for an abscess by fire cautery
When a chancre appears at the beginning of it, you should arrest its growth if a fire cautery is performed around it completely.
And the surgeon says that you should apply fire cautery in the area around the abscess as well
and I think it's not a good idea because I believe he may ulcerate or become infected, so I want to avoid any such thing.
And further, it is more right that if you do use fire cautery, to avoid any other type of cautery unless otherwise specified in the text, as we have mentioned before about cauteries.
If someone has a disease that is called "adubelati", and it appears to be worsening or due to the excess of moisture when it becomes dried out, causing sores, or because the patient's strength decreases "and you must remember: "when performing cautery, do not prick the patient with any other application unless it is necessary. After leaving them alone. It will worsen.
If you prick all the cauteries at once, if your fire is too strong:
While applying the cautery to "adubelati" patients while holding steady their eyes until they feel the heat; keep them in that position as long as you continue cauterizing, and do it gently enough so the flow of mucus remains normal.
After the cure has been applied perfectly.
Another way to describe this ailment is that it "corrodes," and nothing more than a wasting away of limbs because they lose the strength in their legs.
If you see such a disease that may cause cautery to fail, do not apply the cautery too lightly or too broadly, according to what is necessary for its treatment.
After the cautery has removed all stains and there is nothing left to be cured, it will cure all corrupt things.
And then leave it for three days, and keep the affected area cauterized with oil until all the burns are healed, and any remaining corruption is removed.
After applying the remedy to the burnt areas on top of the charcoal powder.
And if you see after three times that healthy hair does not grow, it's good.
If this is the case, reapply the cautery to those who are suffering from corrupted veins.
And that treatment never cures a disease in place of fire cautery.
But every time there is a fire cure comes with greater aid, I've already mentioned the treatment of the disease in the section. Take what you have mastered
hairs that come to a point It often happens when the points of those hairs come off that there is a disease called "closed" according to our understanding, and it's a big thing that makes you bleed.
The cautery for this disease follows two ways. It is to know the fire cautery and hot water cautery.
The fire cure is that you shave it and it should be made of thin iron to penetrate the base of all hairs evenly.
After applying it on the hair shaft, hold your hand tightly around the hair until both ends grow equally long. And leave them as long as they continue to grow evenly without getting tangled up. Then apply a poultice of sweet vinegar on it and leave it overnight, covering it with a cloth so the roots will be protected from drying out.
"Prevent dislocation by keeping the joint straight as much as possible.
And if they are converted by fire and often happen to burn the skin and eyes, it is advisable that you apply a hot cure. And then it happens this way: Take a needle of iron or steel, or a thread of wool, and pierce the flesh with it at an angle. And then stick the needle in deep enough to pierce all the way through, and put some hot oil on it. Hold your hand tightly as you pull back the edge of the needle towards the base of the vein, so that the hot oil can flow right into the vein.
And let the pain subside a little after applying the hot oil for one hour; Then release it and it will remove all of its roots.
"After the hot iron treatment has been applied and removed as instructed, continue to apply heat on those affected areas until they heal.
If anyone has a cold or burning feeling in their spine or any other part of the body, if necessary you should apply four or five fire cauteries to between each vertebra. And instruct to burn or pierce through the liver's sheath.
If it causes shivering and pain in the cold disease symptoms.
No pus can be found anywhere on the body except for those on the skin, which come from corrupted substances.
If they appear to need a cautery on a pimple's head, a subtle cautery with fine needles to pierce so it is not too painful or fiery, or deep into the root of the abscess, or to the lenticular cautery.
And never cauterize at the beginning when they appear, in this manner, and do not harm them further but heal their wounds.
But it is best to perform this after evacuating the abscess.
There are many great losses from sores on the artery that is cut into the wound coming from elsewhere, or at the incision of the abscess, or to the cautery in one's body part, and similar things. "And it causes great suffering
"And whenever this occurs without any doubt, if you put your two fingers over the wound and hold them steady until they stop moving on their own.
"Then apply the olive cautery and hold it onto the affected skin as long as it remains red.
"Then apply the cautery on one or both sides of the affected area according to how much it hurts and where the artery is located, hold the cautery steady until you no longer feel any pain.
"And if it happens while you are pressing your finger against the vein and the cautery tool is still hot, then apply more frequent applications of the burning cautery until all pain subsides.
"Do not stop doing this one after another as long as it continues to provide relief;
"And make sure you do not harm the nerve or any other part of the wound.
"And make sure if you accidentally cut the artery, it's impossible to stop the bleeding even more quickly than in one of these methods that we mentioned. "Either by fire or extraction as it is not treated well, or by applying force to draw out the arrow, or by using medicines that can only heal wounds, And then there will be stiffness and restraint.
Who will treat with gentleness of dressing or cutting things that are sharp on the body, or other similar things, he won't benefit from it at all
If there is no treatment or medicine available, you must first apply your finger to the wound on the vein and then gently stretch it until both are healed. And do not move your finger, but keep it moist with cold water so that it does not freeze and become stiff until both are healed.
Do this first thing before you start any cure or medicine.
We have told in the first chapter all about diseases and how to use fire cure or medicine of heat or cold and ask questions and answers and reasons for treatments.
And I shall proceed to this chapter in the same manner as before for it is still necessary and more easily understood.
"Furthermore, in this chapter there is more risk and fear than when performing the fire therapy, so it's advisable to use greater caution.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, similar things. where there is doubt and fear, many die
"I advise you not to make a mistake. "Different people come for treatment. if it comes from such severity of their illness that they die easily due to the ferocity and great size of their malice; And so one has fear.
and these I give you my sense, and say "Listen, I am the way."; The disease is severe
But please be mindful of these that come to you with this manner but make greater caution in your own actions, and do not rush unnecessarily into anything for which you are uncertain.
And use prognosis and indications when treating wounds to ensure recovery of health.
This will help you achieve your goal, honor, and memory for long time.
Dear friends, our dear superiors require a solemn and correct interpretation, and may the Holy Spirit inspire you with its gentle guidance through your hands, Amen.
I have ordered this chapter to be read by the doctors as they are the ones who perform cauteries; for it is in their hands where one can find more lightly what one ought to know best.
This disease comes many times in childhood when the child is shaken too hard.
And no time comes from a reason repeated that it does not occur.
And I do not see this disease in only children and many times have seen those who had died from it. So, for this reason, I think that it is worth to leave the chapter of treatment in order to move on to other chapters.
And when the dislocation was fresh from injury
and as a result of this moisture, the bones were separated and moved around the joint
and the swelling from this moisture is between the bones and the joint, and the tendons are stretched, causing a severe sprain.
And as long as there is this moisture
or until it becomes unbearable
When the moisture is greater, and the abscess is larger, if you pierce through with a cross-cut method as follows
And if the moisture is severe enough to damage the joint and see swelling in the tendons of both hands that have been stretched, it may cause immediate injury If you want to reset a dislocated shoulder this way
After incision is complete, moisture has been removed. After holding the arms and applying oil or fat, and letting it be for five minutes.
After applying cold compresses and ointments to the affected area, leave it to heal with dry heat as long as the limb is relaxed and healthy.
And another way of incision would be to cut towards the larger part of the abscess and gather in the edge.
where there is no doubt or fear every time behind. never on the left. and never towards the front.
When cutting into an abscess, gather in the edge while applying pressure to prevent bleeding and ensure proper alignment.
And make sure you do not cut through the artery. And be cautious of the pain that may occur if an abscess bursts and blood is evacuated excessively due to moisture.
"When someone has a disease that affects the eyes or ears, and it is serious, and treatment with medicine does not help at all, except for cauterization of the vessels.
It is necessary to ensure that all veins are covered with bandage, as they must remain still until their wounds heal. After wiping off the top of his head with a rough cloth that the veins are exposed, then bind up the wounds tightly with one bandage. Then look at which vein is bleeding and close off both ends of it after the ears have been pierced through.
After closing the veins off, tie one end to each of two thin strings made from catgut as tightly as possible around the wound; and whenever it reaches the bone or any other hard part.
"And if you see a vein and an artery connected together, then cut them apart as I just mentioned.
And when the veins are opened continuously for too long, it is necessary to stop this procedure.
And the artery will not open if it feels, so measure out three times to ensure that you have done so accurately. Then seal and stitch up the wound;
And it is necessary to make a few cuts away from six or seven centimeters, depending on how much the patient may suffer and the artery's fullness.
"Look at the wound: If the wound remains at the base of the finger where sutures are not in place, then apply pressure and hold it tightly until it is healed.
In other words, you are asking me for an When you sneeze or cough, the moisture in your eyes and sinuses can cause inflammation of the nasal mucosa and similar things, which is treated with remedies for colds and all that does not benefit me if arteries in the nose are cautorized as we have experienced.
And the method for removing them is to shave off their eyebrows and go near an artery in the temple as it beats well with its pulse, but one must be very careful not to cut through veins.
And when she is healed and has removed the arrowhead, then wipe off any remaining blood from her temple, and apply a warm compress to the wound until it shows clearly that an artery has been pierced. Then take a small sponge soaked in water as follows: Then gently scrub the area until you see clearly into an artery, then wipe it off with several cloths and clean all of them thoroughly.
"The dislocation occurs gradually if it moves towards its end, then gently pull the affected part in that direction as much as possible. "If it is not released completely, make sure to avoid any sudden movements at all times.
"Take three of these and use them with this third one.
"If the dislocation is severe and you use two of these with a strong cotton thread tied tightly in place to prevent bleeding from the wound. Use them gently.
"Then pull the extra loop between the two laces in that way and tighten it as much as possible. If you see a need to, apply another cautery strip directly on the joint.
"And that is how it works. The patient has no feeling in their hands and they are very pale due to the burn. "The cauteries help with moisture control: "It is much more helpful in managing moisture.
"To extract blood from an artery, make sure to apply a clean cloth and hold it tightly in place.
If you are bleeding heavily or if the wound is deep enough to be dangerous, and stitches have failed, continue applying pressure until it stops.
If you are trying to extract blood from an artery and your grip is too tight or you apply heat with cautery, use a cloth soaked in vinegar and hold it tightly against the wound until it stops bleeding. If you do not have anything else available, if a cloth is too hot to touch then use an ice-cold cloth and hold it tightly against the wound until it stops bleeding.
And should have between the second ribs it must be large pieces, and then when you have touched them with a sharp object they will burn fiercely until the bone, and hold tight to the veins. They should be burned between the second ribs because there is no doubt about this cautery in every way.
This is the form of the cautery
The extraction of an artery is more severe when you use a sharp cautery compared to one that uses less force; however the latter should be used for longer periods as it is better at preserving its heat. When the extremities are too tense, if he takes less heat
of tears When the tears of the eyes fall into veins that are above the highest point of the ear, and there is no treatment for medicine to do, you see the face turn red from pain, as if from fever. And the hands are tight and moist so that the hairs of paper are burnt, and the papers themselves are scorched, and burn with the heat of tears; if there is any mistake in this treatment The ancient one called it "a painful cure," and you should gently pull on the patient's hair that has this ailment, then three times gently tugging at its roots.
The ancient one called it "a painful cure," and you should gently pull on the patient's hair that has this ailment, then three times gently tugging at its roots. And if one of the pulls is on the front downwards towards the back, and others two are to be done by gently pulling at its roots, and you must be careful not to cut into any arteries that may be underneath.
And continue your hand with the continuation of both mandibles, and if there is a wound or injury to three days duration;
And use a sponge and wipe the affected area gently to wash away the wound, then place a sterile gauze over it.
from the incision that is made on the temple towards the second incision; "And shave all the hair that is between the two fingers to the side where it connects to the bone, then make a small incision just above the second one, and extract the arrowhead. The instrument used in the first cut is called "culterelle", and it is very sharp on one side, but soft on the other. It leaves a mark like this:
And make the wound towards the ear on one side and towards the bone on the other, leaving it as smooth as possible by the time of closing.
"And cut off the veins that grow between the two fingers while the incision is continuous up to where it opens the wound, and then make a small incision just above the other finger.
"And extract the arrowhead out through the opening, and express the left side towards the arrow that was taken.
"Then put a bandage of fine cotton, and tie it with strips moistened in wine and oil, and guard that the arrows are still.
"And in the meantime hold the limb, and apply a great many remedies for wounds, until it is healed.
When there is no joint movement at all, you see the hairs twitching and flinching, and the eyes become blurry. And the hairs stand up, and often cause pain, and are irritated. unless there is a specific reason for the dislocation happening repeatedly, then it may be necessary to treat many wounds and the patient's health may deteriorate over time, if untreated.
And then you instruct the patient to put their head back on the table, and then make one large cut in the forehead, and another one wide enough at the top of it. And from the front of the temple towards the back of the temple, and make an incision into the bone. Then stretch out your hand to touch your temples as much as you can.
And when the bone is uncovered if there's blood on gauze or cotton and towels, then you need to squeeze them gently. Then place a bandage soaked in wine and oil, and be careful not to tear it open.
"When bones are broken, it is advisable to set the bone and begin treating any subsequent fractures.
Here's a more formal translation of the same sentence into English: "In this case, one should endeavor to align or set the bone as soon as possible thereafter attend to any subsequent dislocations that may occur. In addition, perform a series of stretches and movements for flexibility. And attend to any subsequent fractures thereafter.
The removal of the ears
One of the things we have heard is that... ...or pain or burns, or worse injuries, like stones, and similar things. Or dizziness if you fall, fever, please Any injury that occurs, such as burns or worse injuries, etc.
When something pierces the ear in a manner that is not comfortable to the ear, or when it is inserted into the ear itself (not just touching), then place the ear on its side (lie down).
If you see a stone, if it doesn't give off any oil that is yellow or green, then attend to the extraction. "And let him remove any restraints of clothing and put earplugs or wool in his ears. "Let them listen carefully.
"This treatment is done once.
"And if it doesn't work, perform the incision with fine needles so that it is like this:
"If done properly, it will be good.
"If not, perform the incision with fine needles of small circumference:
"If it doesn't work for any reason, or if you can't put the wax in and remove it from your ear with a soft needle, then: "Then repeat until it works as we have said.
And if you pull on the eyes in any manner at all, it causes great pain and injury. And press down on the point or whatever thing is there, causing great pain and injury
And if you do not come across all these things that we have mentioned, if you try to cut into the ear with a chisel or any other sharp instrument, causing great pain and injury.
and the way of opening if you make an incision into the skull first, extracting two abscesses according to their size, then take it in your hand and turn it around so that the ear is facing towards the side. And if you make an incision in this way until it reaches the bottom, then straighten out and sew up according to your preference, and eat as much of it as possible.
"And until he feels better.
And if it swells after being drained off?
If he cannot sit up due to swelling and discomfort from draining the wound gently slowly? Then make an incision in the grain.
But do not worry until you think that the patient's ear is wet due to moisture.
After gently draining and applying a compress if necessary, if it continues in this manner that the extraction should be continued regularly.
In the meantime, when it is convenient to make the ear numb with cotton, gently press on both sides of the earlobe first and then gently press on the inside part of the ear. And it shall be used for either ear equally or whichever one is easier to reach. It should not be removed until you are ready.
And not to worry too much if it continues after many pieces as the hair grows longer and thinner and becomes cool. And if it swells in the ear or on another part of the body and the incision is on the other side near the ear? Do not cease to make cuts as long as they are bleeding all over.
"And if you pull one joint, and the other joint is still hot from fire,
"Repeat this for all joints until they are completely cool, as we have said in the previous paragraph.
"In the extraction of a small abscess, if it is cut and similar things, cure as we have said in the previous paragraph;
"but if it's large enough to feel, then an immediate extraction may be necessary; "This is the lightest thing to take out of the ear.
"In the extraction of ears through the ear canal, if you use the treatment we have mentioned in the previous paragraph and treat any distillations, and the cure does not profit either; if it is convenient that you look at the ear with sunlight: If someone opens no wounds but uses very small needles, and if they don't see it, please remove the bandage from around where this is located.
"And sometimes one has very bad earwax or a very large one. And apply pressure gently to the affected ear according to how much pain it feels, and then continue applying firm pressure until the bandage is completely removed. Keep doing this until you see him breathing again.
And if they don't respond to the bandage being applied as I said earlier in this passage;
and if they don't move as we have said, then apply the distillation remedies that our predecessors have tried in cutting into veins, and you will find or treat the distilings.
And if you distill your oils and medicines in the ear as an instrument to where it is located as how you see; And if it is of gold or silver, make them as thin as possible, to prevent distilling.
And when pressing the distillation equipment with pure water, ensure that it is tightly closed so that no impurities enter. After you have strained your oil or juice and all the medicine from it, place a bandage in his ear.
Then tightly apply the gauze soaked with pure water and press firmly until the oil is distilled or has completely passed into his ear. And place a bandage soaked in pure water on it and let the distillation take place near or directly into his ear. And make sure it is not too cold as otherwise the medicine may not be effective.
The removal of the ears
No child was born without a hole in their ear.
And this means that any wound or injury to the ear is not painful at all.
It also states that there will be no pain from wounds on the face and eyes.
The reason for this is to prevent injury from the sun on the ear when opening it. And look at that as well. If you see the discharge, it means there is something wrong with how the ear forms.
And if both ears are red and swollen from front to back, if one does not see the discharge.
If the discharge is thick or dark in color and causes severe pain even with gentle pressure on it, keep doing this until the discharge stops completely.
And when they have been healed with a gentle application of fire, then place the coals in their ear
"If you hear sounds coming from your ear, gently press it and hold on until the sound stops.
Apply a warm compress to the affected ear, preferably one that fits well and is made of cotton. Do not apply any more ointment until the wound has healed or you take a warm compress and dab it with hot water and dust.
If you feel a lump in the ear, make sure to apply another warm compress with hot oil and wax until it subsides. Continue applying pressure until it is healed.
If there is another abscess or condition that requires further treatment after the wound has healed and you have applied a wet cloth to their ear and used other remedies for previous abscesses that were treated, continue with further treatments as needed.
When the hairs are moist and dry, it is advisable to gently stretch them with tweezers and a needle, and apply a small amount of root extract. "Then put a little oil on the broken bone.
Then apply some petroleum jelly if you're using a needle fire cure, and after the incision is made.
And many times they healed without any damage to their roots; And when they are burned with fire, the roots of those hairs do not come back at all.
from the neck Many times the hairs seem to grow and thicken in appearance and substance, which is called "graying," and an assembly of moisture large on paper. The treatment for dislocations is as follows:
The treatment for dislocations is as follows: To stop the dislocation on one side and then on the other, it's a light thing to know.
And after that you gently stretch one side, then the other, and hold it tight with pincers, and release it.
If you do not cover yourself with a piece of paper when passing by someone, you will get hurt to some extent.
and if it is closed properly, the treatment should be as long as possible until recovery occurs.
And if it's small and cannot withstand any pressure, then no effort should be made to treat it as the skin on its surface will tear easily in that case.
And if the earlobe is detached and descending towards the inside of the ear, if you cover it with paper, stretch it gently and press from one side to another.
If the incision cuts through the paper, that is not a problem.
And if the earlobe has been cut through and is bleeding heavily, then treat it with something clean to stop the bleeding while keeping the area as clean as possible until the ear lobe heals completely.
fat of eyelids Exinach is an ointment that is spread on the paper towels, and it has many applications. It helps alleviate pain for those who are young, but not for those who grow old.
And because of this, their faces become soft and smooth as the cloth is rubbed into it. And when you push on the left side of your chest, it will release gas from inside you
The method for the procedure involves placing a bandage around the patient's head in order to prevent movement
Then wrap a bandage around it and arrange the cloth in a circular manner, covering the entire area of the ointment as described. Press on both sides from opposite directions so that the ointment is applied completely in a circle.
Then apply it to the affected area with a sharp stroke using a large bandage. Do not make it larger than the wound you are treating for its own sake.
"And hold your breath as long as you want to stay under water. And further conditions are required for exit; namely, the shape of a small fat piece.
Stretch out any piece of cloth between your two hands so that it is stretched tight and then turn your hand outward towards the east.
And remember not to put it in water and do not use any sharp or pointed objects with it.
And if you begin the exit when water is just barely touching your body, let it be there for as long as possible until it stops.
Then stretch and loosen the cloth in that way and hold tightly; then release it gently but firmly.
And if there are such burns that pierce through it and put it near so as to contaminate the moisture which is being treated.
Then continue with the treatment until it stops burning.
And if it comes loose from the abscess while performing a poultice, then continue with the poultice pressing as tightly as possible until it stops coming loose.
hairs of paper When the hairs emerge from the paper and are entangled if they interfere with your eyes and bring about the kind of diseases that we know and softenings of the paper and the albugine, as long as it is because of the destruction of the hairs.
And the treatment is done as follows: Either by fire cautery or by surgical intervention as dictated by the patient's condition and what the surgeon deems appropriate; or through incision and stitching if necessary
It is advisable to place a bandage over the affected area with your hand before you start;
If it has been burned, that's alright; But if you prick the abscess completely through, it is advisable to: either tear off the excess hair or thread through the entire paper and remove it.
Then shave off the excess hair in that area closely trimmed along the incision line.
Then thread the paper with some thin cotton and gauze, make sure it is tight enough to cover any small remaining stitches or wounds;
And if one has more paper than he can hold, then his hand will become soft.
Then, begin by stretching all the fingers gently one at a time. And so, take the first finger near to its root, then bend it in one of the two angles as shown. Then straighten that finger completely.
Then gather the two threads into one fine thread of woolen fabric and tie it off. After tying it off, remove any excess strands from both ends to any extent you deem necessary.
If there is no cure then leave the stitches and threads as they are for three or four days (I assume this refers to the healing process of the wound).
Then cure the wound with stitches and bindings since the paper becomes wet from the wound and sticks to it. But the stitches are more secure than they seemed at first, and this is most often terrifying; "Or if another way:
"Or if another way: You should write the paper of a figure that is just as flat as the skin of one's back, like we have described.
Then hold it gently, with slight force, according to its shape.
If you cannot hold the strings and they are still twitching, if a needle or thread is inserted into it. And between your two hands alternate the large and small threads in sequence.
Then gently move your hand all around the surface where you have stitched, like we described. And sew up the two edges of the wound with stitches as long as it is healed;
The needle comes to your incision if the abscess breaks and discharges pus.
Never does it happen that the paper fibers are converted.
"And if you need to make an incision.
But the stitches in one and two are more artificial.
The treatment for this is as follows And it is that you fold the paper and sew it tightly as I have said, then make two cuts through the paper in a manner similar to the width of the spatula; Then tie the stitches at each end so they are securely tied.
Then carefully sew one together and the other on top of it, and fasten the two stitches of each part to one another. And leave it in any position until you sew on the other side and fasten securely so that nothing can move when you want to touch it.
If he gets tired or if there is too much pressure, then treat it as long as it remains calm;
And when a wound is healed, if it is released from its paper, then the hair no longer grows.
You will use this shape and size according to these instructions below:
The sutures are like you take a fine needle and put it through the silk thread carefully. Then join them together and sew one to another gently, so that the threads are long enough for a palm length;
And then order in the chase of the other silk thread lightly, and sew over the stitches.
Then put the head into its place.
And so put it in the sun if you want to heal the wounds, because these sutures are small and few, then sew a needle at both ends of the thread just above the root of the hairs and make sure not to pull on the hair itself as much as possible.
Until the hair is plucked from above the tail, pluck out the hair that is short or long on top and side, if there are any.
Continue to hold your hand as long as the hairs continue to grow uniformly across the area being shaved with paper and the natural hair.
And if the shaving is completed and the hairs are not leaving with it, if you were to shave all over from top to bottom exactly as ordered, until the shaving is finished and the hairs do not grow further down unless they are guided by observing a mirror.
Unless if you shave and the hair is done, take care of your own face with lotion or ointment twice a day to keep it soft and prevent any dryness.
And if the hairs are thin and you accompany a long hair on both sides of your face with one that you leave, as long as it is elongated and maintained well.
Of the oil When this illness is called aleacrati or when it comes with oil, if so then there are two ways
one way, and another unnatural
And in the same manner of injury, whether it is a burn or a treatment for hairs, as well as similar things.
The treatment is to bind the wound tightly with bandages and keep it clean as possible.
And only use remedies that hold and stop bleeding. If you do this instead, it will make the illness worse than before.
But if you use gentle remedies like honey, as we have learned. And the roots of aleacrati or oil are cooked and burned if not in any oils, and you cover a bandage tightly, and treat this.
And the effect of your treatment is that you hold steadfast that it will not worsen than before in its form.
"And concerning those who have already contracted this illness, it will not progress according to the form in which they were first encountered.
This illness is commonly referred to as "axactract," and is a natural occurrence, not due to external factors
The injury occurs from a wound and a fracture, and from cauterization and similar events.
and the opening of the wound is where you pierce with a needle, if it has two folds, and the fold in the vein, and it pierces through the sternum as well. If the artery is pierced too deeply, then the finger veins will come out after the injury occurs.
Then the artery runs through to the large spleen vein. And it looks like paper again when this is convenient.
If not, if you press the razor and it goes into the wound, then you tear paper, and you get multiple tears in the paper.
"And make sure that when the incisions are closed, their shape resembles that of a letter which has no cross.
"Then take the fold that measures its breadth and length, and join it to two pieces of thread.
"Finally apply the treatment for our previous discussion on the mollifying medicines mentioned.
"And if the disease comes from a burn or cut, it is advisable to make a clean break with the hairs on paper and follow what has been discussed above. "Then seal between the two sides of a cloth as mentioned previously.
"Then seal between the two sides of a cloth as mentioned previously. "And the work should be done according to its form as it is different in shape and appearance from any other type of wound.
"And he must increase his efforts and remedies more often.
When the saddle becomes stiff due to dryness of the oil and can no longer move or perform its duties properly, if you wish then cut a razor at the paper's edge, lightly across it
until the blades are sharp enough to touch without being too rough or too fine, so that the horse's skin only suffers from slight discomfort and does not burn the oil.
And remember to make an incision in a way that matches its natural shape.
And ensure all cuts are made smoothly and without any burns from the oil or grease, and remove any excess oil and grease.
"And place between the paper and the ink a seal of wax, and smear it with oil so that it is saturated. After each stroke, you will need to clean your brush and other tools until they are dry.
The sores that come from the fire treatment can be treated in two ways The first way is to be nervous and keep them steady like this: when you touch it with fire and take care of the wounds as best you can, if not done
Both ways are to bring about the great sorrow and harm, and gradually over time will extinguish all light and all movement of oil.
The way of incision is to make the hairs stand upright initially, then shave them off. Hold onto the paper with your hand, and cut out the eye-lids gradually, and you will stop it. Then take an arrow, and put it through the horsehair or flax, or of bull's hide, and bind it tight. Then bend the arrow's point slightly and tie it through the fur of the horse or of flax, or bull's hide, binding it tight.
No matter how many times you bend the arrow only once and through the thread as we have said. Then scrape away all the fur from where the arrow was inserted;
And remember that the fur should not touch the smooth surface and break it, and the feathers should not be pierced.
After making a small incision into the flesh, two pieces of lintel are placed together, and it is stitched shut as close to each other as possible. And then apply treatment until he feels better.
And if the patient is not calm and cannot hold the needle still, many times it will be a remedy for this kind of injury.
and in the surgery it is to be opened up if there are too many stitches, and you must see through them carefully, so as to avoid any injury; And gently remove the needle from beneath it carefully, and if you see that she is moving or agitated, so as to avoid any injury, stitch up the flesh with lintel pieces together tightly, and then seal it shut close to each other.
"In any case, if you prick your finger and hold it down for a while, then release it slowly, as long as the finger is still straight.
"Continue with another chapter as before, ensuring it is complete.
And if the appearance of the body changes due to excessive hunger or thirst, and it begins to weep excessively but not all at once, tears will cease to flow.
After that, a red sore appears from exhaustion.
The eyes do not have any bruise once healed and cover the wounds with bandages and remove them from fire, and they seem a burn scar.
And the wounds if they are treated with ointment on clean hair and then apply the ointment to the eyes, covering everything that burns in any way, and sustain strength.
Then treat the first wound, and cover it with gauze all over until finished, and remember to keep the ointment on at the end.
"And if it is incised in such a manner that the force applied after this chapter shows, then hold the limb steady with small forces so it does not move until it grows.
"When the incision is complete and all the wound has been cleaned out, if it bleeds or leaks with corrosive liquids, apply a poultice of vinegar to stop bleeding.
"If nothing else is needed and the stump stops bleeding and you suspect an abscess, then apply vinegar to heal the abscess.
"Then move on to your next chapter as soon as it is done, and continue in oil by this way.
"But always remember that the treatment of any wound should be mild according to natural ways. And by chance occurring, in the work of injury.
Do not use your hands for any of these injuries as long as you know that it is a serious injury.
The blood vessels that are covered by the oil become weaker with time and harden as they become injured
The physician will examine the patient and see if there is anything else wrong with him. Then go to your doctor in this manner
Instruct the patient to place their head on something soft and support their neck as per their intelligence, and hold both hands gently against each other in this manner.
Then proceed in descending order to the other veins as follows:
Then gently pull the two wrists apart after holding them steady for a while, until you can remove them from their place.
And make sure you don't burn the skin with needles, and perform this injury in front of sunlight at noon, and try to get out quickly if you feel pain while doing it.
And when you have done this, if you distill it into oil with a filter that separates the impurities from the substance, you will get pure oil in two colors: red and clear.
If you don't have the time to collect everything in that hour, if you pour a drop of oil onto the eyes, it will ease their pain and keep them steady until they stop being sore or inflamed.
This is its form of healing.
The "fistula" refers to a type of fistula, which are openings in the body that connect different parts and allow communication between them, such as the urinary bladder and urethra (in men) or the uterus and vagina.
When you cure it with cautery or by burning medicine as I have previously said, and it is not cured easily, if it prick at its base the eye will be held steady until it grows; but when moisture enters into it it must die out completely, while keeping it open.
And when they see destruction, then you will witness corrosion and darkness, if the ruler of what is there formed it.
And they are called 'the sharp chief', and may be done with this ruler if it is in the present form.
And put your left hand on the corrupt bone and turn between two of them, pressing your hand a little until you see that the corruption is removed.
And do it not once but repeatedly, then return to the excisive bones.
If the bones are soft and hollow, and the roots of the bow are also soft, then it should be applied every X days until they do not renew or become inflamed, because it does not harm, but helps that which is good.
If you don't have another tool, then you should bring the fistula back to its place according to this form. And it is that you discover the second time with a hammer, and by applying pressure, if he hurts himself in such a way as to break through this form, or if there are three joints, then let him be restrained from using force like you see here.
And put it into the fire to roast his flesh, and hold tight your hand over its oil as you press on it until it breaks through the bone and feels them with a touch that he holds his hand close against his side.
And after the flesh has been roasted from its own heat as you have instructed him, and when it is not burned or hardened by the fire, if there was a material on his body. If this were easier to do with an abscess.
When the eyes have been completely open and there is no bleeding or pain, then you should hold the abscess.
Then the patient should hold his breath and endure the pain, then apply oil, vinegar, honey, incense, and musk to soothe the wound and cleanse it, then bind up the wound with bandages and cloth.
The manner in which the bandages are applied should be such that you use enough soft ones and alternate between four of them, then place one over another in a way that they meet at equal distances.
Then hold the wound tight with a bandage made of hard material to prevent bleeding.
After applying the bandages and leaving them in place for some time, gently loosen them if it is necessary.
Then after a day or two, loosen the bandage and see if the oil has improved in appearance.
This cannot occur When the flame cautery is used, instruct the patient to keep his eyelashes and eyebrows trimmed, and let him stay calm while doing so
The dislocation of the shoulder When dislocations occur in the shoulder joint, first inspect it, then apply ice if there is swelling from injury.
If you see one needle in the root of a limb and another one further up that same limb, then apply another needle or two if there is a double thickness in the elbow area. And pierce it through, leaving the first needle in place according to its position.
Then pierce through the second needle and pull out part of the vein, holding it tightly, then remove the needle and put into a clean bandage in place.
And leave it like that until the veins heal completely, providing comfort as needed.
And any wound is held steady by a piece of cloth as long as it is intact
And if the hairs appear thin and prone to curl with slight moisture, they will become inflamed and dry, causing them to split and fall apart.
Then it is removed as soon as it heals.
This disease which is called "flesh eating" occurs when worms are found in the oil, resembling live maggots and dying at once.
And the manner of dressing an abscess is to apply it with heated oil or warm water, then squeeze it tightly between your hands for two parts, and move them while watching for pus coming from underneath. Then cover it with a cloth to prevent drying out, do not let the light get in, and watch for pus coming from underneath.
And if she does not descend from above, her face will appear ashen
If you put the bandage between your hands, take a subtle strip and place it on top of the eye corner.
And if she is cured in this manner, whether with honey or fenugreek and milk, then be treated for another treatment as long as it remains healthy
"hot oil We have the resemblance of diseases in this division, and what should be done to cure it. If you follow the course of health.
You should put the bandage between your hands and tie it with a knot at the end of the day so that the oil stays in place tightly.
Then lay the paper of oil on your left hand side so that the hairs are even or on your right hand side they should be uneven.
Then take the tool in your right hand if they are even or in your left hand if they are uneven.
Then put the tip of the tool into the crown with care, at an angle, and then gently apply oil to the smaller ear as before. Then turn the tool called "almagda" smoothly while holding your hand tight until it stops feeling the pain from the oil.
It is important that the length of the "almagda" opening matches the size of the ear at its end, which is near the exit hole. This tool is used to apply oil on both ears
The arm is being examined for the clarity of the skin color, and then it applies some sort of instrument to the area where it seems to be, after which you apply pressure in another location
Now he holds his breath, seeing the arrows before him and the instrument at its sheath
After a short rest, it proceeds to apply the instrument in another location. When finished and applied with pressure, gently tighten your hand slowly and slowly
Then release the tension gradually and repeat this process several times to relieve pain. Then proceeds to extract the arrows or foreign object from the eye with oil as described and in a manner that is not painful
Now, for those of us who are skilled at this, let's proceed to our task with plenty of oil.
And if the eye cannot enter oil through its orifice because it has tough eyelids, then you should take an instrument that is called "the eyelid spreader," which is used like this.
And when it is only needed, do not apply too much pressure but gently and slowly, as we have mentioned earlier.
And at the end of this procedure when the bandage is tightly applied to the patient's back in a dark place, where he lies down and sleeps.
And any sudden movements or excessive violence should be avoided and the patient's head kept still in whatever position it is comfortable.
After washing his hands with clean water, he wipes them dry and looks for any damage.
And you must do this after the incision has been made or after treatment is complete, but it is important to remember that they will become inflamed later on.
And you must lubricate the joint before applying any sort of bandage or dressing to it.
And when he is bandaged up tight and you notice a small wound, it is important to lubricate the area and then apply another dressing over that one.
And with time they become hardened in their cases.
In that case no one should put themselves between the patient and the fire. And there was someone from Yract who told us that in some places it is not allowed to eat meat while treating people because one may succeed but another dies. And as for this new thing
And these are the similar shapes of the venom, because whoever does not know how to treat them properly
and they should be treated correctly: And it is the essence of this subtle science and its derivative in three degrees.
There are no newborn or hatched chicks that come into contact with venomous snakes, as it would not cause any harm.
And if there is a rash which appears to be of the flesh color or if there are sores with deep wounds. In those cases where the venom is painful and not healing, it would be best to apply the poison between your hands against the sun.
In those cases where the venom is painful and not healing, it would be best to apply the poison between your hands against the sun. And cover his nose and kiss the bite of these snakes, and treat them with care. But as long as you continue to apply the subtle remedy of a part gently, until you know that this snake is completely healed
And if there is no remedy at all to cope with it, as the wounds are treated gently and firmly. or hold tightly to your arm, if you can't control it otherwise.
And if you hold tightly to your arm and it burns and the cautery is very strong until all the hairs are burned off and there's no pain or movement left at all, then go easy on them gently and slowly. If it is not healing as quickly as expected, the patient should expectantly wait until they are healed completely.
and if you don't control it gently as expected, the patient should hold tightly to their arm until the pain subsides.
And as long as there is doubt and fear, you must hold tightly to their arm until it is either held firmly in place or less. "And hold the eyelids tightly shut so that they do not move as long as he keeps his nose pressed against them.
And many times it happens to children when teaching them how.
Then the first finger that comes out through the nose is held by one hand, and the second finger that comes out through the mouth with the other hand, holding them both alternately like we do when they are small.
Do this as long as you squeeze it tightly enough to prevent the nose from being clogged with soot, then take out each finger, extract the wax, and smooth them down in an Egyptian style, and place them gently on his face so that they lie straight.
Do this for three or more times until the nostrils are free from soot.
And then apply some oil to his nose once every few hours as needed, and if he has such medicine available, do so.
"And this is how you purge the phlegm, by straining out the oils and the medicines that are within:
"Whether it's gold or lead, like a lamp in its light, if it burns the same way and lights so brightly;
"And you see that when you put one into a flame closely, whether or not it is plain to purge the phlegm.
"And this mixture of oil and water must be held tightly until all the oil has burned away.
"Of course. Of the scar or the new one?
"There is often a disease called 'tolu' that crosses and becomes great over time as it keeps the eye steady.
"And for this reason, you must apply it at the beginning and continue with the fire cautery or burn ointment:
"And when you hold for long enough until it is great, if the pain is severe, turn off the fire cautery and apply cool water to soothe the pain.
"Do not touch it with force as that may cause injury. If you prick at the base, hold steady so they do not move until they grow.
"When pricked by the base, keep it steady so they do not move until they grow.
You should treat each individual case separately and take a closer look at this particular ailment.
"It is advisable to check if there was any injury because looking at the fresh wound may cause further harm. "And when doing incisions of this type, treat them as soon as they are done.
"And when the incisions are done on both sides, it is advisable to cleanse all parts as thoroughly as possible, then sew them up and bind with appropriate herbs and incense. "Sprinkle on the incision a piece of quick-drying plaster or another such substance and let it stay in place until it dries completely then treat the wound as soon as possible.
The manner of stitching consists of putting together the solution or with needles if you have mentioned in the description of stitching below the belly or with thread, as I told you before.
of the arms
With the right hand placed firmly on the patient's abdomen, causing pain and bruising of various degrees
until you turn the sheets, and fasten at your neck, and bring them around in one piece.
After removing a stone from inside, hold it steady until no movement is detected;
And then remove the leaden chains and heal any wounds as quickly as possible.
In the work of this chapter there are often evacuations from abscesses at the opening of veins, incisions for abscesses, treatment of wounds, extractions with arrows, and cuttings into stones, similar things; where there is doubt and fear, many die.
"If you hold on to it with both hands at its base, let some of the roots or blood vessels be exposed.
"...and then sprinkle salt and drying powders onto the wounds...
"And after incision, it often happens if the second time, and cautery is used. "If not, after the cautery...
"No times have been seen at the root of the jawbone between the gums, which are dried up and shriveled; "...and no black or yellow teeth have been seen as long as decay has come to the gums, and are falling out.
"If you keep the wound between your hands and make sure it is clean, then no pus or discharge will be seen as long as nothing happens. "And wash your face with blackness and whiteness, youthfulness, and other virtues, as long as they remain.
"When you do this at the first stroke (lit. 'first reason'), it's good. "But if after the second stroke and third time you do not have all the necessary things,
"and the teeth have different shapes due to heat, which is why the toothache that has been treated by pulling out between the gums. "And these forms and others should be with you present.
"It is advisable when treating the toothache that you treat it as much as possible, because one must not be stingy with it. "because this is a substance high in which there are no excuses for the removal.
"When the hairs are restrained from moving, if you want to prick them at their base, make sure that your hand is steady. Many times does the pain arise from a bad toothache, and it's important that they are extracted or treated in time. And no matter how much the pain lasts as long as the wounds remain, because we have already known that it is necessary to treat these injuries.
And when you are sure of the toothache and it's causing no further harm, then it is advisable to extract the tooth as soon as possible in order to preserve the gums from all sides
Then it is good to loosen up your fingers at first and slowly until they are well secured, then fix the nails properly. And if there's a dislocation of both shoulders, between your arms, and hold tightly so that they do not move.
After the patient has been properly restrained from moving around in any way, and if he is not allowed to sit or stand at all, then let them lay flat on a table gently without causing any unnecessary harm.
And if you find it necessary to cover them with bandages, put the pieces together in a way that they are held. "If he gently pulls on it, let it not break away.
And please also remember to keep the joint as loose as possible when opening your mouth for dental treatment.
And do good and keep part of the skin unbroken, and remove the arrow by removing the base causing more severe pain than before.
And remember that you should not do anything to break the joint as it is fragile and has never broken before, and they can only withstand a slight amount of force.
But never come from the root cause disease due to the roots that grew and because of the joint which broke, as we have experienced.
And when it is injured, if you clean the injured area with vinegar or alcohol.
If the joint swells and becomes swollen, then apply a mixture of vitriol (sulfuric acid) to it.
Do not do this if you use fire cautery.
The arms are covered with hair that cannot be removed except by the most powerful means you take.
and these are the forms They can be large members if they cannot stand still on their own, and should be made of iron so that they hold well and are strong enough to stay in place.
from the roots of them If you pull the root of the hair out gently with cotton moistened or if you use oil to lubricate it as much as possible so that the hairs are soft, then hold tightly the tweezers which have been treated with algicide to prevent the itching which may come from the itchy hairs.
and be made just like a lump of coal this way is it formed.
And if the roots try to break through all of these veins, it is advisable that you uncover and expose the root, and use an instrument called "althalie", which means strong thread in French.
And so firm and large if they do not break easily, and the root can be pulled out with that force, this is good;
then it will work poorly if you use too much force on the hairs as the forms may come later.
And if there are any such instruments that can help, what is their shape. and other limbs in front of the reason for the pain, and a tool that seems to have large tendons.
And so long as the hairs cannot be broken easily and many of them are tough. And also these other things mentioned earlier are not mentioned here
And the most subtle veins are to be felt with one's own hand and by instruments that suit the ailment; for there may be different kinds of instruments required based on these ailments, as it is broken or not, if you seek such things, I have told you and given you instructions how to perform them.
And hold the arm securely so it does not slip away or become loose.
Then restore the limb using appropriate medicine and if there is an abscess in the arm which is small, then use that instrument.
When the tooth appears naturally and its shape is good, and especially in women who are pregnant, if it is convenient that you make the extraction immediately without waiting, as there may be no other treatment.
"And if they prick at their base, "...and if they prick at the base of their sting...
And when the gums get very sensitive due to the toothache, and for this reason you do not move the other teeth, if there is pain from one loose tooth like that which has a certain shape,
"...like when one pierces an arrow.
"...and in the same way as with a knife gently held between his fingers while he is piercing it...
"...until he has pierced it completely without making a single mistake.
"...when the sting is broken or torn in any way, and they cannot be pressed to close unless he wants them not to sting...and then you must provide remedies that do not harm.
"...if it is desirable to bind with a golden thread because gold threads become green and rotten over time, but the silver ones remain unharmed.
And let them grow neither too short nor too long according to the amount of space between hairs.
And if you pull out one hair and the next one is too close between two healthy hairs, then place it between those hairs. If there are more, just let them grow until they reach a healthy tooth on another side. Then reapply the cover to the area you were working in and gently hold it firmly until they stop moving.
And be sure to shave around the root of each tooth if necessary, or as directed.
Then tie them up and collect the hairs together, put one between each healthy tooth to prevent bleeding.
And then leave them tied until they stop moving and start bleeding if you tie up another hair.
"It is to be expected and will serve as the form of the healthy bones and shape of the front arm.
And when the finger bends, if it is released in its place repeatedly.
It is not to be bent backwards or splayed out of place repeatedly, and it should remain in its normal position unless there is a defect that prevents this.
It can also occur from any other source such as the tongue or body tissues but will not if it is removed. Or by accidental injury.
The wounds are such that you can open the mouth without pain and keep your head steady, as well as gently move your tongue.
And as long as the tongue is in its place, and if it becomes loose or moves too much, this will cause pain immediately.
And hold it steady so as not to disturb the artery underneath.
Once you have done that, if it is warm or cold water, then apply a cloth soaked in linen.
The wounds will heal without leaving any scars.
If the wounds come to a head when applying vinegar-soaked linen, and if it is burned with the slow burn of the fire cure that works well, it is good to use. And continue with another treatment as long as necessary,
until the wounds are no longer painful or infected, because this is a burn.
If the wounds are healing but painful and wet with moisture, if it stings when you apply vinegar, and use a very fine, subtle cloth to wipe away any excess. "And hold your breath as you perform the procedure to avoid inhalation of any smoke or fumes.
"Then loosen it up and get out of there, and continue with other procedures as soon as you are safe.
"The throat abscess "There is no danger from the mouthpieces that have been removed 'godath', and properly treat the second ones; if you do as we have advised in the division, they will be safe.
"It is very important not to be too rough or cause any damage while using it; if you do as we have advised gently, nothing bad will happen.
"If the skin is red and the root is large, do not be too rough or cause any damage; instead proceed with caution. "But leave it as long as it stays put, and if you are going to remove it, or it would break off by itself;
"If the bleeding is minor and the root cause is subtle, if you need to prick it with a tool, but first make sure its base is held steady.
"When the pain is in front of the sun and you've held it steady as an arrow between your hands, press the tongue to everything it touches.
"Or of silver or of lead subtle like a needle:
"Can you press the tongue to everything it touches and see the target, if one draws near and the fish is in its way, and the trap will be sprung more than necessary:
"And do nothing on the cloth with it, then grasp the tool as if there is force. "And every joint may be bent and another place may follow, they are both sharp, and made of iron or steel:
And if you do not have this tool, when it comes to hold, of course it is necessary. And from one side to another
And when you pull one of the arrows, if you pull the other in the same manner thereafter, and after cutting into it gargle hot water immediately afterward, repeatedly gargling them until they grow numb or are cooked, like embers. And so long as he remains sane;
Only the two arrows ever enter his throat, if they come out in the same way that both entered.
And I treat a woman with an arrow lodged in her throat, knowing it is not deep;
She could not breathe through the passageway that was blocked, and could neither drink nor eat, and died within a short time.
"And their eyes were swollen as if he had been weeping for two nights.
I have seen things, and fixed one thing at a time. Then came the day of woe, when great portions of body
And then I took another step to their left and pressed their mouth and tongue.
After fixing the one thing in those steps, I took a part of it away only to find that there was still some pain. And I put her down from the bed and started to drink water as well as wine. Then I kept cutting into the abscess one by one.
And the abscesses were closing in and covering up my earlier cuts until they grew no more.
After I burned through the abscess, I cautorized the throat. And after a while of cutting.
And I parted from these things, but God gave it to me after.
From above
When the vein is removed and it has been sewn up tightly and well;
If it is large and rounded, it is called a vein.
When she has been cut as we have described in the section and the treatment does not benefit her much, you see that the artery ends are held steady, and it is subtle if it's done correctly.
And those who are rounded together but do not extend very far. If she is bloody or reddish or black, if it's necessary to make an incision in her. There is great danger in the abscess.
When you see her, according to the manner I have described, of her blush and length, make sure she holds the bandage in front of the sun, and press her tongue on the tool we have mentioned here. Then bind up his wounds, and let him rest in bed, and take the second of the two kinds that I mentioned during the incision to the second artery.
And it is advisable not to use any excess that exceeds natural limits;
because if you consume more than necessary, it will affect your voice and your speech.
After the incision, apply what we mentioned during the incision of the second artery, and treat it as long as necessary.
And if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow
The manner of cautery should be consistent and even. And let his nose remain in its natural shape, and then press the tongue against what we mentioned during the cautery chapter, holding it steady with a gentle wet cloth, so that it is neither too thick nor too thin. And apply this instrument, which has the shape as follows;
And if you put it on his forehead, or above the ear, and apply the instrument to all of the medicine there.
The hair on the head of the patient should be left long and even in order to prick at its base.
Then take your hand and press it against the vein, for as long as you can see a steady flow of blood without pain or itching.
And if you see it, take cotton and apply it against any instrument, rubbing the cotton in the wound until all the cotton is used up.
And once that's done, leave it to dry for four or five days.
And if you find another way to treat the burn, and it relieves after treating with the remedy of cotton, remove any remaining cotton from the wound, wrap up the remainder in bandage material, and clean what is left from the medicine.
"And when it is cold, or you have a sore throat, stay still as long as your symptoms are manageable.
This treatment is safer than the fire cautery alone.
If the fumigation is performed this way with lavender, hyssop, and rosemary, chamomile, wormwood, and other herbs, and mix them all together or none at all, you may use it as a cure.
The mixture should be well glazed with good earth, and the vessel should contain something that heats up according to this way: Either gold or silver, and when you bite into the mouth of the abscess as it boils with hot water in the vessel, until the eyes are blinded.
After rinsing your mouth, as long as the eyes are dry, and keep in mind that you should not perform this when beginning to open an abscess, for many things happen. "Do not worry about what comes after this sentence.
"The instrument is not present if someone approaches and puts too much pressure on the artery. As for the vein, do not let go of the pulse because it is a serious treatment method.
"If there are fish bones in the throat or nothing at all.
"Therefore, when you see it, press your tongue against the instrument so that what you want to see is seen.
"And if it does not open and must be swallowed, you should vomit the medicine so that it is digested in the stomach. "For example, if there is something to expel by vomiting.
When the hair of the patient is wrapped around a sponge or a navel, an onion, a root of lettuce, or a straw. And then tightly wrap it in the sponge. When it comes to its place, if you hold firmly and then remove it.
And when we have said this, if one holds the tool in this way,
and the instrument is pushed up to the throat so that it can enter more easily into the mouth and put the throat in a high position. And you must not touch the epiglottis, which is all closed and cannot be opened by any movement of your own.
And it must not be pulled out while the instrument is still inside, for otherwise you could lose or tear off part of your own flesh. If you break it apart gently, or if you pull on it with all your strength, as long as it is broken
"of the nature of the throat
There was no medicine without surgery And when you do not profit, then look in the mouth with the abscess towards the sun, and press your tongue against the instrument that I told you.
And if you see this ailment appear suddenly, or even in small quantities, then hold tight and try to find out what it is
And if this doesn't work when you take a cold compress and place it in the throat sore, then you should try rubbing alcohol on it. If there is any other ailment that occurs here at all times.
Then breathe in deeply through the nose, and close your mouth, and gently swallow, and move it to its place with your hand. And if you feel sick as soon as you use it, then stop.
And if she does not feel well as we have said, then apply the abscess to the affected part with the instrument that I told you in the application of the powder.
Do this many times because it will be necessary for treatment.
"The method of cauterization is that you burn it with a hot iron, and if the patient moves while being burned, cover their eyes with a cloth to prevent them from moving.
"After the cautery procedure, place a cloth over their nose and mouth to prevent them from smoking.
"Now seal it tightly with wax, so that they cannot break free if the cautery procedure is repeated many times.
"And they become thirsty and lose strength, and do not drink water anymore.
"Until the government decides to intervene.
"The shape of the instrument is that it should be applied so that when you see it move, similar to tied strings entering the throat. "She is gentle to touch,
There are different opinions in this book, regarding incision and amputation.
One of the methods is to use fire cautery, and one method uses moisture.
The second method involves piercing the ends at the neck.
The veins and arteries that are closest to the heart have different characteristics than those at the extremities, and these veins at the base of the neck differ in structure from those connected by joints, each having its own judgement concerning their nature.
If an abscess is being incised too deeply, it must be held steady until completion.
If the cutting is too deep and not completed, then it will be fatal to the jointure
"When an arm comes out of its socket," the text continues, "and it is held firm until it becomes solid and stable through pressure from both sides, as a result causing contraction in that member.
Or if the incision is done on a principal member, and you stop the cut until it is healed.
If the cutting goes into the base of something, then that thing will die.
And it's not advisable that you prick at the base of the abscess suddenly and forcefully, for fear of breaking it off. It may cause significant harm in a short time.
Ensure you gently remove the abscess and complete the incision slowly. And when there is pain or bleeding, take immediate action to stop it, such as applying pressure on the wound, elevating the affected limb, and controlling any swelling or discomfort.
Ensure that you make the incision less dependent on the abscess to prevent it from opening if necessary.
Ensure the incision is made at a safe distance from the hand or fingers, and not near joints, arteries, veins, or any other vital structures. "In these cases where one member dislocates.
And when the arm is in a sling after injury, if you allow it to remain that way until it is healed completely as we have said.
"When you pierce before this, if there is no way to remove it from his body, then the sores will heal with time. And after a long while the wounds heal and fill him up.
And if any joint is pierced through both sides of the arm, it will make the limbs weaker and more prone to dislocation.
It is important that you also address any abscesses separately. And in large abscesses and wounds similar to the location of the arrowhead.
If there are such abscesses or wounds that require treatment elsewhere, and if you need further assistance for this When it has become so painful that it is unbearable, consider doing what we did with the boils.
And if there are such wounds that protrude into three directions, or if there are wounds whose treatment is similar to the method used for treating a boil in the third eye, and with wounds from angles.
And if there are such wounds that require cutting off or removal of parts, similar to the way we remove cuts and similar things.
"When a person has no head, if they fall onto their stomach, it is important that you lie them flat.
"If the blow is severe and causes great swelling, then you must lie them flat so as not to break all of their bones at once, but rather a part. "Then remove the other eye in turn and treat it gently. "Do this repeatedly over time until all bones are treated.
Finally, the patient's limb must be weak or frail, or they may lose strength as they grow older. Because the joints were not properly aligned or secured, many times they dislocated and caused significant pain and injury to the patient.
"Follow the instructions of this chapter closely and when you have treated your patient's eye, if there is a small scar or no scar at all. "Then gently lift the eyelid or wipe away any crust that may be present; "And he will endure great pain if he tries to separate one from the other.
"If you try to separate part of the joint and it slips out or becomes dislocated due to moisture, then tighten it with a thin cord or rope.
"Then treat the wound as soon as possible.
"And whenever you encounter a sore or abscess, if you cleanse it with ice and heat, then make the incision gently as many times.
"And if the abscess persists, and he suffers pain and discomfort, then you have described various treatments in this book that might be helpful. And when applying them make sure to use linen and oil cloths as advised.
"And if it is severe and painful, then you should apply linen or oil cloths soaked in vinegar or fruit juice as advised.
"Then remove the abscess and drain it if necessary, until he is well.
Then treat all abscesses universally in treatment procedures
Or when we have said that the patient must be treated before cutting into the abscess, and then proceed to the doctor.
"Or when you encounter stones (gallstones), and the way that it is removed from bile ducts.
He has gout and pain as if he were soaked in water
If there are such things that are painful to cut into but not doubt or fear, then he is sure to do it contrary.
"When the veins of the arm are opened up by mistake or forcefully due to moisture; and if they pierce through anything that is called 'entromissing,' where it goes after piercing, what substance does it contain?
"If there is moisture present when you enter the wound, then follow these steps:
And when moisture comes from a vein, if you leave the hairs that contain that moisture alone because it returns often,
then squeeze tight with Egyptian bandage if present. But otherwise apply the wound and leave it to rest on the other limb; And how
And as for the second and third joints, so long as you hold them firmly they will not move at all.
In treating an injury such as this one, until it is completely healed.
And if the abscess head is held tight in a certain way for a long time, so that the opening becomes narrow and small. And get your nails trimmed regularly, and clean all the wounds thoroughly, and make sure you follow through with treating any cuts that may come.
If one of these instructions goes against what I told you after this.
"And if the veins are pierced, and you tie off tightly as I have advised, and cure them properly.
"Cut through the veins when they are less strong, because it's easier to seal off since there is less blood. And if any of the joints or stones are not wet enough, and these sutures were made from old woman's skin.
The joint was so painful that it could not be moved at all. And if you see a wound like this one, do not move it at all
And if these veins and roots come out through the ears and nostrils, the incision should be as small as possible to prevent further damage.
The treatment will depend on the specifics of each situation.
"Often times come to the abscess on the arm, and then go to the elbow, and the shoulder, they always come back together with each other.
If a scrotum is properly tightened at its base as we have described, then it will be firm and the abscess should heal. The scrotums of these sores are many.
The scrotums of these sores are many. There were some people who contained moisture, and those who did not want to obey to health.
If you see one that is well disposed towards the shaft and similar in colour to the scrotum, and does not have any part missing or defect, it should be fully functional from both ends.
If you want to remove it through surgery and make a full incision into its part, ensure that all the levels of circulation are intact from both ends if you do this as we have described for removing abscesses.
"And slowly and gradually, make sure not to force the finger or vein, do not cause any harm either to yourself or others, keep your hands steady, don't use too much force, you must ensure that only what you should.
"If you prick a vein or artery and it doesn't stop bleeding, if there is any bruising remaining after the injury, then hold the wound tight. "And let that continue until both eyes are closed and relaxed, and until the pain is gone.
"When you're done, do it completely.
"Then check to see if there are any small scars or wounds.
"If there is a large vein on the root of the wound that needs to be closed with very strong thread and held by it so that it doesn't move.
After applying the Egyptian ointment to the affected area, follow with treatment
And if you squeeze all the abscess, make sure to collect and apply both plasters at once; then do not worry about whether it is from a large abscess or small. "It is advisable to go gently when trying to get at the root of it, and pulling slowly as we have advised.
"It is advisable to go gently when trying to get at the root of it, and pulling slowly as we have advised. Those whose hair is excessive and long enough, remove it by cutting
And if the ointment has not been used for a long time or is spoiled, follow with treatment and ointments as well, to prevent further damage from occurring. And when the wound has been treated properly, if the application of ointment is causing pain, as long as it remains so.
The ancient ones spoke and talked about the treatment of the throat. But I do not know anyone in our land who teaches it, and that is their writing.
Those with a cleft palate should remove the lip which is called "epiglottis" from being seen; And in this case, there is no assistance available, as all the veins and arteries around the lips or in the throat are affected.
"When a disease is in the channel of the windpipe, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis so as to prevent choking.
When we want to cut the epiglottis, it is best if we make a small incision through two circles or at most four circles of width.
And these sutures will be easy to cut through the epiglottis as it has no cartilage in that area.
And the major sutures are vulnerable, if it is convenient to stretch out the skin of the throat all the way through, and then cut along as far back as possible to the chin. And remove the sutures if you see nothing there, and then cover over it as described above.
And demonstrated by cutting through the cartilage of the chin that breaks off and the failure of speech;
Let the wound be covered with a piece.
And when the hour is reached to doubt about the dislocation, apply a poultice from the afflicted limb with equal heat over the affected area.
Then administer medicines that are gentle on the skin until it is healed.
Albucasis does not allow one to remain as long as the throat is completely closed and the patient has been killed by it or otherwise failed. If a stroke occurs in the epiglottis that prevents it from being aligned correctly and causes breathing difficulties, and if it is not treated promptly:
the patient is instructed to leave the wound open as long as the disease persists and it does not heal in three or four days.
I will tell you what I know. I knew that a woman put poison in her husband's drink and he drank some of the poison
but when she found out it was too late to cure him, she died.
"I discovered the wound and found that it was caused by an abscess, but I realized that no treatment could be performed without causing a blockage in her throat.
I hurt myself, and then I applied a cure, and continued to care for it until it was healed.
And she did not have her voice back after it had recovered from its damage.
Because of that, I was afraid to remove the epiglottis
Hernia is called "epiglottic hernia," and it occurs in a variety of colors, often in women.
There are two types natural causes, and accidental causes;
Or where there was no cause.
The accidental causes are of two types: one is like tearing us apart, and the other way is like an artery tear. It was painful, and it could not be surpassed by treating with small things, and seeking to make an incision throughout the entire length of the artery. "If you prick it just as much and do not pierce the vein, if someone else pricks them as well without piercing them deeply, or if they are cut through completely by themselves. "And keep it oiled and care for it, so that it is kept in good condition.
"The same manner we have mentioned earlier.
"And it is important that you understand the distinction between 'not' and 'issue'.
I say that 'issue' means to be present or not absent. "Without removing the fire and preventing its spread.
"When there is no fire and it has been extinguished, its own essence remains as it was before the injury occurred.
"And similarly to what I mentioned earlier about the differences in gravity and moisture levels.
It is important when you come to the treatment of one that first check thoroughly for any possible tools or instruments that are called "entromissoir" after this as it comes from a surgeon, depending on its form and shape.
And the manner of questioning the apostrophe is that you grip it more firmly than you hold onto it at its place, and then slowly release it until all the contents are expelled, or until it reaches a certain level.
After that, take caution as follows:
If the moisture continues to burn, it will continue doing so until you have said what I advised before for other apostrophes.
After the apostrophe is done burning if no more moisture remains you should assume it is cured and gently pull out or scrape off any remaining parts and apply a clean cloth to where it was.
If after all of that you still cannot remove the burn then do not attempt to scrape or pull out any more of it as doing so may cause further harm.
"If he moves nothing, then returns it to us many times;
"And if he moves a bit and does not hurt the sensitive areas with corrosive wounds, holds it steady and applies soothing remedies until he is well;
"And if we lose one of its levels, hold tight the wound and apply the remedy that causes it to heal.
"And if the vein turns against us or another way when it splits and leaves two or three cuts until the wound stops bleeding, and rest the inflammation with water. "Then come back to the physician who performed the procedure.
"Here are the shapes of the entrances for the treatment; they are in three ways: "Large and medium-sized;
And he has three methods great, mild, and small to pierce the abscess.
and they are also like needles that pierce wounds, and are of iron or silver, or yellow, and can be used to pierce blackheads.
And they have three methods. large, mild, and small depending on the size of the opening.
The shapes are like this:
and if one abscess has three methods as well;
and if there are abscesses that have three openings, and they are of the same three methods.
And if one of them has two heads, or one with just one head, they are three times as many.
They must be necessary for their place
The doctor must be skilled and gentle, or else they cannot help the vein or nerves.
And of these incisions are made in multiples, so that if the artery is not opened properly.
They are three times as many. large, small, and middle-sized, as you see them.
And none can be used without practice, like legs and arms, and breasts, and faces.
No other tool is used small, similar to those of scissors, following this form, in order to perform the operation. And it never occurs at any time to those veins, arteries, or that form:
"No matter how much these roots are straightened out as long as they seem to be straight.
"They will grow longer and thinner, and the wounds will heal as long as you follow this form of treatment. "After treating the abscess with medicines as mentioned earlier, gather all of its contents and stitch it up.
"And let the hair grow long for its size if it is healthy, and when it becomes too thin in two places, cut through both ends of the wound. "And if one of the two ends is longer than the other at both ends and in between, that line b will be cut according to this form. "Then stitch the flesh between the two wounds and remove any excess fat. And follow what we said about stitches and powder, and do what is necessary for treatment as long as it remains healthy.
If the injury is not properly treated or if no incision has been made, then it will not heal and may require medical attention to prevent infection. The patient should keep the remaining hair short and well-groomed while undergoing fire cautery treatment.
The abscesses are filled with pus or moisture and contain sores; as long as there is moisture present.
Whenever there is moisture present, it is advisable to treat the wounds in a specific way, as described in line b of this text. And when all the boils are on an abscess and if you apply a wet cotton swab to it, then gently remove the cotton swab, wipe off the cotton and continue treating with ointments as long as it remains clean.
And if the abscesses are similar to sores as described above for sores, then treat them in a way that is similar to what we have described previously.
If the artery is punctured and the vein is cut while performing fire cautery treatment, then many times an abscess will occur in the vein as well.
If a vein is pierced during the artery burn procedure, it may cause both arterial and venous punctures. When you see two different sensations, if one is an extraction
If it occurs through the vein, then bleeding may occur.
It is foolish to try and remove the abscess, especially if it is located on the bones or joints of any other parts of the body, because it will cause great pain. "It is advisable for those who have had such treatment to avoid further procedures and especially for those whose arteries are affected by long-term exposure.
"Or remove the stone from the artery while it is still open, so that no damage occurs when closing it again.
"Then pierce it in both arms and fasten the artery with two threads as shown in the removal of the two arteries from the temples.
"Then hold tightly between the two threads as long as it stays in place and do not let go of its base.
"Apply a remedy that will keep bleeding to a minimum until they stop. "Cure any wounds as long as possible and wait for them to heal completely.
"And as for the dislocation of an arm," [the following sentence should continue with another part of the text that completes it]. "And for dislocation of one arm," [the following sentence should continue with another part of the text that completes it].
"And if you doubt that the arm is dislocated," [the following sentence should continue with another part of the text that completes it].
"And as for closing up the dislocation," [the following sentence should continue with another part of the text that completes it].
"Then after closing up the dislocation," [the following sentence should continue with another part of the text that completes it].
The arteries and veins become inflamed when they are injured or subjected to excessive stress, causing similar symptoms.
And what happens when there are dislocations and injuries?
When restraints are applied but the limb is painful and not straight, it may cause pain or damage to the joints.
It is important for all parts and nothing more than before or behind, but the one with dislocations must not be moved by force. through trial and error. This refers to a method of treating conditions on the head or face using hot irons, as it says "front
This refers to a method of treating conditions on the head or face using hot irons, as it says "front If abscesses are being treated and there is pus present, if one punctures in its base.
And if it is large and pricks the root or the vein, then the surgeon should stitch up the wound as soon as possible, with stitches until healing occurs.
No other disease is like this one, and it is called "phlegm" because of its resemblance to phlegm. It is a subtle ailment that can cause the following symptoms:
it causes coughing fits and large amounts of mucus
They had phlegm in their stomach that was much like the phlegm one usually sees, and there were no other differences; they were white, and had a large amount of phlegm, and felt dry, and it burned due to moisture.
I examined one of them once and found it to weigh 18 ounces, while the other weighed six ounces. The incisions were made as you look at where they are moist, and their appearance is bright white and moist with a subtle root; If one of them was taken out quickly in front of your eyes to the fire cautery.
If one of them was taken out quickly in front of your eyes to the fire cautery. "The tailbone often causes severe cramps due to numbness, causing discomfort when applying a fire cure.
"And if you see a vein about to burst or fear the incision will be deep, if you press firmly and hold it steady as we have said, and let go after.
"Then hold tightly, and do not let go of the vein as long as it is working, and stop cutting when you feel that it has reached its goal.
"If the roots are big and it's painful near your belly, but you do make sure to cover all of it, then cauterize in a way that will not spread.
"Then treat the wound and make sure you don't cut into any veins that are bright red and thin, as they may be carrying bad blood or pus.
Certainly
When boiling it causes The appearance of the boil comes from a burn or cutting of flesh, and is located in the belly and may spread to other veins, if it occurs on any other part of the body.
It occurs by cutting into the flesh and through bursting of boils, if it has the color of the liver, causing pain that is not too severe, and accompanied with many issues. And if it is from the issue of the intestine then there are many issues and when you press at its two ends repeatedly, and return time after time and by chance if one is sore or enlarged near the entrance to the bowel and due to much work.
And occurs from moisture, it is a light thing, and increases when you press on it with your hand, but not too much.
And occurs from an abscess if there are large and hard signs, accompanied by a certain quantity; And occurs from swelling at the thigh, and leaves if it is seen that its appearance is due to an artery or vein injury.
And occurs from swelling at the thigh, and leaves if it is seen that its appearance is due to an artery or vein injury. "If necessary, let the treatment proceed. "Because of doubt and fear, as I have explained in previous comments about the chapter involving the doctor's work.
And if it is on the stomach or bowel, you should instruct him to apply his poultice immediately and keep it applied until all pain subsides. Then you should place it between your hands and move it to the area where you made the incision over all of the abdomen, then apply firmly but gently on both sides of the wound. Then bind it tightly with a strong thread or firmly bound with strong cord so that it does not loosen
And then put the poultice tightly over the incision and tighten your fingers around it, and cover your abdomen. If you remove the poultice from between your hands, if the pain persists, then put the poultice over the belly above the incision.
And if you remove the poultice due to dizziness, and in case of excess moisture.
And if you feel contrary to the vein and it bleeds significantly, then return immediately to your origin, and pick up two more fish hooks, and sew them into the place where you had made the cut that you believe you have injured.
Then hold the eye steady with four threads around the hooks, and if you see it move, stitch over it, and leave it as long as it bleeds, and close up the wound from there. Or if you find it subtle bleeding and painful, then treat for what is needed, and check the eye as we have said.
Or if you find it subtle bleeding and painful, then treat for what is needed, and check the eye as we have said. And extract any abscess or moisture you see, then treat the wound with what is needed, and sew up the place.
Then We have said in dividing the symptoms of ulcers, and how one should overcome with medicines, and how to wash away the pain of healing.
"The chancre is to be treated with a cure that causes pain while being applied. The doctor said that when the chancre is in its place or if it has been moved out of place like this, and inside the urethra, and similar places, the patient must endure until the beginning.
"None of them can come near me.
And the veins when they are open and you cannot close them as mentioned earlier, it means that you must not apply any black powder to the affected area.
Then make a small incision if there is visible swelling, and then make a cut into the abscess to drain it out.
"Then cleanse your wounds or abscesses completely, leaving nothing behind.
And let the blood flow freely and press it well with your hand or any object, if you perform a phlebotomy incision on the artery or vein, unless you use heat to stop the bleeding. After that, apply another treatment until it is healed.
Of the dislocation In the treatment of similar things and in assembling an abscess, we have mentioned two types of healing; one by medicine and another by fire.
And in these two similar cases, you should apply fire to heal them. this is deadly business; tympanitis and otitis are deadlier things;
when treating this inflammation of the ear that is called otitis, and if you do not treat it with medicine, as long as you see that its ears are weak or have another disease than otitis, then use both solutions and similar things. If you do not touch the eye, because there is doubt
And if you see the eye turn very red, and it has no other disease except for a drop of blood, and it is not too long nor too short, then do this: Hold the eye with your right hand and press down on its belly at the lowest part of the ribs. Then take a small sharp instrument in this shape And so to two parts And whenever you pierce it inside, it should not bleed excessively.
Then look to see if there is a drop of blood on the intestines. If you want to test its sharpness, touch it with your fingernail on three different spots And if there is a drop of blood near the liver injury spot, then you have tested its sharpness.
"It is because of moisture, whether it be on the right or left side, and one must ensure that there are no loose ends causing harm to the fragile joint.
"Then stretch out all the skin on one side and the other, and lightly touch your fingertips to the skin between them as you would when washing with water or alcohol.
"Then stretch the skin as far as it will go on one side, and gently apply pressure to the area where it thins out; then remove the instrument that is there. "And similar to using a thin silver needle, or one made of wire light enough, and in the small area it can be used. "Or if you prefer one end. "And on the other side as well. And on the other hand and the third.
"And if you dislocate it as a result of a single blow,
"But when the arm is raised and held tightly, if someone suddenly pulls it to one side, then you should now stretch out the instrument:
"And when it is the first or third part of the body,
"But according to how much strength and how much pain it indicates, and what its location is,
"Then stretch the instrument and hold it tightly,
"And gently release the other arm as soon as you see that the injury is not severe,
"Do not move it as much as possible for a short time.
"If you doubt the bite of a venomous snake and it is let go gently, if its treatment or application with fire causes pain, try to rest, stay cool in water, or keep out of direct sunlight. "The treatment of the desiccant medicine should be done when it is safe; cautery on the stomach and liver after extraction of poison, as I have mentioned before.
No one is born without a pulse in the artery, or it is weak, or not present at all
"If necessary, cauterize with a very thin needle in this manner:
"After that, apply gently the plaster and bandage it tight in three or four parts. If you want to urinate but cannot hold it, do not close off its opening, urinate instead, then after.
"However, there is no need for concern because the urine that comes out does not stay closed.
"The part of which was cut off is now healed completely.
"Those who do not keep their ears in place are blunted, as no one can hear properly from the top of their ear because... "And cannot start properly if there is a matter that prevents material from reaching the ears and it's an ear disease.
"And the way of treatment is that if the hairs are too short and uneven on both sides, it should be cut to a size like the blade of a knife so that the dislocation doesn't occur when pulling.
"And be careful when removing the skin that sometimes it occurs frequently and if it happens, then the treatment is to heal the wound as soon as possible.
"The pustules of the foreskin "Often come in small groups near the ear, which can be an indication of a serious disease;
And if there are both good and bad ones
If you want to straighten out the crooked bones gently, cut off any sharp edges, and put it in hot water. Then apply the ointment until it is healed completely.
And if the abscess is malignant, bring pus and drain it out, if you please to apply a cautery
After you have treated it, and if the abscess is still visible on some part of the skin or in the hair, then apply an ointment that is designed for treating abscesses. And when it is healed, but if the treatment did not work
If you treat it altogether but cannot remove the abscess from its place, and there is blackness or corruption in its location and around it.
Then apply the ointment of honey and flour which has been made from the husks of green peas and beans, then continue to apply other treatments until it is healed completely.
And if there is a lunar cautery prescribed, then follow this form of application:
"Instructions for the fire cautery are included: "In order to cure it (the sore), and in treating the corruption
"If a vein is cut or punctured, and blood comes out, then you should apply pressure to the wound.
"When the hairs of the head are shaved around an abscess that cannot be closed or has been ruptured due to an incision made at its base, if you feel blood coming out, you should apply pressure to the wound.
"And when shaving around an abscess and hairs are shaved at its base to remove the scab, if you feel blood coming out, you should apply pressure to the wound.
"Afterwards, put between two cold cloths and squeeze gently until it stops bleeding.
Circoncision is similar to other wounds; We always strive for the best possible work and the most gentle approach to healing.
"I say that they did not circumcise their children, as they do not use circumcision in their law, and we have only what we acquired through experience.
Because I am more interested in the masters and surgeons who did perform circumcision during that time period,
If they could not perform it correctly or with enough precision, then more force would be used and repeated until the desired result was achieved. Or there is increased pain, and the deformity that causes the member to bend backwards.
And the deformity continues to worsen until it is no longer possible for the patient to straighten their leg; and he wants more.
"From the movement that is made with great force throughout all the length of the incision I find the beauty of the experiment, as the forces cut so well through flesh as through bone.
When you press your hand hard enough on the area below the elbow, it causes swelling in that part of the body. "The hair on those parts must remain long and even.
"And as for the first step: if you think of a child, when they get stung, do not let them go until their hair grows long enough. Do everything necessary to comfort and care for them in every way that you can.
"Then hold the force between your hands steady and prevent them from moving or falling in any way.
"Take your hand to their head and gently pull it away. Hold it high as long as the dislocation remains. "Then clean up any remaining debris and tie them in two or more separate knots.
"Then clean up any remaining debris and tie them in two or more separate knots. "Tie the second knot at the base of the sting and behind it. Then hold them tightly between both knots, gently release one after the other, then take off their clothing and tie a band around their neck to secure their head. After letting the wound heal slowly and slowly, it is the muscles. And mix a mixture of vinegar and oil to apply it gently over the wound for healing purposes
The form of strength is this one:
If the dislocated joints are loose and flexible, and they move in a similar way to each other.
The error of dislocation occurs when the nerves from the incision become damaged;
it is important that you extend it to its fullest extent so that all the joints may be held in place.
Hold tightly and consistently; if you cannot hold it tight enough, then do so.
If three joints are disturbed and the joint which is furthest away from the skin becomes swollen if it lets you hold as long as the joints remain steady until they heal gently.
"If you move your arm as if you're about to hit something or someone, do not let go of the shoulder part.
"For any sudden bleeding from the wounds mentioned earlier, when treating powders and if one applies excessive pressure as before.
"For those with [what is missing here?], as long as it remains sane.
Retention of urine
"The retention of urine if it is from a cold abscess, or a boil, or a carbuncle, or similar things as mentioned earlier.
"And the urine will not come out and you hold it due to the urethra opening as before. "And place them on your back and extend your stomach from the part towards the buttocks as before. "And when closing the vein to express the veins' pressure causes urination.
"And if it doesn't come out as we have said and the veins are in great pain, you must administer the treatment known as 'siringue', where that is its shape.
"And if there's a small trickle of blood from an arrow wound; "Or the pain of one hand and half, or subtle on top.
"The method to stop urination is by pulling the string with two fingers and tying it tightly at the top of the urethra.
"Seal off the excess string and tie it tightly at the top of the urethra. Then apply oil or butter and vinegar to it, and put a small stone on top, then press down on the bladder and stop the flow, and close the veins and artery, and empty the bladder and bowels.
After binding tightly the string at its end, until it reaches the root of the twig, then tie two knots on top of each other above the bough.
After binding the string tightly to the twig, it will be pulled towards that branch, and it stops when it reaches a visible object.
After binding the string tightly to the twig one by one and then in the next layer, tie it into a bundle, and pull out that bundle.
Continue tying the string as long as there is still visible branch or twig to which it can be pulled towards.
When sores or wounds come in the urethra, it is gathered together with compresses and medicaments; there's an instrument called 'Clepsedrum' used for this purpose.
It's done when three knots are formed. On the one hand, and on the other side, as you see it.
And when the string is tied tightly enough to prevent it from being pulled through with moisture intact, if there's no way to dry it out and straighten it.
"And when you put your medicine into the vein, make sure to put a stopper in it with moisture, and treat the one that is inside.
"If you apply moisture to the stentor, then push hard on the one that's inside. "If there is moisture in it and they feel pain, go to the vein now.
"This is how you do a delicate procedure for the vessel:
"And if it's gold or silver and higher in degree.
"Or even of the highest quality, with both hands clean.
"Then take a sheep's vein and put the moisture you used to clot it in between your two hands, forming a double fold of linen thread. Then tie off that moisture on fire.
After dislocating the shoulder joint in its place, hold your hand tight against it with all the moisture around to keep it steady until the hairs on it have grown.
If you don't have a bandage, use some parchment paper and wrap it tightly around the affected area to hold still. Then wrap it tightly with strong thread around the affected area in a circle like you would for stitches, and apply oil, moisture, and honey to hold it tight.
And do what you did with the bandage, holding your hand tightly against it while the moisture runs out of the wound.
at its base
We have mentioned in this chapter how to extract arrowheads and assemble remedies
And I mentioned the differences between the first aid kit supplies and the medicines, and in which one should be preferred for size. In the vein
I will tell you clearly and briefly.
I say that the base of the vein if it has become inflamed and is causing pain in infancy, then this indicates an imminent burst from the vein.
And I firmly hold them by their base, and gently pull them repeatedly until they separate. and at the bottom of these breaks it separates.
And healing is gentle until they are 4 years old, and it's painful in older ones.
The treatment is gentler for those who have a great stone than for those with the small one.
And when we come to treatment, if it is first to remove the abscess by clipping, so that all of its contents are drained out. "The dislocation has never occurred.
Then take hold of the vein by its base and bring it down gently to where you want it, if your stone is in front of the vessel and will not move at all.
Put your hand between his hands so they can see, and keep them soft against their thighs if he wants to avoid a decline.
Then kiss the cheek gently.
If you feel a vein in your arm, immediately tie it off with a tourniquet.
If the needle does not hurt at all or just a slight prick in your arm, then you should loosen the tourniquet and try again with another finger. And touch its base, kiss it gently, and if you feel one in the groin, where the urethra enters.
After that, tie off with your other hand as close to the exit point as possible.
Instruct the physician to press down with his left hand over the bladder and instruct him to extend his right hand outwards towards the hip joint at the top of the thigh, and have the other arm hold the skin where you are taking a measurement.
After the initial instruction, the specific method follows here: And between which is between the bones and the foundation, do not move at all but in response to the slightest touch of the overlying edge:
and if it is on the base or edge of the foundation, then stretch gently towards its size as much as possible without causing too much damage.
with each press when it is either close to or on the surface, so that a force may be applied quickly:
and if there are fractures, or edges or margins. if it is dislocated to reset
and if there are torn ligaments, which cause severe pain and swelling, return treatment should be sought promptly.
When it has fractures or margins, make the stretch larger:
"And if she jumps up while holding onto the tendons that are just like a rope around her head, make sure to hold tightly and prevent it from jumping. "or you put an instrument gently curved around the head;
"and if it's not held tightly enough, then loosen up a little bit while keeping the pressure steady, and don't let go of the rope when you feel the pain from the whiplash.
"And if there is more than one joint involved, first compress the largest at the base of the bladder and then move to other smaller ones.
"And if she becomes big, it is advisable to apply more dressing. "There are two things that happen during an injury: "or it may die or the urine will come out uncontrollably;
"but always try to tie tight and avoid tearing or damaging the tendons while you wrap them around in sections.
And when you have completed your work, if there is an abscess of incense and aloe and dragon's blood, hold it, and place by its base into wax and oil or heated rose and cold, to soothe the eye. Then rinse off the patient's eye with fresh water gently, without rubbing too hard on it.
"After you remove it and if the wound is clean and dry, then apply a dressing of aloe and dragon's blood to stop any bleeding.
And the eyes should be cleansed gently from the wound and corrosion, and frostbites in the bladder, and by doing so maintain the urine, which is usually done without mixing with urine. And when you enter into the wound and remove the stone, if it remains, if they damage the bladder or urine pores.
Then remove the wound of any and all things, and aid in every way that you know, as long as it is healthy.
And it is advisable to apply all sorts of remedies you give him; tie his lower limbs together with bandages, and gather the medicines near him.
His heel is small, and it is located below the knee, wrapped in a bandage, unable to urinate. If you follow the treatment that I've described above, please excuse me for this delay in treatment. I've tried it before.
You should divide the angle into three equal parts, as shown here:
Then insert it into the vagina of the patient, if he is unable to urinate because of the bandage.
Then apply the ointment gently in the vagina while keeping him from urinating for as long as necessary at the bottom. And take the ointment to your hand gradually and gradually until you have finished treating another area of his body.
If he urinates at all, press down on the part that is most swollen with the bandage to be applied just inside of his vagina. If a bone is broken, it will cause pain to urinate, and there may be some swelling.
and then they will separate the wounds in a way that makes sense to them as a whole. As long as it is healing properly.
Of the last women
If a bone is in the head of a woman or doesn't happen at all, if it causes pain and is prevented by three things
The first thing is that the woman is still virgin
And the second one is finding a well-behaved woman who has not had intercourse before marriage.
The third one is that if they cannot find a virgin by any other means, such as by hand.
And the fourth way is that the first of the woman is sharper than the first of man because it should be done with more force, and great fear arises. It is necessary to do so if you are willing to acquire a skilled mistress, without whom there will not succeed, as long as you don't take advantage;
And present a skilled mistress in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of that art, and commands you to do what she commands for her interrogation. And look well at how virgin this woman is.
And look well at how virgin this woman is. Unless he wants to deceive him or the ground, and ask for the truth.
And if she truly wants to convince him, then constrain his mouth or ground and recommend that he spit in her face, and want and press his hand steadily towards the hole.
She moves her leg from side to side as much as she can go in and out of the vein all the way down to its root.
Then, apply it at the base of the thigh against a rough surface where it will feel most tender and sensitive in that area. And do not move his other leg or foot over the sore place or down to its root, but rather gently apply first aid there.
And do not move his other leg or foot over the sore place or down to its root, but rather gently apply first aid there. Then, you should apply pressure on the thigh as much as it can cover the wound and keep the pressure until the sore place stops bleeding. And various methods of wounds are:
This means small and large, tight and loose, long and round, all kinds of pressure can be used to stop bleeding.
"When knowing the issue (of the dislocation).
And if you apply cold compress on the swollen area and tie it in place for one hour until it stops bleeding.
After consulting your previous instructions regarding the extraction of the arrow, you must proceed with the procedure even if the base is severed and veins are ruptured.
And if the vein is damaged during this procedure, seal the wound by applying powder to the entry and exit points of the vessel in order to prevent further bleeding. After performing the procedure, treat the wound.
"When the heart attack occurs, as soon as possible, even if it is far away, until they are certain of death.
The ram's horn is nothing but a vessel for moisture or milk, which contains the whey.
And it is called "sfac", and never properly in the cloth of the whey, unless you take care to make sure that is nothing else. It is between the white sfac and the milk we have mentioned.
And this cannot happen The generation of this rash will be if it contains impurities, and the matter is expanded
And if it happens to be struck by moisture near the joints, and that moisture has many effects or it is accompanied by sudden decline in strength, or without redness, or blackness, or aqueous blanching and this happens more.
These are the signs of a severe dislocation, as it is either white when we have spoken about, or it has redness around its joints, which may indicate that moisture is present throughout.
And if it has moisture within its own fabric as well, then the dislocation is accompanied by part of an organ, and therefore people think that there is another injury.
And if the moisture is between the skin of the joint and the white portion, then it feels good to the patient.
Whenever you see how much moisture is present, that's when it becomes clear whether there are any serious injuries or not. "Once you are inside, judge what is denser.
"And when we cure him with fire, make sure his hairs are shaved according to our instructions and the replenishment of his body.
"After washing it gently from its place on top a bit high, then wrap it with a cloth or towel to dry.
"Then tie the other end of its strap gently and instruct the minister to tie it around one of the two cords that come from the pulley.
"Take the small leather strap and gently pass it through both cords from its end until you reach a point just below the pulley. Then tie the end of the cord around in such a way that it will be white when you pull on it gently as needed.
"Then draw out the small cord firmly but gently until it is all drawn out. Then tie the other end and thread up.
"And do not scratch or prick at the veins while lying down. And if you use force on it too gently, he will not heal properly.
After the dislocation has been treated and your shoulder is reset, if you move it in its new position too soon.
After fixing the other joints with stitches and treating them as you would other wounds, as long as it is healed.
And if the dislocation was caused by another illness, make sure to apply any necessary treatments for that illness.
After applying and removing the cast on both sides of it, you then treat it as we have described in this chapter.
And if the dislocation is caused by two different things acting together. When you've finished the first procedure, then apply a poultice with fresh clean oil to the wound.
When you've finished the first procedure, then apply a poultice with fresh clean oil to the wound. And then apply another poultice of fresh cloth soaked in vinegar and oil, and tie it around the affected area, and cover it with two layers of bandages.
Then tie another set of cloth strips in the same pattern and bind them together with stitches at the back of the arms, tying one to the front part above the elbows, and the other to the back part below the elbows.
And tie the second set around the two angles, making a loop with the strips of cloth.
And do not use the fire cautery in place of a surgical one, and if you choose to perform a delicate cutaneous cautery, you must shave off any hair from the incision site, so that it is clear for inspection by the surgeon.
If you follow this procedure strictly, prick with an incision near its center;
And in all the ways that you do it, as long as you use every one of them
and make sure they don't touch the vein.
and it will be cured more quickly. And remember to care for the wounds, and make sure they heal properly.
And do nothing against that rule, unless you are instructed otherwise, and follow what is said to be done first.
And if the treatment causes fear or great pain, do not perform it unless instructed otherwise, and remember that when you know well what we have said is to remove this, if they are causing injury or bleeding. As you open up the abscess and make the incision through its length,
And if they are wide enough so that their sharp point is exposed.
Then apply the cotton over the joint and tie it tightly to prevent any movement of the sharp point remaining, after which you treat the wound as long as it is clean.
And the clean cloth does not expose any of its sharp points inside the wound, as long as you use a bandage or instrument designed to treat it appropriately.
And let the wound heal completely after 6 weeks or more if necessary, and when it is healed as expected, then you can remove the bandage
And in cases where this procedure causes more fear, I think it's best to leave them.
"I will tell you about the work of this chapter, its healing measures, incisions, and extractions.
"They come in different shapes, some small others large, And it is through such cases that they are treated.
"It's by applying hot and cold things, which is expanded for some, or striking with blows.
"And the hue of the abscess depends on the shape of its surroundings, "And it does not bring about any pain, and the abscess will die.
"And through this, the abscess is often frightened and troubled, and its color changes, and it never comes back unless there are arteries or veins to return.
"When this is through no artery, if the patient's shoulder is pressed with both hands, And do not move
This vein closure is achieved through the correct positioning of both arms, and properly aligning them with each other. And you must hold the eyes steady while cutting it, and remove the scissors from above, and deliver them away from all parts of the vein.
If the veins are cut with these characters necessary, if it is convenient to take out the vein and the scissors
If there are any vessels close by that may be cut if the vein is severed, then you must remove all of them and return to the correct position.
"Si li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier" translates to "If the formation of the vein is at or behind.
"Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis" translates to "And when your wounds are healed...
This is similar to a vein opening with the help of a vein holder, with the relaxation of the fingers, and the eyes must stay steady when doing so.
And the treatment of this disease should be as described above with great caution and all our efforts to inform you about it, just like what they did before.
It is important to let the hair grow long and even on the affected area, then tie it back with string at your fingertips, all along the veins that are visible at the edge of the wound, and make sure they extend well.
Then apply a sharp point to cut through the tough tissue deeply on all sides until you reach an artery, as we have described in the extraction of arteries near the temples.
Then put on a needle with two threads if you have one, and bind it to the first point where it has come out of, then tie it tightly to the other end. Then apply a tight bandage along its length according to how long you can reach, and squeeze any protruding blood vessels tightly.
After curing the wound as you would with others, if none of them have come to an end,
because then there is no harm done and the veins will grow as they should, if you want to draw them out all at once. If none of them are cut without injury and cannot be helped or moved.
The muscles of this branch if it is by the section that comes out or extends in the part of the groin, because the intestines descend from that opening to one of the veins.
And this route is either by cutting it or extending it, and these two methods lead to different outcomes:
Or hitting, kicking, beating, or lifting the head back with pain.
And signs when it is by cutting off, if it has little and little, gradually lengthening, and never suddenly. And it is the buttocks which itch until they reach their front part, because the anus presses on them
"The signs indicate that the dislocation is due to stretching or pulling of the ligaments connecting the joint with one of its bones and can cause sudden pain as it tries to expand within the abdominal wall near the angle.
"In no case is it accompanied by bleeding from the intestine and is held in place until swelling causes great pain to occur near the angle.
And for these treatments of iron, because it is convenient to escape them
The manner of the operation is that you command or advise the patient to ram his finger into their anus during healing, if he can endure it. And you hold onto your colon between your hands and gently squeeze the buttocks.
Then cleanse them thoroughly and shave all the hair of their anus to its length. Then cut away all the loose flesh of their abdomen in accordance with what you have learned to treat a wound, so that it may heal completely.
Then wash the skin of their anus as thoroughly as you can, until no filth remains on any part.
Then anoint both your fingers with what you learned from the anus skin, between the white part which is above the buttocks' flesh and between the second skin, and apart where it ends behind the anus, and between the second skin.
and hold tightly to the arm against your chest, with both hands high in front of you instruct the minister to extend his arm above and remove any item that is attached to it behind
and if you feel any pain or discomfort in your belly button when removing it, do not remove anything else if they tell you to
then take a needle or strong thread made of X fibers, and sew it into the back part of where you removed the button, which is after closing the skin sutures. After removing the buttons, take care to sew up any holes that appear with threads of at least four strands. then tie them together in a cross shape and stitch up the skin sutures from both ends with very strong thread of at least four strands. After pulling out the dislocated shoulder joint and stitching it back together in two parts if possible, so that no veins can enter or exit through these openings. And gently straighten the joint as you do with the second one, after which you leave it to heal from the inside. After everything else is done, proceed to round off how it should look like.
Then cut the part that was injured from the flesh of the joint as close to itself as possible, and then remove it if you have not corrected it or repositioned it properly.
And after all of this, apply a bandage soaked in oil and put the joint back together if you have not corrected or repositioned it properly. "And no one has been burned since we said so after incision due to doubt of improvement in healing. Because this happens often, leave it as is until healing is complete;
If the patient complains of pain, use a hot compress and place it on where we have told you to hold onto until healing is complete.
After treating another wound perfectly well
Hernia carnal
In this vein there is no one who can make a treatment using iron or fire.
The previous one said that it was done in the same way as tearing off a bandage, after cutting through them gently.
After doing this to him, treat the abscess that was caused by it, while holding his hand steady.
And after treating it like we have done before, so long as they are firm and steady.
No fracture occurs when you follow what I said, and open the wounds gently.
And do not remove any internal organs unless it is necessary, and if you must, quickly repair all damage.
If the pain becomes too much in this part, whether it be from a wound or syphilis, so long as they are still within.
The swelling of the sack is resolved like that which we have described before, it will be firm and steady.
"And its treatment is by cautery as we have mentioned earlier.
"It can never be treated with fire in this manner: "And it is that the arrow strikes between your hands and you hold down its lower part firmly with three fingers.
"And then extract the sinew that is under the skin and let it go loose but hold its lower part with the other finger.
"And press on the abdomen and count the two fingers that are visible through the sinew to the upper part of the thumb, then count one and another.
"Then extract the thumb and do not touch with sinew or extend any other part, as I told you in the treatment of the intestines' sinew. "And then treat it by cautery like wounds are treated.
"And then treat it by cautery like wounds are treated. And when you prick at the hairs if there is a wound to heal completely as long as it exists
The heat cure is painful and there's no appearance in the process, and the sores are treated with care in this way, and more people get better.
Of the relaxation of the hair on the arms
Many times it occurs on the limbs of the bones, as they are softened by moisture, and is clear to see.
And it worsens when you try to cure it by gently stroking the affected area with a soft cloth.
Then put on two plasters, and try to see clearly by removing the softened cloth from time to time.
And between the plasters hold tight as for other wounds until it is healed and ceases pain.
In anguish
Diseases which are mentioned in our law I hope you understand that I cannot speak about them here.
And no need for two ways
One way is that you look at it and ask it questions when asked, and in doing so provide its cure.
And the other, for whom we have sometimes seen worse because of their actions and those of a dog and sheep and others alike.
These methods are performed in two ways By pulling or pushing.
In the method we do by traction, let us be gentle with warm water as long as they remain soft and pliable until; Then rinse under cold running water while holding them gently in your hand so that you no longer feel the heat.
The process of cutting. It is important to shave the area well, and press them into your hand firmly as you hold them steady, then bind them in place with adhesive tape around each corner, so that when they are completely dry.
And leave any remaining bits of stubble and the fine ones which are near to the roots;
And this manner of torture is done with the same effect as that which is done by pulling out, because in pulling out nothing is removed from the bone through which it moves to get out.
Then treat the wound as much as possible.
disfigurements
Hermofredie is done in two ways One way of doing it is to shave between the second and third fingers as closely as possible like how a woman's body hair would be shaped if she had any, except never cutting her urethra
The other way is when it appears as women, with two breasts instead of testicles
And the cure for the pain and inflammation is to apply cold compresses as well as other treatments.
The second way involves using alcohol wipes on the skin of the finger where it entered, but there is no treatment for that
The splinter is lodged in such a place that it's too close to see; "And no woman has as much strength with one hand, this is a cure.
It's important to remove any excess fluid from the bandage using your hand or another object, and apply it gently.
And do not let them bleed too much so that bleeding does not occur further, and the other treatment until it is healed.
And another herb that is in the mouth of the mare, and its application, and by chance it will occur, according to which they called it "cow disease. If it is convenient for you to apply this treatment as we have suggested earlier, then please proceed with the incision until everything is in order.
Erraticity is when a woman's nature is not perceived as it should be, or if she becomes upset. And by nature at birth, or illness that comes upon her, it is so.
And by nature at birth, or illness that comes upon her, it is so. Or through a sudden shock, or by a subtle blow, it is caused by the mare, the chest, and so on, wherever.
"And prevent conception,
"and to know about it through the experience of life.
If his testicles are swollen and painful, if he is in need of treatment for two days or more.
"If you are a skilled surgeon, and you perform surgery with great precision; then hold steady your hands and eyes:
"with both your fingers together, holding his head on your lap, extending his legs;
"Then the skilled surgeon will cut into them as quickly and carefully as possible, until he has made an incision that reaches both ends of each vein;
"Then he will sew it up with thread and oil, placing the stitches on each side of the incision; and then place him back onto his chest, so that no one can see or understand.
And it is difficult to breathe, if you cover your nose with a soft cloth like a blindfold.
"If their veins are too small, if they break during the process;
"then give them medicines to staunch the bleeding and stop the flow of blood as quickly as possible,
"Apply a plaster of quicklime if it cannot stay put.
"And so make the bandage tight with linen cloth.
"Then apply other remedies as much as you can for how long it is sane to stay put.
And when the abscess comes to a head, if it is convenient to cover according to this manner, then you should increase your strength and exertion. Because the incision that is in the arm must not be touched
hemorrhoids "In wounds that are not easily treatable, and when old ones become difficult to treat.
"And we have already mentioned in the division of similar things, signs, and I will say that which is due treatment.
"The hemorrhoids should be tightened when they are swollen in the morning and do not feel when pressed, unless it is cured with fire.
Those who have hemorrhoids at the mouth cannot be felt, those are unable to heal.
"It is advisable to put the patient in a cold place first, and then apply warm compresses and poultices, and powder for restraining wounds if there are any, especially those of dragons and smoke, and similar things.
"Then put the patient in lukewarm water first, then into very cold water.
And he makes himself a poultice of sumac and sour orange peels and green apples and similar things, and then applies some oatmeal mixed with honey to his back.
And if they are itchy, that is good. If not, he puts poultice on the back and holds them steady so they don't bleed.
Then he applies liniment made from the juice of banana or ginger mixed with wine to the sore spot.
And when the abscess heals and is no longer painfull
and those that are called 'albathirs' are red and resemble the head of an ox in shape, if it is convenient to cover with something like what I have described. And then he applies a poultice until it heals.
"These are the same ways that abscesses heal, whether they're deep or superficial, fistulae, hemorrhoids, and cuts made into stones, as well as other illnesses I mentioned in my previous statement.
It is convenient that I do in this treatise the operation of making an incision when it comes to the marriage, which only cuts deep into the abscess.
"And when you see the swelling of fire, look for where the arteries are and begin to cool it down gently, and if it turns red, you should stop seeing. "But do not hold your breath as long as the pain persists.
"Then put one hand over each vein and cover your nose to prevent it from getting into your eyes.
"And spread out his limbs, put both hands over his groin and tie them well with a cloth;
"Then stretch him onto his right side and apply a strip of cloth over the mouth to prevent choking.
"When you see the instrument being applied, make sure to check how deep it goes into his mouth so that if it doesn't stop moving after being used, and he isn't strangled. And when it comes to dislocations, if the limbs are stretched out, then they cannot move freely.
To align the instrument and straighten it properly
And when one takes hold of the abscess with a curved needle, if that is done skillfully, they can easily open.
And when the bowstring is tied and one wants to remove it from a moist wound with oil that has been dried out or olive oil, they should:
Put the bandage firmly against the wound from above and secure it with clean, dry gauze that is tightly pressed or burned to remove any excess moisture.
Then apply a compress after every two hours as needed until the bleeding stops.
Do not remove the bandage and wound with cold compresses or roots from the liver unless they are burned to a crisp. Reinsert
"And if the wound is healed but you still feel heat, then be sure to apply a cool compress as we have suggested in our previous instructions.
"Instruction for infants. The physician first examines the body to understand its natural shape and signs. He also looks at how she is pressing her back
unless he has had a previous operation when the child's body shape is according to its natural form, and also according to his head, as well as the second line in general.
And when you see these signs, it's best to gently press on her belly so that he defecates quickly.
because when he descends upon his head and is accompanied by the second line with him, and from there it purges out its impurities through a good purification.
And that which comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Because it comes on no part of the body, and over the buttocks or joints, and hands, or at his belly, or else, and is converted by chance to its base, and by other bad things.
"If you treat her gently with care and respect in all these matters, I will show you everything that must be done to help her.
"If a man's head is hurt from an accident and he becomes very young in age or has weaknesses of the mind if it happens to be on his back when they are sitting, then women hold him.
"And the oil in his veins or any other grease is burned off and a vein is torn between its two small parts due to this. "And if it becomes inflamed until the moisture that has been flowing in runs out completely;
"And the belly of the woman until it becomes inflamed and if it does not become inflamed then the female should massage her with oil to soften the veins or arteries;
"Then they put her down gently on a bed and nurse her for as long as she lives. "Now attend.
And if they are separated, gently pull them apart slowly and gradually If they cannot enter together, let the woman sit on a pillow or lift her feet. Then put them down gently and support the woman while she sits down so that she does not fall from sitting up.
And if the hands cannot enter together and are separated by a gap in front of which there is nothing to support them, then hold the baby tightly while supporting their hands so they do not fall apart.
"The child has suffered a dislocation at its ankle. When his feet come together again and you wish to lift him up And then gently lift him up slowly until he is sitting upright.
Then straighten his legs and extend them slowly and gradually.
If he wants to stand up or sit down quickly, support him while keeping in mind the conditions of his condition. If you push, you must endure
"And if it is not well positioned as we have mentioned, repeat the action gently and gradually aligning with natural body position. "When it is light.
And if it does not come as we have experienced and says: "Push harder," and pulls the skin taut, and strains the muscles, and breaks everything in half. And applies to the woman's body tightly and burns it until it is white as snow from the roots of her eyelashes.
And when she is moist, he makes a mirror collar, puts it on, and leaves it for an hour; Then makes her lie still, then tightens the eyelids and nose, and lightly pries open the belly, as she now feels a sudden urge.
The child has dislocated its arm/shoulder When he feels it coming in this way, he puts his hands on her head gently and gently. Then closes the eyes tightly, pulls back the eyelid skin, and lies down flat. And place his hands gently and gently, then let him hold them tight against the belly, and the doctor will feel for any signs of sores as long as they remain visible. And if he closes his eyes, and if you touch his foot or toes and feel for any signs of sores, then place your hands back down. And let the child gently and gently; Instruct the woman to remain still as long as he closes his eyes.
The child has dislocated one arm out of joint I advise removing the hand And if you can't hold it still, and if she moves her arm, then
If she doesn't move them properly when you try to straighten the leg, then
Then instruct the midwife with whom you are acquainted.
And if she does not move in time to lift her arm and lower it, then try to straighten out the limb by force. And when you say "here comes the first sentence to translate", it means that this line should be translated next:
The child was separated from its mother's side and held with both hands stretched out It is advisable for him to gently move his hand back and forth slowly.
And when the eye begins to bleed due to inflammation or injury as we have said before, then he should gently move it back and forth slowly.
And when you have done that, if the patient lies prone on a bed or couch, tell him to gently move his eyes slowly while lying flat. Finish it off by telling them to finish gently and calmly. Of the above method for everything else
Of the above method for everything else When he comes here in this manner for the second time, if one of his joints is still loose or tender despite that, as long as moisture is seen.
And if he feels pressure on his face and neck when the bandage is tightened even though it should not be, he will move away.
After having put it on securely as you can, command her to take care of herself once:
of the dislocation Wounds that heal many times and never in three or two days; And it is not a thing to be extracted unless necessary. Unless they are an extraction of choice and do not live by themselves.
Unless they are an extraction of choice and do not live by themselves. I understand that there may be many, and they will be treated with the same remedy as you apply it to the vein.
And never come naturally like all under us unless we have said so;
If they are very painful, as the cure that is used and done in a subtle way, gently but quickly do what she does; And ensure that it is useful to be done with good treatment. more children
No dislocation shall happen when the marriage is made on the first day or second day or third day or fourth day or fifth day or sixth day or seventh day, but if it happens to be on the fifteenth day and beyond then there shall be a dislocation. If that occurs as described here.
of a dead child
When you treat a woman who has just given birth or is pregnant, as I mentioned in the previous part of this chapter, and it doesn't work anymore, then you are required to perform an extraction with forceps. If you determine that the woman is healthy and has no accidents or history of death,
if the woman sits with her back straight, and her arms bent down and legs lifted.
And apply two sheets to cover her belly if she is lying in bed if not treated for the removal of the placenta.
After spitting out a mouthful of the driest and coarsest oil with garlic, salt, and pepper, take your hands from these oils and seasonings.
After gently rubbing in the lighter oil, take it out and rub with the coarse oil until both are even. Then press on your forehead as you would to wake yourself up.
If the sores are on his eyelids or nose, forehead, cheeks, mustache, temples, or near the eyes, and they itch to scratch, take your finger nails and gently touch them.
And it is advisable that he scratch the sore with his right hand and put the corner of his handkerchief between his left two fingers, gently rubbing the sore until it becomes white.
Then try another remedy, or the third one if they work better.
Then gently move it from side to side, pressing and holding as you do.
If one part becomes detached or slips from its place, hold the other side firm and treat the separated part.
If it doesn't work at all or if you find that one of them is higher than the other, continue using this remedy until you are sure it has been completely done.
If one hand comes in front of the other and cannot be pulled back by the thumb, as long as you hold it tightly. Then put on the joint where there is a sprain or an injury to your thumb and continue with the other hand after that.
"And if the dislocated child is large and it comes out in one piece, or if there's a serious injury, make sure you apply pressure between your fingers and press down on the shoulder. "Or use an instrument called 'almidach', which is used to apply pressure when there's bleeding, or after surgery.
"And if the child naturally loses its grip in one piece, then...
"...then tie the arm to something strong and press down on it forcefully if there's bleeding or an injury.
"If that doesn't work then try cutting off circulation by applying pressure directly above the heart to stop the bleeding.
"...if it is around the belly or the chest, then press as hard as you can until the bleeding stops.
And if they prick at their base lightly, then it will be an irritation to the mouth of the mare
And if it is dislocated in the belly or thigh, then make sure you pull it out with both hands. Keep the belly or thigh dry so that moisture does not worsen it.
And if the other member is dislocated and its arm cannot support it from falling to one side, then tie a piece of cloth over the mouth so that it does not fall. Then go on to step two or three depending on severity.
And the mouth of the patient is held with something soft so that it does not move if necessary to keep it moist and wet. It nourishes them gently, soothingly moist and wet.
And the swelling is held down by its chest wall, and it should lie flat if you have advised to do so.
"And if it is not held steady by anything at all, let it stay still.
Once you have done this, treat the patient as we instructed in our previous instructions.
And when the bleeding stops, if there is any restraint left on it, and the patient is treated with other remedies.
And a woman was in her belly when she had given birth, then she gave another to that one, and refused others. After the patient was taken away on the stretcher, he began to breathe heavily
I called for help and thought about it quickly but could not hold back the pain.
I put on a strong adhesive bandage, wrapped around an arm, then after a few moments, some others came I wiped my mouth, as there was nothing inside it.
If I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
I wanted to remove the pain, but while holding his hands open as much as possible; And when she had removed it gently and with a little bit of bone from above.
But I do not remember this chapter saying that when the master is about to remove a foreign object, he should give help.
After this comes the shape of pressure, where you lose the books;
And when it has lost its second lien, it is then separated. Anywhere, whether they are more subtle or restrictive, do whatever you please.
And if the mouth is of a fine kind and straight, it must be trimmed so that there are no long branches or excess flesh around. And if the limbs are of a certain firmness from this kind of fur that is firm on one side and the other, half palm or more.
And if you pull them out by the mouth as in opening up their ears, they will come out.
Another form to its more subtle and lighter kind may be made of the fur or skin around it according to how fine the tendons are. And if you pull out two joints, like this, from half palm long and two palms wide.
And when you open up the instrument in front of her to see it, if she is holding on tightly and lying down, then pull out two joints so they are together as a bundle from half palm long and both palms wide. Tie its tail between her thighs and stretch your legs over, and then pull out the two joints and tie them together at the instrument's head; Upon taking your instrument, if you have done so in the manner that we have seen, until she sees it as we see
The instrument is sharp and numerous. And when you look at the instrument closely, it becomes sharper and higher for its quantity.
If you did not use this instrument when it was necessary, then there would be no escape from the necessity.
When the second line is set in place if you command to the patient that he retract his eyelid and then gently close it, hold your hands at the mouth and nose. If she moves like this, it's good
If not, prick gently and make sure that you don't hurt her eyelid or nose. All these herbs, or none of them should be cooked or heated in any way.
"Then, hold a rope or someone to pull gently on the other end of it as you speak into their mouth, and keep your tongue from touching the lips.
And then straighten it out when we have said so. If she lets go of her tongue prematurely
And after this treatment has been done, do not let go unless the patient moves their arm to wash it with oil or wipe off sweat, and then bathe it in water. And when they have lost their hair completely, if the first and second hairs continue to grow steadily, as long as the pores of the skin do not open.
But it is better to move gently towards both sides and front, and then stop. And if they come loose
And the lips of the mouth should be kept close as we have said that the treatment will straighten it out and steam the herbs.
"And if she does not obey what we have said, then guard her with your strength.
"And when it is in the mouth of the wife, you should tie its four corners with thread. "If she says yes and returns [or 'is willing'], then come forward to marry her.
"However, if she is pregnant or has a bad smell in the stomach and head, and is bleeding from an injury. "If it suits to use fumigation for [unclear], then do so:
"None of the ancients have tried fumigations with dry figs and raisins.
The form of the instrument when you are to fumigate the woman is such that it holds tightly the flowers and the second part, if this one is like this.
"And it is like seeing a snake, you should put your hand over the fire to touch its head gently in its nature and hold widely held by the fire.
"And if fumigations are done on charcoal, let it burn until it is finished, then start another one.
The first child was born with a defect where it cannot move at all. When giving the patient an enema to clean their anus, make sure they do not move around too much and gently guide them so that it does not touch.
Then, apply a poultice made of wine and oil to the wound until it is healed.
And if you doubt that he will not move, tie a rope around him and let go of his hands, so that he does not try to move as long as the eyes are closed.
And no matter how many times this happens in an abscess or incision. When opening a vein suddenly If you are going to cauterize it, if like we have said about the fire of the arrow.
Fistulas that occur due to the base are draining, and those from the outside of it come out too quickly or in multiples.
And when these fistulas are young and tender, then you must operate gently with a small incision or probe, and no matter how many times they occur.
"When a wound is extracted, there may be bleeding or pus; therefore it must be treated carefully.
If the fistulas pierce the vein and cause the loss of blood from the site. And they pass through the connection between the thigh bone and the knee.
And if it is located at its base, do not worry; If you prick the base or bottom of the fistula, use a thin needle made from iron or steel to insert it when there is no tortuousness.
If there is tortuousness, if you prick with a fine needle or horsehair until the tension or hair feels to your touch.
And if it is not torn, and bleeding does not occur, as we have stated. "I can't find anything to translate next. If you have a fever, please seek medical attention.
And when the fistula is present in the vein or channel of urine, if it jumps to urine and cannot be cured by medicine alone.
When the skin is perforated through the incision, if it is pierced at its base If there was no bleeding and the pain disappeared immediately, if it is because of injury, then do not bleed excessively, as this may cause further damage.
And in these fistulas that persist there is no cure to be found, and the matter worsens as they continue to grow.
In those that do not heal and are persistent there is hope for healing through surgery if you have experienced this, as we know the pain between your hands and its base.
And let his legs grow down to his crotch, and bring his crotch close to his belly. "Take shelter under an awning or tent if you encounter a difficult path, as long as you are patient until it is passed.
"If the hairs at their base are pricked, make sure to hold your fingers steady as they do not move until they grow.
"Or if you sense that there is a difference between the surgeon's hand and the knife, make sure to be cautious as you hold it. "If not done properly, [it] cannot heal.
"Sometimes it can be difficult to do well at all, but that's the point;
"And if you make it so, [it] can be healed with a subtle cauterization according to the size of the fistula. "And when you have done all that in the fistula, as long as it stays put at its base; And do this twice or three times until you ensure that these hairs are evenly trimmed to resemble a quill of an arrow.
And then apply the poultice ointment while holding tightly onto these hairs until they bleed, and also extract the arrowhead as soon as it breaks through.
"If he is sane, it will do.
Otherwise, nothing can be done.
and hold it between your teeth, and do not bite down on anything that is firmly in place, and put an extensive covering of thread or cloth over the fistula to cover it up. if you are starting a fistula and want to stop it before it reaches the outside, then apply the cautery after it has stopped growing into the cloth. And deliver the tent as well.
And make sure that these hairs are evenly trimmed to resemble a quill of an arrow, and they will no longer be visible.
"And if there's a vein that isn't visible or the painkiller is applied incorrectly.
The fire cautery consists of two parts to know how to treat burns that are attached and those with moisture.
Then apply treatment for blisters or bruises until the burn has completely healed and remove any remaining charred skin.
Then treat burns caused by scorching heat with cool compresses and apply dry dressings.
When restored, he will remain straight
If the fistula comes out of its proper place and is held down by both cords, it will cease to cause any trouble or concern.
If you suspect a dislocation and there is no relief of discomfort or injury through the first method, apply one of the following methods:
If you use fire cautery as advised or try other treatments like first aid measures or repositioning.
Do not apply excessive pressure that could damage the base of the skin, gently ease off any tension and allow the skin to heal naturally. "And then the treatment begins.
"And then the treatment begins. "Or if you use a bandage and apply it to the base of her head, covering it gently or using some other instrument pointed out. "And then apply pressure firmly over the wound as much as possible; "Then try to restore the wound and stop the fistula in its base.
"Then try to restore the wound and stop the fistula in its base. If it is less severe, do not worry too much;
"And no time will pass until the fistula heals in this manner. "When you apply a bandage to the fistula and it is firmly pressed against its base, if one uses a bandage covered in this manner as described. And when puncturing in this way, and to pierce the fistula all along it until it reaches the head.
"If the fistula is located at its base, and you touch it with a finger or another part of your hand, then pull out that same finger.
"And tie the right arm to the left leg, and hold them together with a cord or string.
"And keep them tied up all the time as long as the hairs grow evenly between two sides.
"Then heal the wound while it is open and clean.
If the fistula does not break off completely, if you pierce it in all ways as described, do not worry And when doing so, make sure to treat the wound properly afterwards to ensure it remains healthy.
"This fistula from a soft spongy substance that has been made into a lump or a mass. "And the other side is not like this one in any way because it cannot be tied up as well or in the same manner.
"The eyes may be different ways: "Or they may be sunken into the base like grains of lead and in little and big amounts as well as more or less, with the base and the top of it.
"Those who are freed if they have little moisture, or touch the base of a vein, or prick an abscess, and turn blue in their corners;
"The treatment for those who have freed the foundation: instruct them to let their hairs grow long and even, as they do not move when cut; "If you feel pain or tightness in your veins: prick the roots of your hairs to release tension.
"And if their hairs cannot hold due to moisture: if they prick near the elbow, or on the hand, or from any part of the body. "And extract those hairs and powder them with ashes that are used in the fire cautery; "Or burn them if you do the same procedure as described by the medical treatise.
"The joints of the limbs are unable to move if they encounter a sharp object while trying to straighten themselves. "If the hairs cannot be parted and the fingers are firmly pressed down on their base, then it is a light treatment.
"If the hairs cannot be parted and the fingers are firmly pressed down on their base, then it is a light treatment. "And if you use them to cut or tie laces, and treat it like we said before, until it is healed, and do not make a cut by force. "If you should repair the wound in this manner:
"If you should repair the wound in this manner: "Take the finger and hold it in a loop around another needle, then take the thread from there to make a knot on top of one end, and turn both ends under the other needle. If you have enough thread, tie them securely.
"Securely tie the threads together. Then pull out the needle and make sure all of them are tied tightly.
Then apply oil or grease to the base of it, and press down on it, and command the patient that when they rest
Then let it stay until it is dry, and once it is healed if the wounds are treated properly, as long as it is sound
"Dry thoroughly before using any material or foundation Often there is bleeding from the bowels due to internal constriction; and when illness is old and treatment does not work If you wish to reset at the joint's end where there may be friction or rubbing against something hard that would cause moisture; Then treat it until it is sound, as necessary.
And if the reset does not hold, if you continue to force it too hard while holding something else firmly on your hand, until it is sound and dry. Then treat it until it is sound.
The first sentence of the medieval medical treatise A flea is a small creature that often makes its home on the skin, and will certainly bite.
And whenever they break, it causes death by stabbing through all over the body, in every place where there is a hand that holds.
And the treatment should involve taking a cord of sinew from an ox's leg, or a tough vine, and putting it around the wound as tight as you can make it turn. After tightening the cord tightly around the wound and holding it in place for as long as you can, then cut off your hand with a sharp knife to release the flesh from its roots.
And if so, take a cure from iron or thorn according to this method and gently rub it against the flea; be cautious and keep rubbing until Do not forget that both hands must hold tightly at this point, and press firmly.
And if you see a fire doctor present, follow his instructions as they come.
Do not ever apply silver or iron, or from head to toe, or make a full incision without reason or cause.
And never do anything with these means small ones, for those who are accustomed to them And when treating infants who are weak and in great pain, the treatment is also painful.
And when treating infants who are weak and in great pain, the treatment is also painful. The form of fire cautery for small and large wounds should be as follows:
and when the veins are bound together as you see it or cut through them in any direction.
And if one of the ribs is broken off, and then the other
And if either of the ribs is cut off completely or pierced through with a needle, and you pierce all the small veins and put them into the belly of a calf or sheep, and sew up any opening in one rib, then close it as best you can, but leave an opening on the other side. And when the medicines are done, if the thread is held tightly by a strong needle, then you seal it with glue.
This is how the circle forms.
And if the medicines are neither too hot nor too cold, and you anoint them with oil or any other substance, then bind them lightly. Here is the translation: "Then he places his two hands together as tightly as possible, and gently pulls on the hair of each leg, until it is pulled taut, after which he ties a knot. "If he stays awake for an entire night, that will be even more beneficial.
And with a bellyache disorder and the medicine hastens to heal if the pain is severe enough.
"Or if the dislocation occurs at or near a joint, whether it's on the arm or leg, but is done with as little force as necessary for an infant.
"And this is how to perform a subtle dislocation that holds onto the skin only:
"In previous chapters, I have discussed the treatment of wounds.
"We will discuss the treatments for hands and feet in a moment.
"Wounds vary depending on how they are made, and depending on the type of wound or injury that has been sustained.
"The wounds are treated by cutting into the heel, and the toes and fingers, or the arm or leg, depending on what is needed.
"The incision should be made along the line of the ribs if it is on the chest or stomach, or at the top of the shoulder blade, or near the belly button, and similar parts.
"I will tell you how to treat that kind of wound, and explain the simple treatments for wounds on the shoulders because they are common.
"I tell you that if a simple wound comes from the chest or shoulder and doesn't bleed immediately, then hold tight to the base of it while applying pressure over the affected area until the bleeding stops. "If you're trying to treat a wound on the forehead and it comes from a nearby part of the body, then apply pressure over that area.
"Also make sure they have plenty of wine and large pieces of meat.
And if it is not healed quickly, whether from injury or disease, then no wine should be drunk nor any other drink taken.
And after the wound has been cauterized and the abscess opened, only apply a poultice of oil or wine.
If there is no abscess to be opened, if the wound has been thoroughly cleansed with its own pus and it's not being infected by air or powder, I will say a little bit later.
And if the arrows have been removed, so that any wounds may heal quickly and completely.
"If the wound is large like a sword cut and similar things, and the veins cannot be tied together with stitches, if they are bound by glue or stitching.
If the wound is discovered in bone, quick and easy to remove with just a bit of care if necessary. After healing the wound with medicine, restore strength in the flesh and command the patient to eat large portions of meat, as tested and proven useful for such cases; and similar things.
And if you burn or frostbite, it won't hurt to the bone, unless the frostbite is total, and the patient will recover in time.
And if there is an artery or vein injured without cutting into it, and the patient cannot stop bleeding with medical means alone, then you must cut off what bleeds. If not done properly, the cautery can cause harm.
And if the wounds are small and simple, then light treatment is enough. Make sure you remove any powder that may remain after cleansing it.
The method of removing the powder is as follows: Take a part of incense. Cut off two parts from Dragon II. Hold the wound tightly for as long as it can be held steady and joined to all its parts.
And then let go gently, if she doesn't fall Because the medicine is not strong enough
And once alone this has been done when there is no oil or fire the wound has not healed
And if it moves the wound, especially when this powder comes in contact with it
But mixed with any digestible ointments or ground wheat and honey that are equal amounts, until the wound is healed. And then continue other treatments as needed.
Then if the splinter of bone comes with the wound and is small, it can be extracted with tweezers.
And I will tell you after the fractures are healed.
from the wound
If there is no difference between the joint and the other bone, but if the joint part has been cut
If there is no other injury that needs treatment and nothing else to restrain it, then let the cure go on without anything restraining. "Do not apply any ointment to the wound, as its cold nature prevents heat circulation and continues with the heart, which is the largest member;
"If you have such medicine available in the form of an oily ointment and some cold water, apply it gently to soothe wounds as mentioned before;
"And if the wound is large with many bandages, then the treatment until it is healed.
"If the wound is superficial and bleeds easily at the point of injury;
"And if the artery appears torn or damaged, and bleeding occurs, then you must make a tourniquet;
"And if the trachea is torn or damaged and breathing becomes restricted, keep it held while moving to prevent choking; "Then hold the tourniquet until medical help arrives and leave no gaps in treatment to prevent loss of life;
"The wound is pressed upon the bone if it pierces. "If there is bone-piercing, the wound should be cauterized immediately to prevent further bleeding and damage.
"The wound is fresh if powder upon the powder I have spoken. "And if there are fistula or abscesses, as I said earlier in my treatise.
"If it's a lance or a dagger wound and the wound is full-length, you should look for the arrow/dagger to help in healing. "If the wound is mortal.
"If the wound is not full-length and fresh throughout its entirety, do not apply powder immediately but wait until you have made preparations for powdering to prevent damage and save the limb. "But if it's a contusion attractive, and you hold it steady two times before letting go.
"And if it swells with pus from moisture, and you apply a compress to the wound three or four times, depending on how many blisters have formed. "If there is no spasm, do not tremble in any part of your body from pain. "And when you see the bone is saved, know that the wound has been treated properly. "Treat all other wounds as well while healing occurs.
"If it cannot heal and worsens, then there is an abscess forming.
"The treatment as you know how to do. "If the wound is from a spear or arrow, and it's not too deep or on the back, then you can treat as you would normally do. "It swells with pus, burn.
"And if it is small and powdery, and when it gets stuck in the bone, and has caused pain or injury to others, seek help. "If they are not severe enough, if you leave them open for healing, and if the extractions should be performed gently;
"And other injuries on other parts of the body will occur just like we have mentioned.
Doubled hip displacement
"The abdominal muscles are large and strong, but tender;
"There is no entry into the intestines through any means other than the anus.
"The stitching is more painful than a small injury compared to a large one. Because of that we take great pains not to tear the intestines in tearing and ripping.
"Because the intestine swells so much that it feels like you are eating fruit, if they enter more deeply, and because of this we must be careful with the small injury, for example we will not sew up the intestine to its place instead of other parts.
The second sentence to translate
The abdominal and thoracic cavities are joined in the process of joining the abdominal organs and other skin wounds are common to both types of wounds.
And all those are more clean with a belly closure and I will say one word and declare it.
When the wound is small, and no intestine tissue is damaged, and there are no problems with removing it, one of two ways can be taken: Either through the incision made by the wound itself as we have described, or because the intestine is swollen from cold.
And when it's cold, try one of these two ways: Moisten a sponge or drip hot water onto the sole of your foot only, or heat it with steam and cold compresses and warm up the intestine as long as it remains swollen.
"And every time it has happened, there is swelling.
And when you see the inflammation departing if moist and wet intestines are burned, because from that point onwards it is extremely painful.
And if it cannot be opened even slightly due to the injury in its tool used for cutting off the excess flesh;
The first treatment is that it should not be shaved, because otherwise there would be a great necessity and it would happen.
It's the instruments for cutting
If he strikes at the breast and misses it, then it is like this. And when a wound becomes larger and the intestines swell if you remove them according to their natural shape in their own way, then it is better.
When the wound is wide and in the lower part of the belly, if it is desired to apply the treatment on its back, put his legs higher than his head. And if the dislocation is in the lower belly area, it puts pressure on both sides and moves inward towards one of them so that the higher part comes above the other.
It is important to treat dislocations with great care and urgency.
Small wounds should be bandaged first, then have someone else hold your hand so that it does not move and bind the sides together.
This is the common way to suture wounds, and if you are using a needle or more, depending on the size of the wound, leave some space at the base of the wound, then put in a stitch that has a strong thread. Pierce through the layers of skin with two needles that are attached to each other, making sure you pierce only one side at a time and bind together all four sides.
"Pierce a vein with two needles of the second kind, and then fasten together the two ends of the wound, and then leave one end open. Then pierce another hole...
"When you have pierced the vein with the first needle, do not stop doing so until all of the wound is closed.
"The needles may be small or large, as the smaller ones penetrate right through to the bone and larger ones cannot enter. "It is important that they are fine.
"Do not pull the needles out too soon from the skin or bone to avoid them penetrating and tearing the wound before closing it.
"Then remove the needles from the hole and cover them with cloth or bandage to hold them in place while the wound is healing.
And this manner of tattooing is more convenient in small wounds, because it pierces a needle or II.
The second method is common and is that you join the two shoulder blades together with a needle or thread.
And when you have joined these two shoulder blades together and you want to pierce the place where you started, do it in this way so that you can easily pass through.
And between these two stitches use a smaller needle.
This method sews shut and causes one wound in the belly that was three inches long and was a full palm's worth of fat, and it was an internal injury four palms long, and there was an incision in the belly.
I removed his intestine then it took him 14 hours to recover, and he was cured afterwards
And they knew that he would die, but it was a miracle.
"And do not touch any part of it, because there is no cure for it, nor are there any medicines. "And twice a day apply some honey water until the wound is healed.
"Here are two other ways of suturing:
"Take the needle and sew around where it was broken.
"If it has been pierced through both sides of the bone, if you pierce or pass near another point on the other side.
"The thought behind this stitching is that you stitch in the same way as they do for fur coats, and leave a space on one side so it can be pulled all the way through.
"The second way of stitching is to join them as if you are joining two natural pieces together. You pull one end over the other and stitch it.
"Pierce gently or carefully around its circumference, leaving some of it untouched. "Then twist the arrowhead and pierce through to the densest part where the flesh meets bone, leaving some of it untouched.
"After piercing through to the densest part where flesh meets bone in one of the others, pierce the other side as well.
"And that is how you dress and repair it more commonly.
"When you pass through this passage, no one can confirm or deny what must be done to the belly. It may be stitched with two arrows.
"One should remove one arrowhead from one side and the other from the other, in a manner similar to how tailors mend clothes.
"And when you sew through the belly, it should be stitched more tightly than any other part of the belly.
The wounds are of a similar nature to those of other injuries.
And it is that when you touch the fresh wound to its full extent, if you remove the flesh and skin too.
Then sprinkle with a clean cloth while holding it steady to remove any remaining flesh that may still be present as long as the wound is covered. And wash them well and thoroughly the wounds themselves and the mirrors. Then treat the wound as you would other injuries while it is healing.
And if you do not have any medicine, then apply the same methods as above, continuing to cleanse and change bandages twice until it is healed.
But in this case you do not have any other medicine available at all for these simple wounds;
And if you suspect that the pain is affecting both the principal joints, it may be wise to gently apply heat or ice and move them slowly.
And if the pain or injury worsens over time, and frequent vomiting occurs, especially if it is from alcohol poisoning, and more specifically if it comes to the intestines.
And when dealing with the large intestine, it's even easier to treat than treating the small one.
The small intestine is called the "young one" and cannot heal once it has been ruptured, and it's because of its proximity to the veins that this occurs, as well as by the subtlety of all the bowels, and approaching her nature near the heart.
If a vein in the arm is ruptured and reset back into place as quickly as possible, while it's fresh.
And if it is very swollen and turning black or blue, you should try to lie the limb that has turned black, as this can lead to veins and arteries becoming damaged.
"Between the lesion and the healthy tissue, place the dislocated parts on a sterile pad to prevent further infection while aligning them for extraction.
from rupture to bruising
"When the intestines are torn and there is a small wound, if it cannot be restored by applying pressure alone, as this often happens when stabbed in the abdomen.
"The wound was on the right side of the stomach and it became a fistula, and there was drainage from it.
"I followed the treatment until he recovered completely and regained strength.
"And when I saw him better, I doubted whether his intestines would heal properly. "But he was not harmed but improved in disposition and appetite for food and drink.
"When there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be treated as follows: "Firstly, tie off the great veins of the wound and when he pricks his lips to tie them up so that they do not move;
"Then it cauterizes the wound and holds it in place until no more bleeding occurs then applies another clamp after that manner so as long as there is any chance of bleeding. "And then they sew up the wound.
"When it occurs in the intestine there is no inconvenience and it can be sewn up with a thin thread that goes from the intestine to another best way.
"Take the chief of this intestine thread and tie it to another thin thread which can be removed if necessary then tie off the thin thread in an opening and sew up the intestine and close it.
This way of dressing bones is not used as often as following the instructions for healing.
When the wound is deep and wide, especially when it's in one of the major intestinal veins, unless there is no chance for recovery, then subtlety must be used to treat it.
a fistula wounds or abscesses when they are inflamed if it is called a fistula and especially when it is opened and broken open
A fistula is formed when the body's duct becomes strict and painful, without causing pain or swelling of a gland.
It can occur once clearly, then again heavily. It can happen once clearly, and another time more noticeably.
In the discussion of wounds in general, any wound that is not healing and has no cause for it, only one out of seven known causes can be at fault. It is to know through a small incision or probe. unless unless there is great pain, he will not leave the treatment as it stands. or if there is too much swelling. and the patient's condition is poor in quality. or if their medication is not strong enough for treatment. or if the patient has a case of plague-like corruption. unless there is weakness in the body's ability to digest and absorb nutrients, which affects health. or if they have wounds or sores.
I've listed all the causes and symptoms here in this division of treatments for ailments such as this.
"It is advisable for you to know how this fistula treatment procedure works.
Fistulas occurring in both arms are sores that can occur anywhere on the body. because they have fistulas arising in large veins, arteries, nerves, or even the heart, or any of the organs mentioned, or at random anywhere on the body. And if any of the joints come loose from its proper place, then it will cause harm to the limb.
All the fistulas that are made this way are of healing nature and do not have forbearance only labor but ignorance as well
And if there is no fistula that does not come from what I have mentioned and you do treatment and see the course, then the fistula will be straight if it wants to
And if the fistula is tortuous, when searching for a subtle course, because the path twists and turns severely.
And if the fistula has many twists and turns so that you cannot search for it properly with attempts, if you use one of the paths, because moisture from one path to another is bad, and makes mistakes.
Then ask the fistula where it is and nerves as firmly in front of you, and ask for great pain that he feels at the touch of your hand, and from which place does he feel it.
and when you truly know where it is located, whether it's a joint, a nerve, an artery or a vein, or in any of the others I mentioned earlier, if the cause according to what I said holds true, then make sure to follow through and carry out all the procedures that are necessary.
And as long as the fistula is well positioned and properly healed, if you follow through with the procedures I mentioned earlier, then continue to apply ointments gently around it, covering all of its circumference evenly.
And as long as they are healthy, you should keep applying ointment on the affected areas.
And if it is not healed as mentioned earlier and the fistula itself becomes corrupted or damaged due to burning, then you should proceed with cautery as advised previously.
"Arms or legs cannot move freely or remain still at first, as we have said.
"The eyes become swollen and the veins corrupt if blood loss continues until there is no more fresh blood. Then the treatment must be started as soon as possible.
"If not cured immediately and do not receive immediate attention, things will worsen:
"As soon as you realize it has gone deep and all the corruption is present, then restore balance.
"If cured immediately, everything will be alright. "In that case, if the corruption is too much at first, you should not seek immediate help: "If there are no other options left to try then only wait for nature.
"If the corruption is small and you are able to tie it down with bandages or if there are no other options available then do not leave loose ends: bind everything together tightly.
And when the moisture makes it move contrary to its purpose, and there is no harm or fear, if patience and moisture are present, and deliver the body parts.
And if you do not remove the ointment after an hour, and leave it on while the wound is still moist, until the bones are less porous, then when they become more delicate.
And if it is a large bone, such as the leg or arm, and you only remove the infection while not touching any other part of the bone, then heal the wound.
And if it is just a small piece that has become infected with pus, and it comes to the tip of the bone; If you wish to drain all the infection, and then treat until it is dry.
And if there is a fistula in his leg that you are treating for example and helping with this chapter.
There was a young man of about 20 years old who had an injury in his leg due to which it swelled up and became inflamed.
But he tried to pull it out over and over again but the abscesses broke open and started flowing pus and became inflamed due to swelling.
They tried to cure him for 2 more years and could not find any way to treat his hand so that it stopped swelling. His cheeks became red from the injury and he had a yellowish color.
I bought a tent in one of these trips, and then questioned the patients about their feet, and found that some of them came into contact with each other at all points on the leg.
I tried very hard but could not get to one of the abscesses as it was so deep and rotten that it would spread infection if cut open.
I sought a remedy to heal my corrupted bone, but I took care not to allow any further corruption.
And having applied remedies soaked in soothing liquid for too long, it did not help.
And then I tried again and saw the bone clearly, found it still corrupted in its way, and the sore, but could not heal it. But I couldn't help when I applied pressure to the bone and felt its whole surface, then applied more remedies. And it healed and became sound again, but there was no more to be done for the cure because of the small wound which could not suffer pain, and by fear of death that I had from him. For the evacuation of blood was sudden but complete, and it arose from the bone an arrow, and there was no injury or pain to speak of in all its parts, nor did the wound arise
And if it is broken in any way as follows: Stretch out the arm of the man towards the head when opening it up, but command him not to extend his hand above. And make the other arm larger than the smaller one on top of it, stretch out its elbow and bring up the shoulder if you draw down the shoulder blade to align them both with the body.
And then put on or apply a cloth soaked in oil over the arm so as to cover it,
and may you see and feel the contamination, and also another time.
And if the arm is corrupted already, it will not open up, and corruption may spread in many places or parts, if you find a whole one.
then put on the other part of it with oil to cover the corruption and let the length of the corrupted area grow if you've said so.
"And if the dislocation is in a joint, if the joint becomes corrupted, or if an injury occurs to another part of the body.
"Or when there is no other reason for it except two joints being out of place;
"Or when the dislocation occurs from the elbow or shoulder joint, if it's coming from one finger or hand, but in any case you must check that there is no other reason for the dislocation. "And it happens in all ways as I mentioned, except your hand or arm can't cause any harm to you;
"And the bones are often affected when the joint is corroded due to a lack of lubrication and the misalignment of the joints, as well as their size and shape, roughness and subtlety, large and small, hardness. "And because you must ensure that each treatment has similar effects to the previous one;
"And show you the instrument that will help you more accurately according to your understanding of this art and witness its use in treating diseases. "If you consider it appropriate for the instrument that helps you more.
"The dislocation can occur due to internal pressure or external force.
"And when you have healed the dislocation by treatment of disease and it still remains or is caused by malice which is more severe than a member's defect.
"The signs that it may occur are when the limbs become black or seem to be on fire and after the burning they begin to corrode each other and spread throughout the body.
"If you have been stung by venomous creatures such as scorpions and water snakes, the corrosion is most severe at two points, if one of them stings, then it cannot move to come out to your hand.
And if it comes to the hand when opening the joint, or with any friction, so that the inflammation does not subside in time.
and if it comes on the arm, when applying pressure.
And if it passes through the wrist, then death is certain and there is no remedy for that except repentance from one's own faults.
and until the patient knows exactly when or how inflammation occurs at the first joint if pressure is applied on the second joint.
and if it comes or goes through everywhere, if friction happens all over the body. And if it ascends to the leg when applying pressure on the ankle joint;
and if it descends from the heel, there is no remedy other than stopping the pain that will lead to death.
And the way of friction or swelling is to bind one limb and stretch another, so that there are certain measures for each limb separately, and others for both limbs together.
"Then you should shave your head or side of the body if it touches the healthy area and causes another injury to the shoulder.
"And when you apply fire therapy, if you burn the healthy skin or put on any powders restraining them;
"Then apply your medicine as soon as it is done and bind the member with an unstitched bandage until it heals;
"And you will be told when to go home on sick day:
"The fire scar appeared at the second wound and was very painful until it healed completely;
"And when the wounds were healed, if you needed to cover them again, it would be painful.
"After that, when the second wound reopened and it was painful, it came to me and I put on healing things after cleaning up the wounds. And they couldn't stop until both were healed.
And it is my wish to touch him gently with my hand, and I do not want that what I have expected will come true. And I also wish to remove his hands quickly, so he does not worsen the situation because they are weak.
He recovered from it and returned to himself, and he held on tightly with his hands, and was saved.
And I did not have any hope that this would ever come true because he had already succeeded in doing it before.
No time has come to release him from his captivity and leave him alone for as long as he does great damage. Then they ran away and left their clothes scattered around, leaving only a vestige of clothing behind them; The skin that is on top of it is as smooth and delicate as a dove's feathers, they do not run to the bone or the nerves, such sicknesses are called "healthy" but are also called "foul";
"If it is so long that it touches the bone, call a fistula.
"And if you squeeze too hard with one hand and very gently with the other, as though it were a bandage. It will not cure itself from its corruption.
If it is too tight and the corruption is still present, then cut off what is causing it.
Look at its size and the bow that causes it to be painful; if it is an Egyptian remedy then do this. Take it and oil it gently, put a bandage soaked in hot water on it until the remedy turns red, then apply it thick as honey.
Then take what you need and do it quickly and gently, and close the wound, hold tight. "And let the medicine rest for two hours before straining.
"Do this procedure many times until both ends are frayed or loose.
"And do not apply any fire cautery when the medicine is present and you are holding it tightly, or if you press fire to its base. Hold the eyes steady until they grow.
"And the eyes will not feel pain when you apply fire cautery or hold it tightly. If there is any burning sensation from the fire or if there's a little bit of dizziness, don't worry. "Or you can apply fire cautery with honey and wine mixed together. Honey has the property of soothing and cleaning, while the wine adds strength.
"When you have done that and it is clear to the patient that their eyes are well frayed, if there's any burning sensation when applying fire cautery or pain while doing so, use rose oil and wine as a remedy.
Or you may apply heat to any of the aforementioned parts or organs without specifying which ones.
and the eye, which cannot be opened if it is applied with heat for too long, may swell or become blind.
If the wound is too large that only a small part of it can be treated or if the heat causes swelling which makes further treatment difficult, then the patient should seek medical help immediately.
And if you cannot treat it like you have seen or if the abscess is in this manner that it reaches the base of the wound, because when an abscess is in front and does not allow entry to sharp objects and you cannot treat it as you would normally do. "The bow may not be loosened at all,
"The bow may not be loosened at all, and take consolidants to help heal the wound, and bind up any loose threads. And then apply force to tighten the first wound as much as possible, and follow up with another dressing according to how much of each wound needs attention.
And for the other wound that is on the shoulder, he should apply force to tighten it and check what comes out of it, whether pus or not, enough, too little, digestable, indigestable.
And if the patient feels pain or not, and how strong is its pain, and whether they have a fever or not, pay attention to the nature of the wound as it heals, so you can see that healing progresses.
And then it will apply the morning or noon, when you remove the bandage if there is another burn and reapply the dressing
And after many strokes, if your health worsens, because the condition approaches its end.
It also applies when it has happened before in the patient's wounds and when they do the opposite.
After every meal after a long time, saliva accumulates in his mouth so that he cannot eat.
And the eyes become tired of tearing and are prone to swelling if there are many dry medicines in circulation or substances that cause dryness.
The inflammation ends when the wounds are treated with oil and butter applied directly to them, but using too many oily substances can make the wounds worse.
After that you should moisturize it further.
And when the wounds have finally healed or if you take care of them and apply honey and aloe vera and incense, and grind it with powder as a base for the fire.
Then after a while he becomes pale, the skin of his chest begins to swell, and no one can bear it any longer, and he roots out his own heart which is also like flour and cornmeal. And in the application of simple or complex remedies: they break them up, and mix with powder, add to it the honey that I have mentioned, and apply it.
And the treatment is continuous, and no longer treated by this method alone after corruption has set in, causing pressure on the bones, or hard members. if the cure of the fistula, as we have mentioned here before.
The bandage is a band that does not bind the joint of the hand, or the finger, but by accident it may be found in others two.
And when it is healed and they are no longer restrained if an anchor comes, and it becomes a burden on the roots of the joint, and by accident spreads all over.
"And comes to dislocations occurring at joints, as long as it brings great pain and is the limbs doubled up, and the color goes white.
When you treat it as we have described in the division and the treatment does not provide relief, then consider that you apply heat to the joint, and afterwards cauterize the wound after. The cauterization must be done with a healthy arm and clean hands.
And press the eyes tightly shut, and place a bandage over them to protect from injury. After curing the wounds as much as possible.
And if there is a problem in healing because of old scarring or previous injuries to the joint,
And as you see both corrupted areas that are visible at this time, and then treat them until they heal.
If it is broken or torn, and there's a lot of pain involved, if possible first aid the joint to prevent further damage,
After shaving the patient's arm carefully and making sure all the hair is gone except for a small amount on the chest area, warn that removing this remaining hair will cause severe pain.
And if it happens, do not touch anything near there.
"The two joints that are dislocated frequently are often painful and sometimes cause damage to the bones; there may not be any swelling or bleeding in the roots of the joints.
There should be no movement or dislocation of the two joints involved in this surgery, otherwise it will occur.
The size of that which is harsh should be light, in a manner like so: Shave the root of a broad area.
There should be no movement or dislocation in that joint, as it is painful to cure. If you forget the cure.
"For those who have it or cause it due to injury, if you do this correctly from the root of the issue then treat it as long as its healing
"The others come together due to birth wounds or injuries or by the extraction of fire and similar things.
When practicing this remedy, if one feels severe pain, then it must be applied according to its natural shape; And hold tightly with two hands or ropes moistened with oil so they do not slip. Or you can hold tightly between two thin slices of bread soaked in water until it is soft enough to want, as needed.
"If the wounds come apart from one another with the hand then treat that one correctly as needed.
The veins are large and full of melancholy substances that come from the heart;
And more often in the legs of those who walk and work and bear, compared to others.
It is important to avoid purging once every day, but instead have a bowel movement daily.
The treatment for fever is done in two ways One way is to apply a cold compress and bleed the black spot. The other way is to tie off the vein and remove it entirely.
The cutting for fever occurs in this manner; first heat up the leg as hot as possible without being too painful, then tie off below where it is thin and remove below at the point of the vein.
Then tie the hand to the injured limb in one of three positions: large, then loose and straighten it with your other hand as much as possible.
And then bind it tightly, commanding him to apply a black cloth immediately.
Begin evacuation and healing when the wounds are clean, and stop applying the salve on the wound.
The treatment is as follows: Raise the leg of the patient if there is excessive hair, and immerse it in hot water until it turns red, and burn off any wounds.
And if you do not have a bandage, place a long strip of cloth tightly around the base of the arm near or at the shoulder joint.
"Press the flesh at once, and shave off all the hair as much as it will bear until one feels.
"It becomes red and black, and when it enters or strikes with the same force of a fair strand of hair;
"Then remove it from the flesh as much as you can pull with your hair, and then tie it onto an arrow to shoot it off.
"Then shave the flesh with an arrowhead until it is free, and then lightly tie another arrow to shoot it off.
"Then tie a second one on, or more if you are skilled at it, and then lightly tie the arrow to your bowstring, and prepare another for shooting.
"Then extract each arrow in turn until all of them are free, and then tie it off.
And if you prick with a very sharp needle at any of the arteries, the vein and the bone, it will cause great pain and damage. And remember that if she does happen to prick it, then even though you try to pull out the needle and remove her hand from there, severe pain will follow.
And when treating it fully, if you mix sour wine and oil on the wound's clean surface. The treatment should continue as long as possible.
And if the veins are tied and twisted together in a bundle as described, but it is not straight, then you should gently untangle them but do not cut through them. The vein will be treated according to what we have previously stated here.
If the vein is bound and not broken, even if you cannot separate it from the flesh, do not cut through to the vein.
And it is a big bird, but if it were subtle, if it touched the vein, but large as we have said, and that's how it looks.
This vein is only found in legs or warm parts of the body where there are no plants nor trees, and on earth it has no moisture.
And in another place it has the poison that comes from the skin, if it comes into contact with the heart or throat, between the skin and flesh
The signs of the commencement of this vein are that it comes in a very large inflammation to one leg, then tears away its skin and begins to rise up from inside like the root of a plant.
When dislocations occur, it is advisable to insert a piece of lead the size of an I into the vein and leave it there for about two hours.
And if it is too long, if you cut off a part of it and remove the remaining part without cutting into its root as much as possible. "When you hold them down, if they enter through an artery or vein, then pain and sickness come upon you.
"The treatment should be done slowly and gradually with a keen eye, leaving no scar or wound behind;
"And there shall be no vein when it has been treated with water or fire, and the hairs that prick at its base are held steady so they do not move until they grow.
"And if the matter is dense and unbearable to bear, then apply a light remedy in the beginning that may cause no harm, and later on apply stronger remedies as prescribed by an expert.
"And there shall be no joint movement when the hand is raised and it enters into the incision of the flesh, or that incision itself, and then you will feel pain.
"Cure him as soon as possible.
Between the shoulder blades This illness is called "fever disease" in our land because it often occurs when the body and flesh come together along with the blood flowing up through the torso upwards downwards, causing pain to all members of the body equally as long as they remain connected or separate.
it is accompanied by discharge of various fluids such as semen and mucus from the eyes, ears, nose and stomach;
And doubts arise about its cause as when it passes through the torso, and reaches up to the head, and comes down with oil, by chance returning, and destroying the oil; This occurs many times.
When you cure it and bind it, if you cannot hold it when it moves;
If you set it loose and tightly bind its ends with a strong cord then tie it up and let go, so that it moves forward in the path, and do not cut it if it is burned by fire as long as it lives.
"And if they are longer than normal, it is when they touch oil," as we have said.
And if you see them coming or near the oil, then pull away sharply and try to get out of there.
And use a remedy for the foul odors from the body's humors to relieve the bad smells that are coming out of it.
"The pain arises from sudden movement This disease is called "Wakirir" in our land and is a pain that comes on any member, and moves from one member to another.
I know what you want me to do. I called on a female doctor and she discovered some bruises in my forearm;
And later he saw swelling just above the shoulder, more than nothing, and like when oil was poured on it.
"The pain departed from the upper part of his body, and spread to both shoulders, as it reached towards the other arm.
"Then he said that she was tearing into it with great force, as I saw.
I grew worried about her because I had never heard of such a disease occurring in this manner before. "I wanted to move the pain elsewhere, but I couldn't stop it from moving as I saw it in the woman.
"And I thought that was because the woman had a broken arm and exposed bones, which seemed to impose constraints on her.
"They did not think in this way according to these people who are skilled and have many broken arms and exposed bones.
"And when you saw this illness and the pain that it caused, as she opened her eyes as we had said, if lying down or sitting up was equally painful, then covering yourself completely and not allowing any part of your body to be exposed would make things easier. "Injure the arm.
If you do not see it at your eyes if the cure is applied to the wounds, and if pills of fatness, and pills of sharpness, and similar things.
Arrows can come from different places depending on their location or type of injury.
The dislocations are caused by joints that have great points or small points, long points, or rounded points. And those who have two angles and those who have ears, and those who have parts.
and the one who dislocates in any member no matter how it occurs in different ways or to the principal members: the heart, liver, lungs, stomach, intestines, veins, and similar members. If it occurs in any member of these organs, the sign of death will tell you later on, I'll tell you after. if it is advisable for you to extract that arrow because the patient will die from multiple conditions. And when there is no good sign to see, neither the arrow nor the wound heals properly if it is treated, and cure the wound
And when there is a sign of blood coming out and piercing the bone, and when it comes to the eye, which causes blindness, swelling, redness of the eyes, inflammation, and pain in the mind, vomiting. And for any other reason such as nosebleeds or ear bleeds. And by any accident affecting speech and voice. And when there is a moist wound resembling pus, and it also burns with heat.
If you see the sign that shows you need to treat it immediately, but if there is no good sign and it doesn't heal itself.
The sign of a fever when it occurs or in the chest is that it is near to the sternum and feels similar to being pinched in a difficult place. And through the seventh wound he must cease. There is a sense of doubt that they will die.
The sign of the eighth is that when a pimple pops or breaks open and pus comes out from it, the throat swells up, the mouth becomes numb, and the eyelids quiver with cold;
And if the abscess is within the cover of the breast, it is best to leave the small wounds alone; and there will be great pain and fear. And they move their limbs apart.
And if the pimple pops from or into the stomach by chance then there is no food digestion;
And if a fistula occurs in the belly or womb, and it cannot be closed with surgery alone, then extraction of the fistula must also occur
And if the abscess is within the bladder, it urinates and burns fiercely; great pain follows. The wound has become mortal.
The other member, including the arm and chest, neck and shoulder, elbow and spine of the upper body, forearm and foot, leg and similar parts are generally more flexible than others. When the fistula is in a nerve or artery and it is not closed, then I will tell you that I am in great pain because of this reason; what else should be done?
He came to his senses with an abscess in the root of his nose; I attempted to drain from another part of the fat behind the ear, and was cured with ease
And he treated another abscess that was in the fat behind the ear of the paper of the same type as before, and it was cured, and there is no need to touch anything else, except for the tip towards the forehead, and it became the abscess great from one Turkish arc, which is at all ears.
The joint was healthy, and no harm came to it.
He had a sore throat; he had a hoarse voice.
I treated the bristles gently and thoroughly until they were healed, and my patient was cured.
He had a sore throat that was either in his mouth or belly, and I thought he was dying;
And then it turned out to be nothing but a cold, so no treatment could cure him. I treated the sore throat by washing and rubbing it, but there was no harm done.
If you had a sore throat in your chest or back, then the wound would be deep-seated;
And if the sore throat was too severe to bear, it wouldn't stop its natural course and could not be cured by any of his natural remedies.
And a second man whose ear was pierced through his face, he was treated for the wound and suffered great pain
and other similar things
And when a arrow pierced the king's eye, which was open and fell to the right side The arrow remained in the eye.
I asked for help after she was burned on the third day. If the wound is very deep
And I gently tried her but couldn't see clearly; And he felt pain and numbness in his right ear.
I thought it was from the arrow piercing. I placed a plaster over his left ear flap and digestive tract to prevent infection; The arrow became infected.
The arrow became infected. Hold steady your hands, and redress the wound if it's severe, and delay tearing off long hairs as they grow until you feel a stone.
And then he did so. I applied the corrosive ointment with steady hands until it was gone, and tried to remove a scab that had started on his forehead.
Then I opened the wound with the corrosive ointment as long as it was clear to me that a scab had formed.
And for three months I treated the wound with bandages and compresses on one side and another, but it couldn't heal.
Until finally the wound began to heal with properly applied bandages and compresses according to its shape at the end of this chapter, until I found that it was healing.
And the nosebleed cannot be stopped I tried everything but it did not stop the bleeding and wounds were healed completely
You have told the quality of removing arrows if you put your treatment in place as I do not say no because all books cannot be removed;
But the master physician is very skilled at this thing and in place and failing, true he will succeed or fail, but never harm you, with the extraction of things that are strange.
I say that wounds should not be removed from limbs unless in these ways: or through the front or they enter into another way;
That way is to cut off all veins and arteries in it, and if you get through the front but not entering into another way, that way no longer works now.
"And if she does not move now even after letting her hair grow long and evenly.
"And if she has a dislocation in the bone, it cannot move even after letting her hair grow.
"And if she does not move and cannot move even when the skin around it is stretched gently over time.
And if you can't see it after treating the wound with water, apply pressure to it. If you cannot see it even with available equipment.
And if the wound is large and there are no nerves or veins to see it through.
And if it is in the wound that you see and hear, but not when you try to pull or squeeze it out.
Carefully make sure you do not break off any part of it, as you gently extract it.
"If you do not hold on to it once it is separated from its base, then let it go because the pain will be severe. And if the treatment that we mentioned in this chapter is contrary to what your doctor has advised,
"And teach him to remove the stitches gently from around his nerve and vein, or quickly, firmly, or carefully.
"And apply the cautery in a manner that matches how it looked when he pricked his abscess, as this is often more helpful than just removing it immediately.
"The abscess that comes from another place or nothing at all; if his clothes are loose in the area where it was seen or felt.
"Hold them tight while they can take hold and then remove as much of it as possible: "Now if you do not.
And if it is held in the bone, if you strongly turn your hand towards it as much as possible while it enters into the bone and extends the bone, then break it
"And if it will not come out immediately, let her continue the extraction as long as she tries.
"And when the abscess comes off and peels away in large pieces,
And if you administer a splint, ensure it's placed correctly between the gap of the instrument.
Then straighten out the syringe and ensure it is properly inserted for easier extraction.
And if it's stuck inside, ensure you apply firm pressure to the wound or vein until it passes; then treat the wound as needed.
The needle must be inserted into the vein, not the belly or stomach, not in the bladder, and it should go straight through.
Do not puncture the artery or nerve, extract from there, and close the wound properly. The cure must be complete.
They are shaped like tendons from which the veins extend to their heads.
And in various ways as follows Large, medium, and small depending on the size of the syringe.
The shape at its base is similar to that of an arrow's point, when trying to pierce the vein by the tip of the needle.
Needles which are too small or too big will cause trouble; it is important to know that After removing them from the ears are taken away The second arteries that are in the second temples Second veins that are in the second eyelids The vein on the forehead The veins at the base of the nose The two sinuses that are below; Second veins in the upper part of the mouth; The second veins at the end of the tongue
Veins that are commonly known as the carotid artery.
The one is in the head and both are located at the side of the face, and they are commonly known as carotid arteries; The other one is in the neck and composed of the head and upper arm, commonly known as vertebral artery. "The base of the shoulder is either left or right as it should be," and the patient says, "the bottom of my belly.
The jugular vein runs between the ear and the arm.
In the leg there are three veins. One of these is at the base of the thumb on the right side, and the second one runs from the shoulder to the elbow on the opposite side. The vein that is called "innominate" which runs in the groove of the other arm.
In the other leg there are three veins, just like those.
The veins that run behind the ears to the front of the head and the neck region, and the one that runs down the arm are called "ancient" veins.
"And you are to cut away from the shoulder blade, and force out the dislocated joint or limb from a tight covering of flesh. "You are to straighten the dislocated joint by holding it in place with one hand while applying pressure from behind on the other side of its base. "When you find both hands free or when they are no longer entangled in each other's grip, then...
"Take the needle and apply it to the vein near the arm bone. Slowly move your hand up along the vein until you reach the wrist joint, then gently release both hands and release the bandage.
"Straighten and tie it securely as long as it remains straight.
And I have already mentioned the incision and cautery in the first letter.
The veins of the two temples are to be evacuated gradually, steadily, and constantly, and at the corners of the eyes.
And also the two veins that are there as I mentioned earlier should be evacuated gradually but still steadily. and it is to pull out the arrows so they cannot see clearly. And then remove both eyelids separately.
Then gently remove the vein from above your thumb index, and then cut off the arrowhead, and gently pull out the vein from above, and the corner of it. If you have done so for the other two eyelids as well, do the same for this one according to your necessity.
Then put back both eyelids together after an hour, and then apply a bandage. And then the glue forms it, and leaves it to be as good as new.
"And we have seen this many times before in their care and treatment, or commencement of a book.
"The veins on the forehead are equivalent to those in the skull for older wounds and hemorrhages.
"Its quality is that it can extract the arrow as it turns, as long as the vein is intact; "Then take an instrument called a 'fosseur', which has this shape:
"Put the point into the vein and firmly onto your hand or another surface, then release the arrow according to the amount of force you see; "Then remove from the arrow the point and hold the vein as long as it is steady and no longer than an inch;
"Always ensure that the flame burns too low; And after the vein is opened
The veins in the two arms are being used for healing purposes, and to cauterize wounds, and to treat ulcers, and in the extraction of arrows.
The qualities of their veins are such that they break at the slightest touch or movement, as we have seen.
Then the vein is cut short with fire, so that it burns for a long time, because there is no cure. And if the flames are subtle, they will break.
Then seal off the wound thoroughly, like you always do, and then apply pressure to it.
The vein in the nose is valuable for healing purposes, and to cauterize wounds, and treat ulcers.
The quality of health is that the veins are closed until they are pricked by the needle at their base, and then held steady while the flame is applied to them gently over time between the two fingernails, so as not to open right away, and will start to corrode now.
Do not apply it too frequently, as you should follow the doctor's prescription and let it heal overnight because it is easily restored.
The health of the two joints helps in relieving pain and initiating healing, and is good for many diseases, prevents aging, and causes corrosion, and sores.
The quality of health is that the veins are closed until both sides are pricked at their base simultaneously as we have mentioned.
"And may the master's hand be on that small vein so as to make it bleed quickly and tightly, unless otherwise instructed by a physician.
"Then perform the same procedure on another vein, tie it off securely, and gently release all veins simultaneously, ensuring that the veins do not become tangled. "And leave him as instructed in the morning for the wound to heal properly.
of the liver The bile ducts from the liver are important for digestion and can cause severe damage if ruptured
"And you will see if he is able to present his arm to you and hold it as I instructed him. "Then stretch the arm out completely and observe both of them, one on each side. You will notice that one is on the right and the other is on the left, they are black in color because their veins have become narrow.
"If you cannot see both of them or if you are unsure which one is the larger and which one is on the opposite side, then do only the ones that are closer to each other because this is a safer method.
The bile from the gallbladder is important for digestion as well and can cause severe damage when ruptured. "The patient should cleanse their veins and ears after the extraction of a cephalic vein, at the incision in the neck, and ailments of the ear, and ailments of the mouth;
"And be careful to cleanse your hands before exposing them to the sun, gently touching your lips and checking for any black veins;
"Cleanse both sides simultaneously but do not apply too much pressure because they are the arteries.
The veins that can be cleaned commonly use two methods;
or burning with a large flame, or gently touching them as you would call 'anise;' The large and subtle ones are based on the width and depth of the veins. The cautery method of making cuts is known as a flame cure. It produces wide wounds if done improperly.
And better to open veins with a clear sign of major damage inside, or containing large and troublesome ones; And this is how it flares up like wildfire
And it is more subtle when cutting into veins that are slightly inflamed or have small, hidden abscesses.
The illness of the gallbladder, which is one of these veins, if aid those ailments that are associated with the throat, and or colic, and or peritonitis, and or abdomen.
It is advised to ensure a healthy diet, and avoid the artery that carries it. If he copes with the artery, then the harm will come to an end if you comply as I've said. It shouldn't prick at the flame, but gently as necessary.
And if the gallbladder doesn't open clearly, then it is advised to extract and change another. Or you want no pain from it, or you leave it alone with a vein opening the arm It will open clearly. And put on fire blisters if they burn
If you see a break in the vein, as soon as possible please take off your arm. Then bind up the wound and put on fire blisters if they burn Do not cut into the artery as soon as you see it is bleeding; that's an artery. Until then
If you see a trickle of blood that is high like the urine of a child and it is red and subtle, then that's not from an artery. Hurry to this, and put on a dressing as soon as possible, and gently bandage the wound frequently, And leave it uncovered, leaving them untouched, so they do not move.
"And if they prick at their base...
And if it punctures the artery... The patient will lose consciousness and potentially die as a result of blood loss.
Take a strip of flesh, and sew it on tightly to the other side with strong stitches.
If they stop bleeding, good. Then, if it doesn't stop the bleeding as mentioned before, there will be wounds that bleed heavily.
And when they are inflamed and have spread to different parts of the body due to small wounds in a way that makes them unable to hold the bleeding still with their hands.
The vein health is important in this case as it treats the wounds from both sides of the body due to its composition of the base and the top side veins, as mentioned before.
"The patient should rest their arm on a cushion because the joint is dislocated and if they try to straighten it too quickly or forcefully, it may cause further damage.
"The joint can dislocate repeatedly if it is not held in place with sufficient firmness, and it's advisable to use a splint or support for the arm. "This supports the arm properly.
If there is a vein between the two incisions, it should be left untouched.
"If the patient has a headache or severe pain in their head area,
"When cauterizing with olive oil or mint oil is advisable because these are the most gentle of all oils as they do not cause harm to the nerve. "In any case, it is advisable to use a gentler method and avoid causing injury in the first attempt. If this fails, "And as for an ankle sprain, first of all it needs to stay still so that swelling doesn't occur.
The quality of health depends on your thoughts.
The first thing you need to know is how to heal properly. To do this, make sure you stay healthy and prevent future illnesses.
And if the sprain occurs in one of the three joints listed above... it is located at the top, thigh, or ankle. and healing should begin as soon as possible after the swelling appears;
The first one or second joint should be treated within two to three hours, whichever comes first.
The sprain that is most likely to cause illness has no specific cure but will heal within hours and without a doubt.
And you shall not cause children to come to me earlier than twelve years of age, nor suffer those who are fourteen to be sent away until they have completed seven months. "No one shall live more than sixty years.
And if any of them seek healing after having made incisions that penetrate the bowels, and they do not have any bowels left inside their bodies because of this, it is necessary to remove these members which are principal ones.
Do not let anyone who has become too lean from flesh seek healing if they have done so much that their bodies are left with nothing inside them.
And if any of them seek healing after colic passion, vomiting, and defecation, and excessive eating from women, and rape, and watching, and waiting, and what else is virtuous, or through the use of arms or legs.
Then you must be subtle in your methods, whether it is from meats and drinks, or medicines, if you have a lack of them.
"And between any two bodies there is no separation unless a certain force exists, which holds the veins together, as we have mentioned.
And it holds the joint in place, and prevents loosening, and maintains its form.
And the ligaments are strengthened and joints reinforced so that they may withstand higher pressure or more than once, then it loosens them with gentle force only.
Then loosen the joint with gentle hands, until the veins swell and the pain subsides.
Then massage the joint with a little oil gently, then hold your hand steady against that vein until it straightens or it is injured.
Because it feels like the joint is tied with threads as tight as a sinew, if there are such things that make the veins tremble and shake, so when you put flame to it, it retreats from flame, unable to release itself, and this occurs. And if it happens to the vein, if there is a very small wound, then you should cover up these wounds
If it happens on the first stroke of the vein, that's good. But if it happens again a short time after, then its effects will not last long.
If the hair is short and sparse, leave it unshaven on one side or two sides, but do not shave both sides of the arm. Through this treatment, we will come to abscesses.
Do not touch or apply any sort of pain again once the wound has healed
And if it happens frequently, or the pain is subtle and you doubt that it will heal as quickly as seen here, then be careful with every small movement, for fear of causing more damage to all sides.
And the wound is inflamed, so let it become infected. Because this happens frequently when a small wound occurs.
If you see the wound getting worse and no improvement is seen in the healing process, apply a small amount of olive oil to it because it heals the body's wounds, reducing inflammation around the area.
And ensure that you apply the olive oil in all wounds to help stop bleeding from them.
This treatment is repeated and painful when it's applied to a wound. If the application is too gentle or too rough.
And if it comes across large veins that often happen when the vein is small and causes much pain so if you feel it, and apply the wound with wet and cold cloths, and hold for one hour.
After dislocating the shoulder joint and if it hurts immediately afterwards without any redness or swelling, do not move it. If you see nothing broken but a bruise that resolves itself calmly and quickly, leave it alone.
And many times there is bleeding from the incision of an abscess;
If you hold it tightly with your hand while applying pressure with your other hand, and if there is still pain after that, go to the hospital. Do not do anything we have advised you against doing because of an artery cutting,
But continue to try and straighten it out through additional treatments until the patient is well
And treat every wound according to its size and the depth of the wound.
Because if there is no bleeding, let it stay that color as long as it stays red. And if you let go of a small thing If it is too hot, leave it to cool down.
And for someone who has had previous extractions of abscesses and knows how to extract them properly, it will make the extraction larger wounds with more bleeding;
And for someone who is weak, do the opposite. Do not cut in and out repeatedly, but rather make a single incision to minimize pain.
This manner of healing saves from repeated abscesses and discomfort in the nerves, and is much better than doing it long and wide.
And for someone whose neck needs surgery, do not perform the incision quickly but rather gradually with warm pomegranate juice. If the skin is fresh and needs suturing three times or more, if it has a cold complexion, do not apply sutures with mild pain but rather gradually with warm pomegranate syrup, or aromatic honey syrup with spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chicory, or scented honey syrup.
"And if they touch the skin after a sore has healed, it is advisable to apply hot compresses and a soothing syrup.
"And if the vein is inflamed and sore another time, it's advisable to apply gently as often as possible until its virtue continues.
"And if the vein is inflamed and sore after the first one, it's advisable to apply gently for seven hours after the first one or every hour.
And who is to heal from another place if he must heal the second wound or the third one.
"His heart has become so inflamed that it is almost unbearable. "If necessary, stretch the area as much as possible to alleviate the pain. "Then check all the necessary conditions for healing and put your hands on it when it is healed so that death does not come from weakness.
"And do not worry if you see blisters the second time, and make sure to close the wounds properly by pressing firmly into place. "If it is swollen, extend one arm gently as this would be better.
"But leave it like that the second time. "Or you can prick it with a flame until the vein becomes frozen and then press gently to release it.
And when there is blood evacuation from a vein incision and opening an abscess, do not touch it with your finger or hand; hold the eye steady until it heals.
And you must treat the second wound twice if it is on one hand or another arm or any other part of the body.
The arm that was injured will heal more quickly because its structure is stronger compared to the arm that was not injured.
And if the wound is covered with hot oil or grease, as long as it burns.
And after a short while when the vein is open well, then wash thoroughly with clean water
And if the large veins are present, and you hold them gently near to the hand joint as much as possible without touching it directly, until you have enough hot oil or grease applied.
And so this is done if the hand does not burn in the hot oil or grease, for then you add more until it is burned.
And the treatment of this vein is better than all others, as there will be no harm or injury.
The healing process for the hand ailment is like this one:
"Hold tight to your arm while applying gentle heat until the vein is open, if you can. "After cleansing with water and soap all over, do not scrub too vigorously if nothing is wrong.
"Do not scratch too vigorously as the nerves are very sensitive and may be damaged easily; then apply gentle heat to it while keeping your hand steady until the wound heals.
"And when you have treated the sore as much as possible, and if it is on the vein and firmly pressed down, and so long as it stays like that.
"If you have caught in your hand the sickness of the mouse, do everything just as I told you before.
"The sickness of the mouse is good for all diseases that are on the body, such as those from marriage and childbirth, and problems with the hair, and problems with the veins, and stones, and old legs, and similar ailments.
"Qualify the pain from the injury with gentle heat, hold your arm tightly while applying it to the vein as tight as you can, and gently rub over any sutures. "The veins on the shoulder should be rubbed with gentle pressure until they are completely healed.
"Cleans gently wherever and whenever necessary.
"After cleansing with water and soap over the wounds, rinse thoroughly as needed with gentle rubbing.
"And if they prick at their base.
And if you cannot remove it yourself, then apply a healthy dressing to the wound again, and leave it in place for some time longer.
"The first time holds the eye steady, as for the second when it occurs after a short while due to swelling,
"Do not doubt your mind if what we have said is correct and continue doing the same as before.
The joint dislocation of the shoulder is in or near the armpit area, and its healing process causes great pain as it occurs
"The quality of his illness is that the veins between or outside the elbow cannot open otherwise than by tearing because otherwise they would not allow the vein to open.
"If it opens in all ways as you said and when pressed, then: "You must hold tight lest the veins become loose and will not be held any more.
"You must hold tight lest the veins become loose and will not be held any more. "If you do not apply this treatment, if the vein does not open or at all of these points and toward another small point, then your harm will come.
And tie as tightly as you can to your wound, then seal it with cotton and hold tight. It is now sealed.
The wounds are made of thorns or straw, or of reeds.
And the extraction can be performed in two ways Or by cutting and pulling at the wound, or by piercing it.
And this extraction that is done via piercing can be performed in two ways Or by heat alone, or with fire.
And the extraction that is done via piercing and through the extraction of a wound can be performed in 12 steps from beginning to end. The others are called "the others" and their location varies depending on where they happen. And the two others in two corners of the chest. The extraction from the mouth. "The patient is instructed to leave spaces between the letters. "To instruct them (the doctors) to leave spaces between phrases or clauses. "Instructing them to leave space between their two arms, perhaps indicating a specific location for physical examination? "Instruction to leave space between the patient's legs during an exam or medical procedure. "To instruct them (the doctors) to leave space between their two heels, possibly indicating a specific location for examination?
"Instructing them to leave space between the sutures (stitches) and the skin flaps, which are sparse in this part of the body, so as not to obstruct blood flow during dressing change. "They must ensure that the incision is left open and free from infection, in any illness or disease caused by excess fluids, as long as the wound remains dry.
"They must treat the patient promptly if any illness arises or appears at the beginning of the month or at its end, and should make sure to do so with diligence.
"And if they push forcefully,
"And if they press with great force
and those who pierce an abscess in their mouth, causing bleeding. "And if they bite or singe themselves with fire
And when we observe these signs, and most importantly during the first three hours of daybreak, we command to apply the cautery after that time.
The physician's aid is necessary to prevent the spread of infection among those who have been burned and do not want it to happen after the evacuation of all wounds.
And such a washing should be done after the physician has attended to the burns of the head and is not necessary for those with pale complexions or who have chills, as it brings great harm.
And so they should be watched closely to ensure they do not catch cold and those with other cold diseases
"And those who are aware of this should be careful, for otherwise it is necessary to move the bandage a little further down due to the risk of injury.
"The dislocation of the upper arm is from its socket and the base joint, which makes it unstable due to friction between them. It affects the muscles around it as well.
"The dislocation should be gently pulled out because if held too tightly then it can cause injury to surrounding organs such as the stomach or heart.
"The dislocation of the upper arm can cause pain from its socket and around it. It may lead to misalignment and loosening.
"It is advised that the surgeon instructs the patient not to clench their fist and maintain a gentle grip on the artery so as not to cause any harm.
"Dislocations of this type are known as dislocations to the mouth. They can cause damage to the teeth and gums. And they are lost from the second level down.
Dislocations occur due to an injury or filling of space
The dislocations of the arms were just as severe as those of the legs, because it caused pain in these large limbs;
Instruct the patient to not forcefully rub them too much, as they may cause damage and tear their veins;
The dislocation of the shoulder is severe from its base, and causes damage to veins, and it's important that the dislocation be large enough and flexible so she can do her treatment properly; And eventually if she was subtle, it would break. It could cause large wounds.
The leg dislocations were severe because they caused pain throughout the body, and were among the most painful injuries of the body, including the heart, bladder, and flower veins.
"And after long use they weaken the legs more and bring on pain in greater degrees.
"The manner to put on the bandage is that you tie it tightly when first applied and then secure it firmly, and move it gently, without ceasing what you are doing until you have tied off the artery and pulled out the arrow.
"Then he takes away the bandages, and in the treatment of wounds because they have such pain, and make sores. "If it is only necessary to do so once, but you should do large and deep wounds; "And make a small incision.
"If he is very swollen, if it's necessary to do so twice: "The first time with a small incision into the large vein.
And if he is injured for the third time
And when we want to pull out two sutures slowly and slowly, but only once. And if there are many wounds, they often come back;
And if the cautery is painful and lasts for a long time until all the wounds are closed, then it is advisable to use a soothing lotion or ointment. If it's evening, with violet oil, or almond oil, or sesame seed oil;
Or if you are in the morning, with mustard oil, or lavender oil, or chamomile oil, and others like it;
And if one wants to extinguish the fire and its smoke, then apply oil of lavender or any other aromatic oils.
And if one has a tender and large rash that does not want oil to be applied but must wash after the steam from roses or cold water, or dew of morel mushrooms, or dew of cucumbers, or dew of porcelain, etc.
And those who have much moisture should first remove any irritants such as dust or mold spores and similar things.
And those with excessive swelling may use wine vinegar, or hot water, or a chamomile infusion, or others like it.
"Do not rub the body while it is wet with water, but after bathing wait one hour or two.
"Do not sleep immediately after the operation, and should avoid being restless until they are healed and have recovered.
"And beware of those who are sick with colic, as their stomach becomes too agitated and inflamed; "If it is convenient for them to eat cold things, like greens, lentils, and leeks, as well as other things; "And let the patient avoid raw fish, fried bread crusts, and wet meats.
"And let the patient avoid raw fish, fried bread crusts, and wet meats. "And those with a cold complexion should drink honey syrup and musty wine, which is between bitter and new, as well as eat little, avoid fish, and avoid small fish, shellfish, and pork;
"And the one who will vomit should drink more than they eat.
"And it is necessary to perform this operation with utmost care, either immediately after the dislocation or afterward, in order to align and stabilize the affected limb. "It should be done gently but only if they are fully open.
"The veins that are to be cut open are those placed in the groin and neck. And after making an incision into these parts of the body, no part should make an incision into another member.
"In order to treat a swelling in a limb, as when we place veins on the abdomen and buttocks in order to treat the member.
"And when there is pain from an abscess or stone, if it is through its nature attractive to remove the abscess or stone, or if the base of the member must be extracted.
And if you hold down his jaw when he has put the rope around his nose, and these two openings are tightened up very quickly. And never do the two openings come together, and not once plain of fire, as it may cause great pain, or if there are any herbs present,
The form of the sutures applied with fire should be as follows:
And he must have a large and half palm's width, so as to hit the point of an arrow, or from rain, being careful not to strike the limb with it.
And he must have a groove in which to put the snare, and it should be large and small according to the diseases and ailments of those who take them.
As for the young animals' snares, they are different from snares made from silk, and from those made from fat.
And you must put this bandage around the limb
Apply the tourniquet made of cotton or linen tightly around the limb's circumference below where it is applied the bandage securely if you find that the tourniquet does not burn the skin.
Then apply it to the limb and make sure that at where we have said so, if you see, if its use goes bad, and otherwise remove the tourniquet.
And remember to loosen it gently when before using, and tighten it afterwards so you are prepared.
The tourniquet when administered to treat the bleeding of many wounds is tight all around with no place for circulation and no limb alignment, only being applied to the limb temporarily.
It's that form
Without tourniquets are applied when it is not possible to apply a tourniquet around the limb for its size or because of any other reason. "And when you have removed the chaff from the harvest as mentioned earlier...
"...and you will realize that those who are healthy and gentle in their treatment will succeed.
"...and put them gently on the ground, as long as they are domestic animals with no weapons inside... "...then wash and clean your hand thoroughly before treating the limb, whether it is bleeding or not, then wrap it with a bandage...
"...when they are clean and dry, you should apply the dressing to secure them in place as much as possible...
"...If not, if it is loose or too wet, do this instead and then remove the dressing.
"...but if they are too dry after cleaning and wrapping with cold gauze, do this instead...
"And if he is repeatedly dislocated due to bruising or contusions, as long as the dislocation continues.
"Or if you have already treated a sprain to its full extent and it is healed now.
"And also note that in addition to the above, there may be further dislocations caused by other factors such as injuries.
"And if dislocations do not stop occurring even after treatment of the fractured bone or needle insertion as long as the pain continues and they are felt. Then hold them in place further while treating with soothing remedies.
"And when you realize they are dislocated frequently due to bruising or contusions, or the bone has weakened over time and is about to break again, then.
"The book begins with an introduction to fractures. "Chapters on injuries are essential in the field of medicine and healing.
"Seek advice from this chapter and do not trust any old books or letters that have been written.
"Because of this issue there is a lack of information regarding it in our lands.
"I have studied and researched it from ancient books as well as my own experiences.
"In this chapter I have described and explained how they are performed, as well as clearly showing the forms that should be used in these two preceding chapters.
"It is advisable that those who begin this book should first understand its purpose and learn the skills of the author before embarking on it.
"I say that when a fracture or dislocation occurs from any cause, if you are able to apply healing remedies on one side and the other, no matter how small the injury is, whether it is superficial or deep wounds. "Or when they remain too tight or too loose.
"Or if they are too cold and frozen, know how to warm them quickly with fire or heat, without letting the meat become tainted by smoke from the fire, so that no one should eat it until you have completely healed.
The hair on the head of the patient should grow long and even,
"When the dislocated shoulder begins to heal, if there is meat that moves violently or has viscosity, then cut it with a sharp knife and remove it immediately. "The head of the shoulder becomes dislocated.
And if you pierce the veins or arteries and cause bleeding, do not move them as they would naturally.
However, it does not treat the dislocation by itself; you must reset and hold the limb in place until it is firmly set as before. And there is no more injury, so make sure to avoid large veins if possible as we have mentioned earlier.
"Dislocations can occur in different ways and locations.
"I will tell you about all the different types of dislocations in this chapter. "There is one where it came out and another by straining, similar to how long you hold your breath when writing.
"There is one where it came out and another by straining, similar to how long you hold your breath when writing. "If there is a dislocation with an injury or a small crack.
It also means that you should clean and properly maintain your tools to ensure they are in good condition for the next use.
And if you break a bone as it moves out of place and is very painful to fix, do it right away with force.
"And when it does not have twisting or pain at that time, then there is no break;
"But he can still experience twisting or a small break. "If it is not convenient for you to move your hand now, but take hold of the remedies that come afterward, and then gently restrain them.
"And when the fracture is near the shoulder joint, and it separates the two parts of the arm, then it's advisable now to have the surgeon perform the operation;
"And when the doctor has left no joint between them while performing the surgery,
"then he moves it gently and smoothly, so that the restoration of this is easier than the restorations in those who have injuries.
"Then he holds it, as appropriate after surgery;
"And if there are fractures in the bone, then he holds it with both hands or one hand and a little finger of the other hand, or two cords, or one cord and your hand;
And place the member in accordance with its natural position, if when the two broken parts of the member are rejoined by means you've just mentioned then hold tight to the wounds as much as you can, and remember that through your efforts no further harm will come.
And firmly fix the two dislocated bones in their correct positions.
And hold it firmly with your hand if you believe that it is securely put back into place.
If the dislocation is very firm and you do not hold it too tightly or press with excessive force as those who cause it through their forceful act of wrenching and tightening on the limb, if we have experienced this many times.
And when the limbs are at their place again, if there is no more movement or injury, do not worry, relax and calm down, do not twist it in any way. And make sure the limbs are as secure as you believe they will feel no pain. When there is no pain at all, it's best to put into place something that will prevent any more pain.
And make sure the limbs are as secure as you believe they will feel no pain. When there is no pain at all, it's best to put into place something that will prevent any more pain. And keep in mind to do this carefully, making sure there is no movement as it returns to its original place.
And the dislocated limb will be assessed by me based on what I have told you.
The limbs that are broken can vary in size and shape, large or small.
Because it has only two arms and legs like many others: And you should gently roll the limb to assess its position. If they are heavy, like arms and legs.
If you roll it with something hard and heavy, as the broad ones bind all of the limb together tightly, restricting movement in any way.
Then you roll it with light things to assess its position accurately.
And soothe the pain slowly and slowly as you gently stroke it with care.
Then move on to the next part of the fracture and gently hold it lightly, not too hard nor too softly as we have mentioned earlier.
And place it between the two splints or bandages as tightly as possible until there is no longer any numbness in your fingers.
If you feel numb or pins and needles, put something soft against the affected area to relieve it and leave nothing on.
Then hold your fingers straight and as firmly as you can reach, or use something soft like a cloth to cover the nails, or palm of your hand, and adjust its shape according to this form.
"It is necessary for a patient to make sure that any cut or incision made near joints are larger than those away from them.
"And the size of the cuts should be proportional to the size of the part being operated on, whether it's a small or large joint. "After holding the eyes steady during the first cut or incision made in one area, continue doing so for any subsequent cuts that are close to it. "In other words, the closer the cuts are together, the more tightly they should be held. Conversely, if there is a space between cuts or incisions, hold them less tightly.
"The thread should not be too thin, nor too thick, and of the right size.
"If the thread is too thick and causes the stitches to be uneven or twisted, it's a mistake that must be corrected by using thinner threads, as otherwise the cut will not be straight if it was done too lightly.
"And if the hairs are pricked at their base after the cautery, they will stay still unless they grow.
When a patient has an abscess with wind and the veins rupture, I'll tell you the treatment afterwards.
And should one choose to extract arrows from the limbs, they must be broken at their first joint. When limbs are large, it is not convenient to keep the fingers still for more than three or seven seconds according to one's strength.
And when performing acupressure techniques to restore broken bones, dislocations, and twists:
And when you take flour and place it between two rollers with some oil, and knead until the dough is neither too thin nor too thick, then use this method to restore fractures in different ways, including both women and children, as it is gentle yet firm enough.
Another way of restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists: Take barley, lentils, rice, dates, figs, and mucilage, mix them together with X. Mirror and aloe, mixed as follows: And the fire cautery And sprinkle powder over them with equal care The skin on the patient's face is hot; so use this ointment because it has good composition and heals broken bones quickly, preventing further harm
Another way to treat it with torsion. Prick at the base and pull gently, as you would do with an X. Look carefully and touch lightly, as if doing so with something of VIIII Z. This ointment has six Z. This ointment is also good for the arm and leg wounds, and applies well with powder or water, and the physician.
Another way to treat joints and heal broken bones is to apply an ointment. Take a new oil, mix it with the ointment you have, and spread this on your face.
"The patient must lie still while performing the procedure to avoid pain.
Another way to treat a broken bone is by setting it back together again. You take fresh straw and earth, mix them together, and plaster over the broken place.
"Another way to heal bone fractures is by using a bandage soaked in honey; apply it to the injured area. Take a mixture of hemlock, chamomile flowers, violet petals, wheat flour, some water to make it stiff and cohesive.
And mix with wine, and seal the members together, or smear it on with a moist ginger paste, or with hot oil, and apply as needed.
"Another way of healing other than the first one, when the wound is more severe on the bone. Take hemlock roots, flax seeds, barley, millet, and chamomile flowers, of all in equal parts; And mix it with salt water or honey, or wine depending on the member's condition and rest period;
"In the book of this chapter it is mentioned that when a limb becomes broken through restoration attempts using wax and oil, nothing else should be used in addition to that; as long as the flesh does not become too soft or too hard.
"It seems strange that one should put on the broken limb to restore it, with something dry and hot like myrrh and aloe and incense-like things; as we have mentioned.
Another way to treat the injury and pain is by setting it back together again. The translation of this sentence is as follows: "The fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
After a short while, and pay attention that the hairs don't feel any pain, nor do they move their eyes. Don't hold it with both hands. And if there is pain in the left eye or itching that feels like a burning sensation, do not hold it tightly, release it and cleanse it now.
And gently wipe with fresh moisture, rinse thoroughly, and then release the eye as much as the itching stops, until the pain subsides. Then leave it to rest for an hour, and then dry with clean linen, wet with water or oil depending on the patient's preference, and tie them securely until you are certain they cannot move.
"And when inflammation sets in the limb, and pain follows soon thereafter, gently reheat it with a bit of warmth, without holding too tight. Gently as much as is reasonable.
"And if you see that the artery and vein are ruptured, and there is great pain and swelling, then I have healed all of this, and you should massage it gently to loosen it up, as long as you did what was first suggested.
If nothing of what we have said comes to the limb within three or four or five days then release it. And leave him for no more than 20 days as long as the blisters are not bursting and drawing close to the edge.
unless you hold it too tight so that it swells its meat like I said before.
And if the joint seems to be swelling more than is best for it alone, just let them come and go without further restraint. Whenever you loosen it after each removal, be sure to apply a little heat every time you loosen it and let each day go by.
In this sentence, "tortement" should be translated as "in great pain.
It is bad and if it happens often, there's nothing else I can do but help alleviate the pain with care and treat properly.
The main reasons for ruptures are various and unknown.
Because it has ruptures that are caused by impacts with a sharp object, and the bones may be fractured if they hit directly where the bone is fragile. And for this reason, people try to avoid this way of breaking bones.
Or the bone is hit with such force that it is called a complete break;
And there are wounds of both large and small breaks.
And if it has an impact inside the wound, or from behind, or with force on the back of the shoulder blade, or others similar things.
And if there is dislocation present, which leads to tearing at the place where it was done on the bone, or inside the bone, and this will cause an injury large or small.
If a wound is healed in such a subtle way that it cannot be distinguished from the bone and breaks little, then it's called a hairline fracture;
"And if the wound is made by stabbing with a sharp object or piercing, or from any other cause that enters through an opening in the bone. When it becomes inflamed due to heat from the cautery. when between bones.
and if they have or are very young children who wet themselves excessively.
and as to all these ways of fractures, the bones will be broken easily when exposed. I shall speak about it later.
"We know all ways of fractures through withdrawal and interrogation, as well as through the use of force.
"The hairline is caused by when someone discovers the tumor and presses hard on it if there's a black fracture.
"In the treatment of the fracture, be careful around any sharp object and see if there's no bad accident; if you vomit or lose consciousness or have pain in your arms or legs, etc., these conditions may indicate doubt.
"If you don't see any accidents around sharp objects and expect to be fine as long as the treatment continues.
And when you reach the first one to you, it is in front of your thirteenth month that you must stop
And if you hold it there before your seventh month, then its appearance will be ruined and many accidents may occur as we have said.
And if the bones break due to a blow or fall that breaks off a piece of bone, you must hold it steady until
and you must try to find the arrowhead, explore it in all ways that you know how to do, with the shape of the wound clearly visible, so that you can see where it entered from, whether from an organ or muscle. "Keep the wound bandaged until the abscess is healed and you have ensured that no further infections occur. After removing the dressing, begin to apply the ointment according to one of two ways described in this passage.
One way is to gently apply it directly onto the narrow strip before you go on to the rest of the wound; and that looks like this.
And then there was a greater problem than the first one.
The second way is by using a variety of different sized bandages, some narrow and others broad, with points for insertion into the wound.
Gently applying it without allowing too much to drip off; in other words, don't let all your ointment drain out.
And if the ointment feels rough and hard, then you should gently apply it in small sections over time without pressing too hard against the wound, as it must have some space around its point so that nothing touches outside of the wound.
And it is advisable to have more than one bone in the place of the arm
This is how you do this step.
The quality of piercing through the arm is that you pull out the arrow and tie it to your hand until the bone is pierced.
Then remove the arrow to another part for a while after, and continue what you were doing until it is complete. And do this more subtly than before, gently, just like we have said, as long as you pull out the bone with your hand or from any of the strings you have tied up, carefully.
Keep in mind that you should not prick at the center nor at the sheath.
And when you have pierced the bone and tied it, if it is convenient that you reset the arrow which is ready to be used as another instrument for piercing but it should be more gentle and subtle than the other one.
"If he moves his limbs too much "After treating the wounds and applying ointments as we have advised.
And another way is when there are dislocations, which happen more frequently. "And the worst of all, it's unbearable. "First it is advisable to cut off a part of the bone where there are cracks open so that when you discover this part, if you apply the Lenticular stimulus as mentioned above, then which should be its form.
And if he has a dislocation on one side and another on the other shoulder.
"Then firmly press into it gently if you are trying to align the joint completely and do not let go of the thread that is attached.
"It will be straight if the limb is properly aligned, because it is painful to straighten it and to feel fear.
The first sentence in English reads: "And if the arm is dislocated from its socket...
If you encounter very sharp razors and after more subtle ones, continue doing so until it's done properly.
Also pay attention to any other small hair breaks or hairline fissures, you should treat them according to their location.
And this is something to be noted by one who has learned this art.
And when the swelling is discovered, if you wish to compress it with oil, as per its quantity and severity of the wound, and set on top of the wound. Then apply another bandage made of linen or wool soaked in wine and oil, and place it over the first bandage. And do it more gently than before so as not to harm the swelling, and then administer another bandage tightly enough that only when the wound is healed.
And let it rest for one or two days as the abscess heals, then remove it and administer medicine like garlic, flour of figs, and incense powder, and alcohol, and similar things.
And from those things, powder is applied to the wound, and an ointment is administered for pain relief.
And you must ensure that the wound is clean and that it does not leak any more blood, nor allow reassembly in case of tearing or injury to the surrounding tissues.
Because when applying a caustic substance, there may be necrosis around the wound. "Unless there is an injury to a joint, it will not dislocate.
And if it is not healed by the medicines applied, then you should apply honey mixed with three parts of oil and wrap it in gauze. Then use the methods of treatment that are suitable for healing as much as possible.
And if it has been broken by two or more fractures in the bone itself, then only one of them is necessary because they are both.
"And this dislocation is unstable unless it's fixed or moved into position.
"If one of the two parties is broken, then you should cut off or remove it, and have the wound treated separately while leaving the other intact as per its natural shape. "And gently apply pressure to prevent pain in the area.
And when the break is in the upper part of his neck and cannot come to rest there if you gently place your hand on the base of the skull a short distance away
"If there are two breaks, then you should try other things as well and hurry up to restore the first one if possible.
"If it happens after the ninth or tenth application when the abscesses are drained but the dislocation still occurs, then you should cut off and remove the injured part.
"Or if there is another break somewhere else, And let them grow as long as they fill up the pores of the skin, but do not let them get so thick
And there was no relief for the pain as long as the joints were held firmly in place But it seems to me that this is well, and it's advisable to mix them with a mixture of flour and mill powder. Then let the tent remain in place as long as its firmness lasts, and continue the tightening procedure.
And never let them penetrate with the exception of the tent, and if any one should pierce it through, and hold firmly onto the wick, and spread the ashes among. or do as I say
And when it is time to vomit and you feel a contraction in your throat or chest, whether due to overeating or from swallowing something hot; hold tight the lips together
And fasten it tightly with a bandage and powder of pitch and incense mixture along with flour and mill powder, then hold it securely in place without causing any more harm.
And the blisters are small and burst in many pieces if the application is done well, then apply the bandage and wound treatment mixture, and continue with the binding procedure until it has healed completely.
And if he has no pain or inflammation, as long as the treatment continues and they are numb from the injury
When the mandible is dislocated and there are no wounds to heal, only cracking occurs at its base; if one tries gently to force it back into place
It is advisable that you bite your lower lip with your other index finger. If the fissure is in your left jaw, bite with your right index finger; if it's on the other side of your mouth, use your left index finger and gently hold onto it while you use the opposite hand to push down.
And if there is severe dislocation in the jaw bone, it is recommended that you administer a dose of two parts as often as needed until the dislocation returns to place.
And if movements occur from the wound or stitches of gold, silver, or silk thread, then place a second dressing over it. And place a large and well-made dressing, or a piece of leather long and wide in relation to the jaw, covering it firmly as you eat, commanding your tongue not to rest upon it, and drink light beverages only.
And if you see that the shape changes when the disease is worse or better, then reset to where it changed. And apply plaster with a mixture of flour and alum after you have applied the cautery cream.
And apply a light plaster and let the dressings stay firm, and the position of the wound does not change. Repeat this process three times.
"When dislocations are experienced many times before.
And if there is a break and injury in the bone itself, remove one part of the bone after healing has occurred. If you have subtle symptoms that are common to this issue
"And if the wound is severe enough, it may require expanding the flame according to need.
"After all the pieces have been taken out and there is no longer bleeding from it, if the wound is large, then add some more dressings according to need in order to start treatment immediately.
The fracture will often occur on the shoulder and breaks in three ways
or it is broken but healed into two parts, with some less severe injuries that require more treatment.
"And if there is a fracture with an injury.
And in case the dislocation occurs together with a wound, you should apply pressure so that it does not break loose. and towards other parts
Then apply the dislocation to both sides if it is in the correct position, without any doubt or movement.
And if necessary, to stretch further and apply pressure on the shoulder blade with a cloth rolled around it or a rope, making sure not to damage it severely; Then apply gentle pressure and hold the dislocation with your hand as you reset it if necessary.
And if you don't tie the head of the arm to prevent it from moving forward as much as possible, then hold its shoulder blades inward, and bend its elbow downward so that it can move around freely in all directions but not backward
And then apply the dislocation to both sides, and if there is bleeding, stop.
Then carefully bind the wound with light strips of cloth without tearing off any part of it if you have one. "Or you use force on this instrument.
And hold the bone tightly and firmly, so that it does not slip or move as you wish to control its movement according to the size of the limb and strength of the body.
And if you see it dislocate, and if the joints are wide or small depending on the path of the wound that you made when treating bones;
When you are resetting the shoulder blade, if you see that the wound is large or small depending on how deep it was made when treating the bones;
And if he feels hot and drips oil onto the surface of his eyes or on himself and into them, it is important that he immediately stops this.
Dislocation of the bone is when there are pains and swelling around it, you put a mixture of flour and sand into the wound along with some water, and you lightly bind it so that you may have to redo it if necessary. And he placed a very thick bandage on his forehead. Then he put an extremely thin bandage three fingers wide and long, covering the entire wound so that both edges of the bandage would remain inside. He placed the bandage over his nose and cheeks, securing it with a cloth strip on each side. And tightly wrapped the bandage around his head and face so it couldn't move or slip off as long as he held onto the forehead strap.
He placed a small pillow under his head so it would raise up when he was lying down to help the shoulder. If the dislocation occurs due to force on his shoulder, or if he lies with his arms crossed and this results in a bad accident, it is certain that such damage will occur.
After rinsing out the abscess with water, hold it steady and let it drain until it is healed.
It was restored by the 28th day at the latest, but no sooner than that
dislocation of the shoulder
When a shoulder breaks or dislocates severely, it cannot be moved by any touch.
If the injury is in line with the shape of a fracture and follows its natural course through all ways you know it.
After rinsing out the abscess with water mixed with flour and mild soap, gently squeeze them tightly to drain off any remaining fluid. Then squeeze a wider and more subtle electrode, one inch further up the shoulder, and then check for any remaining electrodes in the area.
"Secure it firmly with great force," he commands. "If it does not stay in its place, examine the joint.
"Whenever he moves," if it is held in place, and the eye ball moves from its socket, bind it to his chest with a bandage.
The shoulder was dislocated around X times or about X5.
"And when the dislocation is completed," if he is able to move and sits up, as it should not be held tightly.
And put a small piece of the bone in first and remove it when healed, as we have described for the dislocation of the arm's base.
In the first sentence of this medieval medical treatise written in Old French around
"The body's organs are not damaged every time you dislocate an arm or shoulder, but sometimes they can occur; "But it breaks easily in the same place.
And when it is broken in the middle of a battle, if you decline to help and there are many wounds around, and thrusts at your cheeks as well, and pierces into the bone beneath them, and dies all together.
"And if it is dislocated and the eye ball is in between two ribs, then place one hand on each side of its face, press tightly against your chest, and gently put a bandage around both sides as you see fit.
Then they should apply a salve and poultice over the affected area in a subtle way, or another binding plaster, keeping it wrapped up until the wound has healed: Then straighten out the limb again and hold it tightly in place until healing occurs.
And if there is itching or scratching that comes from the skin itself, pain in the joint, abscess formation, wounds healing, etc., then apply dressings and treatments as needed.
Then reset the dressing, and hold it tightly until it heals.
of the break in costs
The blisters that occur on the buttocks do not burst until after the back and neck are healed, because they are covered with a covering cloth. "And he shall well understand the questioning.
And if the stitches have been removed as you say it should be done Then apply the plaster and hold it in place with a bandage so that one is properly set.
And if his limbs break under the burden and cause him great pain and suffering, as is often seen in many cases. And also in blows, there is and to the extent of a wound, which causes great pain and suffering, and one may have lost much blood as well.
And if one of the things that say you should administer foods that inflame the belly to break the stitches from afar.
We do not harm it at all unless a stroke happens to it; if one occurs, then we must act promptly If one happens
And if there is no remedy for the left shoulder due to weakness or pain, it's similar and understandable. In all cases, doubt arises that the weakened limb cannot support itself from its own strength.
And when it is dislocated and moves, if the vein cannot be accessed due to poor positioning, causing discomfort; otherwise, you should lubricate the joint with oil or lotion so as to facilitate movement between the fingers, then treat for pain in the muscle tissue and blood vessels.
And if the limbs cause great pain that cannot be endured by holding onto its base and doubt arises from the injury itself, it is necessary to use instruments in order to support the limb.
"And when the patient is to have a dislocation of an arm or leg, gently stretch and then bind it with strong thread from wounds if they are large, and provide dressings as needed until they stabilize.
"Hold tight the arms when you wet them with oil and wipe it off, then tie a strong bandage around the upper arm.
"After applying the dressing, hold tight to it until it dries completely or as needed.
"And also to the elbow and wrist.
"And when it happens to no one and you know whether he will survive or not, if you see his hands relaxed and limp and dead and cannot move them, and when you prick an arrow, do not let go.
"The man is in a very dangerous situation and if he is restrained tightly but not to death, the bone joint is saved; and when the wounds are treated with care.
"And to the elbow and wrist as well, you will know whether it is stable or not. If the joint is unstable, then check if any dislocations occur in the hand and shoulder.
"When someone sneezes while sitting down, it can cause a sudden ejection. And when it is sewn on the back and he wants to sit up, cannot. The sickness is deadly He cannot stand his suffering in the treatment.
And if an accident happens to them, then it's a less severe injury.
And if he moves his eyes while applying the ointment of water and oil as much as it is possible to do so;
after that he applies soothing and healing ointments, binds the wound tightly, commands the hair to rest. And does not sleep from the part where it feels pain until it is healed.
and if any of his eyes swell up, he covers them gently. and when the wound is large he makes sutures, then after dressing it with fine linen until it heals.
And if the arm joint is dislocated, it is called "arm dislocation." Hold your injured arm firmly to support its shoulder socket with the other hand. Then hold the elbow and keep it bent until you're ready for further treatment.
After holding the elbow, if it is broken and needs to be fixed, then proceed with treating it as soon as possible and curing the wound while it's still clean
"The fracture of the arm bone
When a joint of the arm is dislocated and if there is no immediate danger to the head And afterwards, gradually loosen it up, and go slowly while avoiding pain in your arm, cracking or breaking any bones.
The healing process is when you hold your injured arm steady as possible, keeping the elbow bent until further treatment is needed. "and such a fracture of its kind is severe, causing great pain.
The fracture occurs only at the top part, if one breaks it in half, as long as both parts are of similar size and shape
"And if it is broken at its base, After breaking it in half as described above, hold the top part steady and then secure an end of string or cord to prevent further movement.
And remove any loose clothing that may hinder its free movement "Instruct the patient to lie on their back or stomach.
And tie the patient securely when necessary, as long as their clothing is loose and does not hinder movement. Then continue to treatment, holding them steady if it seems necessary, until there are no further accidents.
The dislocation of the shoulder.
The attendants are those between the waist and the shoulder blade; if they are dislocated as mentioned above, one must attempt to restore them using either of these methods.
The first sentence is "Don't lie when giving a reason for making your hair grow longer".
And if there are two joints affected, hold the hand up high and if one of the joints is affected.
Then hold the other arm down tightly while it grows to its length, and if there is a second joint affected, do not move anything except for the hair on that side.
Then place your fingers together and hold tightly until the dislocation returns as needed.
"Another way to do this is by tying the hand onto the arm and instructing both hands to reach towards the same object that is suspended from their wrists, one at a time.
"And if the extraction is particularly difficult, restrain one of the hands and have it stretch towards the object while restraining the other hand to prevent movement.
And if the dislocation is on the upper arm, make sure to fix it tightly and move the other hand away from there.
And if it is on the lower arm, make sure to hold it gently while moving your other hand away from there.
"Hold tightly to the limb you want to move first,
"Keep the limb still as possible while applying gentle pressure with your other hand and oiling it, until the dislocation is reduced.
"After holding tightly to the limb you want to move first and applying gentle pressure with your other hand, then place the elbow on the shoulder or the chest.
"And place the elbow and hold it tightly while holding onto the shoulder or chest; if both arms are in a loose position then there is no problem.
"And if you doubt that the limb is not moving, use a larger and stronger stick, between two or three fingers on either side of the joint, so they can both pass through.
Then strain on the tendons, as I have advised at the beginning of this chapter to stretch vigorously
And if you see the seat of the tendons and stretching, as we have advised, in the end that you support the arm tightly while it is raised to seventh time, as we have mentioned.
Then check the third joint from below, which should not loosen up or give way with cold, unless the neighboring muscles come to support it because of its stiffness. "If you are referring to the earlier part of this text...
And if nothing is done in time to prevent this from happening after the third joint or more, let it cause its own harm, and keep its hands on its back and stomach.
And make sure the joint is tightly bound with a bandage constantly, and check regularly how it moves or not, that the limb should not move or be misshapen by others.
"And if you apply the virtue of medicine, let him do as we have laid out, in such a manner that the meat is cut thinly first. And when it comes to reattach, no matter how much
It is customary that the shoulder and arm should be reset within an hour or two. And afterwards, one must then apply a hot compress and administer ointments to treat the injured area
"...and if there is stiffness or swelling that persists for more than two months...
"From the break of the arm
The arm is made up of two bones, one is called the ulna, and the other is the radius.
And the others are large, and that bone is what's known as the humerus.
In such a way that only one of them breaks or moves separately, or both together.
When the smaller bone breaks, the repairs are light and healing is quick.
"And if a large joint is dislocated, causing severe pain and more damage than when multiple joints are dislocated together.
If only one finger dislocation occurs gently extend and straighten it
And if the dislocation is very serious, it requires stronger restraint.
And extend the wrist upwards and draw back your hand's fingers higher than others', and the little toes also should be drawn back lower than others', so that you may see further into the eye, while keeping the eyelids closed.
Then stretch out your arm to the side with your hand, or to where you are leaning, and another ministering towards the other one's ear.
Then place them in their best position.
And if there is a piece of bone protruding out when it is in its place, and you cannot remove it without causing harm to the surrounding area, then do not try to remove it at all unless absolutely necessary; as we have mentioned before.
And in using the leech for bleeding, I have already spoken about that single practitioner; if you take the remedy.
And in the beginning of the restoration after a hemorrhage, if you wrap your fingers around and apply oil mixed with wax to prevent bleeding, that it should neither be too hard nor too soft. And keep them steady as they are pricked at their base
And then you apply a poultice made of ground meal with much flour, and bind it tightly to the wound.
make sure that there are six or more stakes in different positions either the poultice is positioned on one of the bones, or at two points.
and tighter than in another place, and softer when touching with gentle touch as I mentioned in the beginning of this chapter. The bandages around the poultice should be soft and moist, and not too tight or harsh.
The bandages around the poultice should be soft and moist, and not too tight or harsh. And there are threads that are strong enough to tie it down without being too thick or too thin as mentioned earlier.
Reward the member after a short while. "And if any injury occurs to the limb, whether it is internal or external, as long as the wounds are bandaged tightly, so that they may be healed.
The limb should not be moved gently at all costs.
"And again apply a poultice, and let the leeches be warmed up and released, and similar things if necessary.
"And make sure the bloodletting cannot come to that member because it is too thin, and if necessary warm up the veins gently and hold them still until they cease.
"And none of these things that we have said come to harm or injury, unless you do not apply the leeches gently as mentioned.
"Or when it happens suddenly, then press the hands to its side and hold them steady, avoiding any sudden movements or shaking.
"Then the dislocation is restored in 35 days or less depending on composition and thickness of the flesh.
arm
It itches the back of the hand and whenever we move our hands a lot, only one side will itch many times.
"And if a finger is broken or torn off, then tie it firmly in place and hold still until it heals.
"Then set the hand on a table and stretch out its fingers. Stretch as far as you can, keeping them well aligned.
And fasten the splints, hold tight, then apply a plaster according to how much blood there is. Or you can wrap it in linen
And if the splinter enters through the belly button area, if you use cloth strips and instruct them to prick at their base. Then hold a long strip down firmly and apply it as large as the hand's palm, restraining any movement as you see fit.
And if the break occurs in front of you, tell them to place one eye on each palm and hold them steady with their other hand while holding it tightly against your chest, making sure that both hands are outstretched and right.
And if they come out of nowhere or anywhere at all, just remove them gently, applying pressure only when necessary. And hold with the hand and use a small strip to lift it out, preventing any movement.
And if the splinter is from elsewhere on your finger or one of the others, just apply pressure with the other hand after removing it gently. "Or tie them well when you apply it, so as to make sure they stay on, or if tied properly at the time of application.
"And in the restoration and positioning of sutures, and after healing whatever you have mentioned occurs as I said.
"The ears are often broken when opening it up, and one can see them clearly in front but not at the back;
"And in restoration, if you bind tightly to a strip of skin, along with another strip. "The hairs become matted at the base and extend their roots to their ends;
"And that is when fractures occur in the bone.
"And if it is dislocated at its base and pricked by the nail of one hand or another, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
"And if it is crooked at the joint and either way you stretch or extend, it can lead to injury;
"Then place the arm to rest on its own accord according to its natural shape and then apply the plaster, and hold the stitches so that they do not move.
"And if it is at an abscess incision, when he lets it heal over time. "It should be done in the same way.
"It is advisable to straighten the knee joint firmly in two or three days, and then turn it so that the toes gently touch the root of the nail. Then stretch out your leg from side to side, and move your head up and down.
"Then straighten the leg and stretch it from side to side. Then put a bandage on the ankle joint, then another one at the shin bone.
"Then tie it snugly between the leg and the thigh with bandages to prevent movement. Then you can start doing rotations of 3 or 4 times on each joint. "And as you continue with more rotation movements for your joints and less tighten the bandage.
After removing the dislocation of the upper arm and the lower arm, proceed to remove the third one that is under it, until you have removed all three.
Hold tight if the joint does not move from its place, then let it go again; otherwise, do not interfere further with this or any similar thing. And if the joint is dislocated after being loosened and tightened as described earlier.
If an arm bone is broken while removing it, do not proceed further unless necessary. And if you cannot remove the joint because of breaking the limb or tearing, then do not proceed with that limb. The treatment as described earlier is to be done regardless, unless otherwise specified
There are no broken bones in the upper arm or lower arm during removal, as described earlier.
Certainly
The joints are restored at different speeds depending on their diversity of composition.
The road to hell is rough but it passes by many times.
And if it breaks only with a small fracture or with force and has any wounds anywhere on the body and is painful everywhere and causes pain as well, that means there's injury.
And when the restoration is complete, make sure everything is in its proper place so that it cannot move.
After that, put on the plaster and let it harden well. If you have followed my instructions correctly, then bind it so that it cannot move, and repair all the other wounds as before. If there is an accident which it should be done when it is right, until then keep him sane.
The wrist break
The veins in the leg have two openings which are called "mustels" and "fossles";
When the veins in the arm break as they do in the legs, and for that reason it is necessary to reset them just like the two arms all together, and the eyes are also injured. And if both openings are broken at once then the leg of all parts is injured.
"And if they are pulled gently
And if the large bone is broken, it will cause great pain, and one sees well. It is torn asunder
After the treatment has been administered, it straightens up and ties the eyes together evenly;
However, at any rate, it is advisable to break the tie and have light treatment so that the restoration may be less severe. Align according to its nature.
After completing your work, if you have two faces of pus that come from one leg and the other, and run along its length until it reaches the end.
Then stretch out two cords of similar thickness and tie them together in the middle, and with this light knot the leg will not fall to one side or the other, and it is good.
"And the doctor does not administer any remedy to the limb that causes this injury and swelling.
"The physician also examines whether there is another joint affected by this incident. "As long as he remains calm.
"Of the bones due to injury
"The joint does not dislocate
"If he is holding his breath due to pain in the ribs, and you see that one bone is pressing against another, as if he wanted to pull it out and then place a hand over the wound so that the bones can be lifted up, and press them gently until they straighten themselves.
"Then apply ice and compresses to the belly with the little bandage over the broken ribs, hold it in place constantly, then cover yourself with bandages, and other things that you have prepared.
"And when the third or fourth joints are passed, if there is a dislocation on one of them, because you will find the bones broken in some way.
"And if any of the two joints are dislocated, when you release them, like we have advised the other joint. "Then place the second joint with its length according to what I have said, and tighten it as well.
"And if there are two or three, or more, dislocate one in length according to its quantity, straighten it with a rope and tighten the bandage over its place; "And if you are going to apply this treatment to the top of the bandage covering the belly; if it feels good.
"It is also necessary that you do not neglect other things I have mentioned for dislocations, such as the others we have advised. "And afterwards check if there are any accidents.
of the bone fracture at the point
"When the woman's body is dislocated, if you make it lie flat on her back and hold her down with your feet.
Then he shall bind up his hand with sinew as a tourniquet.
Then he shall apply gentle pressure slowly and gradually until the bleeding stops completely.
If she needs to urinate, if her tourniquet is too tight, and if she has urinated while wearing it, he must loosen it gently. If the tourniquet is loose or she becomes unconscious, bind a bandage tightly around her arm and apply pressure to stop the bleeding. Then blow into the bandage until it is completely inflated. Nature will restore circulation if the tourniquet loosens.
Then remove it gently and leave no marks, as long as it is not too tight.
And when a finger or limb is broken, if the blood supply to it has been restored as in the arm of the patient.
"And these wounds are hidden from him who does not understand them or their secrets.
And the dislocations mean most times a right course towards restoration. Until then.
When it is broken, take an onion skin and apply it to the wound; Then wrap a bandage around it tightly, leaving three stitches or more, and it will be completely healed.
"To treat dislocations with wounds:
"It is advisable for someone who has a dislocation with an abscess or the like to be treated now if what our previous statement says holds true.
"And if the wound heals but not completely, then you should come back to try and reset the dislocation as soon as possible or at least in an hour.
"And if the shoulder dislocation is corrected gently and firmly, so that it settles down smoothly, as long as the dislocation remains still, but do not overly tighten or loosen anything, because you are at risk of a bad injury.
"And if you try to correct it by gently and firmly applying pressure at the joints, but make sure your hands are relaxed.
And if you're unable to remove it by hand when the instrument is one that has been used for removing arrows and which is of iron with seven or eight needles long, and its breadth varies according to the quantity of the wound. And for this reason it is better to apply three or four stitches according to the quantity of the wound.
And when there is much blood, it does not move at all from the compressed limb towards the outside.
And they are called "palanche" because when this dislocation is located near an obvious bone, once it is reduced to one side and stays there, or if both sides are dislocated simultaneously. And the breaks must be gentle and the limbs should not easily take hold of the bone as long as you grasp the joint firmly, so that the limbs are unable to grip it.
And once it is reduced to one side and stays there, or if both sides are dislocated simultaneously.
Then proceed with what was mentioned earlier: applying a splint around the arm and controlling movement to stabilize it.
And when the bone has been reset and the patient experiences great pain afterwards, you know that this is not part of its natural course.
If he is in his right hand, then apply a black silk bandage tightly on the arm and clean it properly. And do not put anything other than oil on the wound or let any dirt get in that would bring infection and corruption.
After you have restored the limb, let it bleed and cover with clean cloth according to the size of the wound. Make sure not to restrict its movement with a bandage
And many times have made this injury worse, and brought it close to death or corrosion of the limb. Or more swelling and severe pain compared to other injuries.
And if the wound is large or severe, you may doubt that an accident has occurred and seek to apply a dressing so as not to harm it. But in any case, use tough cloths instead of the dressing mentioned earlier, and bind them tightly.
And when you see after the first or second day of dressing the wound if you think that what you have done is all right then put on a soothing ointment to stop bleeding, as well as similar ointments.
It's necessary that you dress the second limb twice a day, morning and evening, until it is clean and healed.
And make sure both limbs are dressed in the same manner as before to ensure proper healing.
And each day the dressing is maintained and it cannot be undone but to remove the bandage when there are small pieces of bone which come from cuts so that you want the wound covered, and all these fragments should be removed that cause pain.
And a fistula comes to its place, or another way of corruption arises if it is necessary for you to cure as described in this chapter above.
And when the limb is broken and pricked through to its bone or shoulder joint, as in an elbow injury or other severe injuries, if you do not take immediate action for fear of further harm, many times it leads to death but will linger until it fails.
"In the meantime, apply cold compresses to him after every 2 hours or so, then treat the wound as soon as possible.
And if it does not work, leave it alone.
There are often times after the healing of the bruise, especially when it is close to the joint, and there is a concern about the shape or form of the member. And by chance cannot make the members their own naturally.
"The best way to help is... "If the patient is advised to use ointments such as oil of lavender, incense, and myrrh, and other spices like acacia and aloe vera, or all mixed with alcoholic spirits or vinegar, if you do not have any of these things... "...and put them on the burn and hold tight, and don't move your hands at all.
"...and put them on the burn and hold tight, and don't move your hands at all. And then dislocation occurs repeatedly as long as the bones are straight.
Or you may strain it with a well-made pulley. As the bones are straight, there is no pain in using them to move the limbs.
The dislocation becomes more intense with time and is accompanied by swelling in the affected area. Or you may use it without any rubbing as long as it stays straight, and the pain relief lasts while it is right.
two limbs which are weak after dislocation
When a bone fracture has been healed, and you need to massage after weak and sensitive parts of the limb afterwards due to any reasons: For one is because it was too narrow when tied up, and did not stretch as he could have. Or due to the fact that there were too many knots, and it was unable to release its own tension in the limb. The first sentence of this text does not have a direct equivalent in English as it is unique to Old French, meaning "or by many reasons. or due to excessive movement that prevents its proper functioning. or when he has little strength in his chest and is weak.
The remedy involves gently massaging the affected area to make it more tender, while applying pressure evenly until all pain subsides in him. and give him rest, and do not worry or fret;
Then apply warmth to the affected member, so that any coldness is driven away, and the swelling subsides as the numbness leaves it. And let him return to his natural state.
"The arm was injured after surgery. After the restoration of the member, and it is torn apart quickly, and its form after the member will be smooth everywhere so that his natural state does not come back.
"Many people say they must break their arm completely in half.
And the work is blamed and brings great harm, and many die.
Wherever there is doubt and fear, the tortures are fierce if he has any heated herbs or cooked moist ones as they grow fine, roots, marrow, and similar things.
The emollient is soothing if it does well and you take the vinegar from the mallow or linseed oil as fat.
Or you can use fats like figs or grind them with finely ground coltsfoot and similar medicines that calm the sudden inflammation.
"Do not hold the dislocation repeatedly for an extended period with wet hands. Let the limb rest when ever any hour
The tortures are harsh and bitter if they are done carefully to the bone, as needed for covering with iron if it is necessary to cut deeply. And place a cushion for support while studying the treatment
Dislocations occur when a joint moves out of its place and prevents it from moving properly, causing misalignment in the limb and resulting in great pain and injury to the patient.
If there is no alternative treatment available, now is the time to resort to another approach.
When it is swollen and inflamed, and if reset improperly, there will be swelling at the incision site.
why should one avoid moving when it is inflamed: there are often pains and other sufferings.
At all times, if this will happen, when the abscess is opened, then let it be left as long as the incision site remains closed.
Then raise a limb to warm air and oil it thoroughly, then gently straighten the limb as needed, and treat every member when it comes in its place.
"And I ordered the doctors to treat dislocations with great care.
It is often that the jaws are dislocated and occur in two ways or they may be loose at their roots, and soften over time. "They are completely paralyzed and they cannot hold their tongue still; it cannot close its mouth, nor can it swallow words.
If a dislocation is small and can be corrected with repeated attempts.
"If she is completely paralyzed, then you must immobilize her as much as possible and do not harm her.
"By the same manner that you apply it to the shoulder, but for the dislocation of the jaw, hold one of his hands at the root of the dislocation in order to hold open his mouth and prevent him from dislocating himself again. "The other hand should be raised to keep it free.
Instruct the patient to gently massage his jaw and move both of them in all directions. And they move their arms at will, as they please from their own will
"And gently pull on his jaw, especially when you combine them with heat and oil so that they are loosened lightly.
"Do not target me anymore if you have already mentioned.
When they are all removed gently and the mouth is well lubricated with oil and wax, then bind them firmly together.
Rest the hairs on its back and the joints should be in between two supports so that it does not move forward or backward but only side to side, as long as the pain is relieved and the jaws are closed.
And then gently cleanse what needs to be cleaned and do not open the mouth to drink or eat until the jaws are well closed and clean.
And if the two jaws cannot be moved back into place within an hour and are still clenched due to fever or worry, then take them out gently with care, and try to vomit while keeping cool; in such cases, vomiting is the best solution for the stomach.
And when you see that it is in vain; Many times have died to those who had this disease.
The tire could not be dislodged because of its thickness and softness, and it was destroyed the first time it was burned; and thus, it is said.
And the restoration process is when he stretches his arms out to it and then presses the dislocated limb towards your palm and it returns
Then he takes an embot and band-aid, and holds them in place.
the shoulder dislocations cannot be removed from the body. And if it is dislocated only once when you try to reset it with your hand as we have advised.
Then he takes the embot and band-aid, holds them in place, and instructs the patient to keep their arm down as much as possible.
And if you want to set it back into its place when it has been dislocated on that side.
dislocation of the shoulder
It is not dislocated unless one of the following ways occur:
it is not dislocated if only one of its ends dislocates into the shoulder socket. And to the second part of the thigh causing pain to that area of the body.
And it does not cause pain in the buttocks or behind the back, and
as for those who are bent forward too much because they are injured.
Those with enough strength can bend and straighten their bodies without injury.
"And in any case there is no use hitting it with blows or kicks, and if you hit the shoulder with a sharp blow, take care that it was dislocated because of this.
It is important that you try it out while still being careful. And then apply the treatment.
It is noticeable when a dislocation occurs near the shoulder and there is a significant difference in alignment between the affected and unaffected areas. You will find that one shoulder is hollowed out, while the other shoulder is prominent like a handle. "The arm cannot bring its hand back to its side without any movement.
"And if it is dislocated in the upper part and cannot be hidden because you clearly see it on the arm.
"This way of dislocation does not always work if it is new or the fingers are bent.
"One way to do this is by gently pulling the arm with the dislocated shoulder upward and placing your hands underneath it. Then gently stretch out the upper part of the joint. "And you stretch up and place under it. "If it doesn't work right away.
"And if after trying this way as we described, if you think the dislocation is too severe and the arm should be warmed up first. "And you warm it gently and soothingly with things like a hot bath and fennel and chamomile. And if that doesn't work.
"Then apply pressure to the base of the ear on one side, and gently hold your thumb against it. And straighten the arm in the direction you want to move.
"And do the same with the other shoulder, if it does not move forward. "Now both shoulders are in place, and you will follow this method to perform each step correctly.
"And make sure the shoulder blade is higher than the hair on it. "Then gently lift your elbow over the shoulder blade and hold it in place. And raise your elbow higher than the hair on that side. "And do the same with the other arm, moving downward towards the belly. And if it is too tight, if pressed with no weight, then a dislocation occurs now
"The shoulder dislocation can also be performed in another way:
"The dislocated shoulder is immobile on the ground, whether it has been caused by a fall or anything else. "Once a sling is applied to the arm, but it should not be too tight or loose, as this may cause pain.
"Then extend your hand in front of you and the dislocation will return to its original position.
"If it does not return due to anything we have mentioned here then perform this remedy: "Take a piece of string about two inches wide and long enough to reach behind the ear. Secure one end around your neck.
"Take the other end and wrap it around the forehead, making sure not to tighten too much. Then place this on your head behind.
"Extend your arms so the elbow is behind and hold the shoulder with one hand. Place the other arm at the base of the neck and extend it out. "The injury has now occurred.
And when it is settled in any way that may be, if it is convenient to you to put the salve on as soon as possible with powder from the mill, with incense and cinnamon bark, covering all of the shoulder and torso, then strain through it and tie a bandage around the arm at its base, so they do not move.
And it's best to rest the limb as much as possible while the body heals, because it will heal faster.
Then after every 24 hours or 7 days, move it around And if it is firm and does not loosen up, then you should apply heat.
And if the connection is due to moisture or from some other cause, it's convenient that you apply the third cut on top of it, whether it was applied before by another incision.
And if you do all this and it does not loosen up after 7 days, the dislocation will remain in place, making it impossible to lift your arm above your head because of how it is dislocated or twisted. And if you do all this and the dislocation never loosens up on its own.
The dislocation that occurs in the wrist or elbows, back or buttocks if it is caused by an impact and the hands are clenched tightly, requires further treatment.
"And hold steady until they are healed.
"After healing comes stiffness in the member and movements after some time, as long as you keep it moist, and until it returns to its original state.
"The dislocation is painful.
"The dislocation occurred at the point of injury and has come back to trouble;
"It happened in all directions and was particularly visible from the front and back, but could not be easily corrected because it was clear to see; "The dislocation caused disfigurement of the limb. "And when you tie a bandage tightly to an abscess, if it is not visible clearly. The binding is tight and cannot be loosened, nor should the arm move in any way
"It is necessary that you reset it as soon as possible to prevent its recurrence, since it often returned and could cause further pain.
"However, in any case, it couldn't be easily corrected even from the back; "And as for other dislocations, they cause greater pain and often come with death.
"The restoration is when it is so severe that the patient cannot hold its own hand any more, you will need to support their arm with both hands. And if the arms are stretched out and the hands become detached from their base, or if it is connected to the root of the palm as soon as it grows on its own
"And if he has dislocation on his shoulder, when he doubles one hand over the other, it causes pain at the base of his palm.
If upon stretching, a firm hold must be maintained.
And if the minister stretches both arms and tugs them hard when they do not return to their place;
Then pull one shoulder blade back while wrapping a long and wide strip around it.
And when tightening the joint with one hand if no oil is present to lubricate it, then tighten as much as possible until it grows.
And when it is at its place, if you apply a lubricant and pull gently while restraining the arm from moving, release it slowly until the hand is free.
And if the joint is firmly set, then it stays loose.
And if you find that the connection is not tight enough, then loosen it and retighten it as much as possible while keeping it firmly in place. After loosening it
And if the joint loosens after removing a loop or knot and it feels tight again while soaking in water and pressing as much as possible. Or you may tie the joint with a loop of coarse wool, let it soak and loosen as much as possible for one night then soak again and remove any excess knot. And when you pull, the joint feels tight so tie it with a coarse wool loop, let it soak and loosen as much as possible for one night then soak again and remove any excess knot. And if this is done two or three times the joint will be loose.
And if you see it so moist that it is about to burst with fear, then hold tight.
It will come back into its place.
"Dislocation of the arm
The arm dislocation is severe and the recovery is light, more so than other joints. Wherever possible, the limb should be returned to its original position as quickly as possible, otherwise it may become dislocated again.
And when you place the arm on a table and stretch out its hand, cover it with another hand, and hold its fingers gently, ensuring that they do not move until they are healed.
Wherever possible, you should check if the limb is in its original position properly. When placing it on a table for stretching and straightening purposes. "The dislocation occurs at the wrist of the hand if he moves his arms in a table manner and looks at his hands through the joints.
"Now let me see... If not, if the patient's veins are closed and they cannot be reopened, then it is recommended to leave them alone.
And if the patient can no longer suffer and you cannot reopen it after a few days or weeks, then you should perform surgery to open it up.
And do not put any pressure on the patient's hands while they are restrained in this way, and you cannot restrain anything at all. if the nerves are damaged or cut off
If there is no other option but to restrain by fire cupping and surgery alone can be performed.
"When the hands are loose and you put it into place as we have taught you to do, then apply fire and let it burn for a time; after that, remove it gently.
"If he cannot move and there is no pain or swelling, if you apply hot oil to it and pull it gently as long as it remains still.
"the dislocation of both arms
Do not ever put your two hands on any part of the body or at the back of the palm or stomach.
And when you are done with both arms and hold the joint steady until it grows out, then support them on top of each other and move towards where the dislocation is.
"And let him go two joints, then put it next to another.
And bind the joint as we said, and lay aside this one, and make them move together.
And do this for as long as it is straight and equally done, so if you've done it here like before, keep doing until it becomes stable.
And then do the same on the other side when it becomes loose from another part.
"two dislocations of the elbow
"When both elbows or shoulders are dislocated, and there is no treatment available, as the patient may die.
And if the signs suggest that both sides should be pulled out but cannot stay in place, and many times they make all members loose, or two fists, or arms.
And often it happens to one side four times.
If it happens on the back, you say "Gilboize.
The treatment is that if it comes from childhood. "There are no remedies nor treatments for this.
And the one that comes from striking or jolting, or similar events, they have ancient methods of treatment with large words, or he makes no use in all.
But I taught him according to my intention, and formed streams in various ways.
I say that in the sudden coming before which has no remedy or treatment;
and such ones that come straight to the second layer of ribs, and cannot be cured unless they come directly from the back as I said.
and it is that the hairs should be shaved on his lower jaw, and the restraint of them so they do not fall off.
Then cut the hairs on his forehead in earth and one more by piercing it, and bind them with sinew under the ears of hair, and another by stitching, and both legs.
"And let him minister with leeches, one for the ear and another for the eyes.
"And let them be firmly applied as we have said, so that they may lie on the eyebrows and hold their paws in front of their eyes until they are closed.
"And if they do not improve with this cure, then take three long rods and break them into pieces, tie the ends together, and place a bandage over their eyes. "And let him put his eyes on the other side of the bandage, pressing hard until he closes it at both ends.
"If you notice any fainting spells that come from turning your head when someone turns to face you. "And let the leeches be applied to the ears of one arm and across his face, then apply them to the other ear, nose, mouth, etc.
"And after the cut is made, whether or not it can be undone, let the incision remain firmly in place until it heals.
"And after the second incision is made, whether or not it can be undone, let two stitches holding the palm of your hand in place to hold back the movement.
"And then the two strands are tied around the finger, one to the first cut and one to the second, tying both ends together with silk so as not to move.
"When it is healed, sew up with silk the incision made through a hole in the skin as well as sewing up each ear separately and stitching an eye of a third needle so that the lower part of the spine is straight along with the rest of the ribs, then close the stitch over one.
And at the end of health if it is convenient to administer soothing and healing medications with what we have advised here. And never give a placebo, nor do they come back after the spine has been opened up and treated for dislocations. It is he who opens it, so that one must not have doubts. due to this there would come death.
Injuries of the knee and shoulder only occur through dislocation, not from other causes.
The joint of the knee is dislocated into four pieces. Dense and flat, front and back
And denser further, little flattened in the front and back.
And the knowledge of dislocations is that when a patient dislocates their leg with an arrow or stone, it is longer and causes more pain than normal joints. The arrows cannot increase the size of the wound due to fire. "And it is from this dislocation of the shoulder joint, because that which dislocates the elbow comes.
The sign of the one who comes to burn is that it can be contrary to these precautions.
And if there are signs in front of it, then its leg is well-aligned with completion. In any case, do not double the pain by doing so, and if you feel it necessary to stop before; hold your breath, and squeeze your muscles, until it passes from below the ankle
The sign of the one who comes behind is that it cannot spread and double in size, and the leg is shorter than the other one, ankles are relaxed, and a bone is extracted from beneath them to the side.
The symptoms of this type of dislocation are that you repeatedly cause it to dislocate itself and its healing takes longer depending on its position. If there is no treatment available; And I suggest that you should make sure your arm or leg is in a proper place, otherwise
And in the case of a fresh dislocation which is quite common and hard to fix if you hurry too much when resetting it and the bones are misaligned. Because of this occurrence, there is no other remedy available
If it does not return in this manner, then you should apply force and hold the limb tight with both hands, or bind it tightly to the ground. And another minister is to stretch out one hand and tightly grasp it in such a way that you pull your other arm towards your head. And the third minister is to tie the patient's chest with cords, using both hands so they cannot breathe until released.
And stretch it up and down once as long as the abscess remains on the ground, while you hold them in place until it is released.
This manner of extension is common; if a dislocation occurs as we have mentioned, it's alright
If not, then apply a remedy to his likeness.
When the dislocation occurs at the upper part of his shoulder, you should tie it to its side so that is remains on the ground and then hold it in place with a cord from above.
Then straighten out the bent arm, and bind the large vein of the limb to prevent bleeding. If it returns to its place now
This method of dislocation is less severe than others
If you do not hold the affected limbs together with great force on their heels and toes, and onto their knees and ankles too much then the limb may be stretched further than others.
Then let it hang from the top of a pole, or supported on the ground with both arms extended.
Then instruct the patient to bind their arm with ropes from above and have other ministers holding it who tie it onto the limb as well, because the dislocation is now correctly positioned.
And when the dislocation is at its place if it pains them as we have said in those who are gentle and strange to their limbs straightening out properly on both legs.
Then tighten (or bind?) it between the fingers of both hands into a ball. And plant the cloth moist so it doesn't stick to the hands, then extend both arms outward towards him, and make sure each arm reaches up to his head when resetting the dislocation.
"It's alright then.
If not, lie down and press into it as we mentioned in the previous chapter, and prick at the healthy part of the extremity.
And when a dislocation occurs, it is advisable to stretch the affected limb as much as possible and follow closely what I have said. And put their arm across the chest of the opposite hand, and stretch it downward towards the ground.
And when the dislocation is over but cannot be stretched downward to ground level, it is advisable that he should lie flat on his back as described in the previous sentence. And with his face up and the hand extended like before, and he must also press against the shoulder joint in this manner. And when the limbs are extended, they will straighten unless he holds tightly with both hands and pulls on a rope Resting for three or four hours, then lie down, and hold the rope tightly.
You will see that they are straight if the rope is held tight, as seen before, and leave them for three hours.
Then lie down and make a strong effort to relax your limbs while holding on tightly.
Of the shoulder joint
The veins are evacuated in three ways: First is by knowing, first purging and then bleeding.
And no more evacuation should be done after that.
And the signs are as you command the patient to bend his leg to its socket, and if he does not straighten it at the socket, know that evacuation is necessary.
"And when you restore all of them in the right way, extend your leg if possible, and place it against its face, and place your back against its feet;
"Then take hold of his elbow with both hands, pull them together, then bend the fingers and thumbs so that they form an 'X'. "And as for the other limb, extend your hand as long as it grows in length and its signs show that it is properly aligned with its socket.
"Place the splint on and firmly hold your arm against the socket, then straighten it out until all joints are aligned well.
"And do not force them to be straight while the limbs are relaxed.
And when one member is out of place as long as treatment continues very severely as we have experienced in the healing process so that it may be healed
Of the arm.
The hands are never swollen and do not swell completely, or burst
"The signs indicate that the shoulder is dislocated and try first at the part where it is dislocated:
Lift your arm gently, and it is necessary to stretch your hand slightly as you move
And when the arrow has been extracted completely, if necessary, hold it with your right hand and draw it out gently from under the arm, from near the elbow.
Then place your right hand on it and hold it there for two seconds, then stretch upward with all force.
And do this again as we have said before, pulling and stretching the arrow out until it is released.
If it reappears after that, you are doing it correctly.
If not, continue the treatment because it reappeared.
And if it cannot reappear afterward, if you do not hold the arrow firmly against its base with your fingers on the ground between your feet and tie a bandage around to prevent any further movement.
And he instructs the patient to put his hands on top of it, as well as others who may be near it. And the fingers should gently move around each other to hold onto the hair while pulling it out.
And he holds his eyes steady as the finger moves around to reset the dislocation in place again.
And when he reaches this point, he puts the strap and stoppers over it, pulls it tautly, and holds tight to the leg, and waves the arms that are behind his shoulder, making sure they do not move too much.
And he lets go of it for a few seconds or minutes, depending on the situation, and gently pulls with his hands if necessary.
Then he releases it at the third or fourth time, and tries to remove the hair in four more attempts. And if it goes forward to its end, then you must hold steady as he continues to move around.
"If the arm is dislocated, you should lift it as gently as possible and secure it with splints; allow to rest for two or three days.
You are asking about the translation "When both arms are dislocated and it is appropriate to stretch gently while working, it is a light thing.
And if there are dislocations occurring due to any reason or cause, then it is necessary for you to sit on the bed with your legs straight up and placed against what opens the joints. Then press firmly onto this position as he continues to move around.
And when the eyes are closed and no longer open, if you place your feet on top of a flat surface with the dislocations, then hold steady and let it be three times. Then release. You should keep him in this position as long as he remains calm.
"Of wounds and dislocations together
When a wound comes with the dislocation and it is seen to be treated, many times occur that the limbs die;
if you are not cautious in the treatment and do not utilize it well and neglect to take advantage of its benefits for a long time, then you will be foolish and miserable and slow.
"And begin with gentle care towards the patient's hand, leaving the hair free, as you cannot see any hope for recovery. "And when you do see some hope, gently move the limb back into place, just as quickly as it moves out of place.
"And when the limb is back in its place, treat it gently as you would an abscess, and if necessary remove any infected matter.
"And with the dislocation comes a break, so fix it as you would for other injuries, and do what we have advised in simple cases.
"And remember that if you enter into a state of fear as I have mentioned, for it is contrary to the nature of your Creator and the healthiness of your body.
