Oh you, dear readers, I have completed this book which is the foundation of medical knowledge assembled in its entirety and has reached its conclusion through my discussions and explanations. And it came to me in a vision that I would complete this treatise on surgery, which is part of the work of hands.
And because the work of hands is so great in our region and has been extolled throughout all ages, it seems no one can surpass its details as seen in the old books on anatomy which describe how the hands are made. And of this there came an error and the vanity, and close the intentions and align the science.
"It seems to me that I am interpreting this correctly, as it should be explained in detail according to the way of exposition and explanation. "The forms of the fire treatment and other aspects related to curing will be explained, accompanied with an explanation of how it is performed.
"And because there are no great masters of hands to be found among us, it is the art of medicine that extends. "It is advisable for someone who becomes enamored with the science of anatomy as Galen did to stretch their knowledge of bones, nerves, veins and arteries, number of them, and the motion and rest of them.
"And for what else does Ypocras not work as expected and the wound care? "In addition to this art of healing.
"We tell in the introduction to this book that there are certain things that must be done without fail and with precision.
"And so I want to say many times more than those who are engaged in this science, and if they abandon the art of healing.
"I see a fool who does not know how to approach a woman or how to perform an operation; Because so many wounds were outside of where they should be, causing death between his hands.
And after that, treat a vein in the leg and make an incision into it, cutting through to where it is large After he removes with him some part of the vein, three people died.
"And I saw one who was called the deceiver, and see the size of his veins and their great size; and if he touched them at all, they would soon die.
And another doctor who practiced our treatment that had a broken leg and with an abscess,
and the doctors who lacked knowledge restrained breaking of the bone with too much force, leaving no healing at all to the wound, and left it untreated until the end.
and commanded that he not remove the dressing from him;
And they delayed until his leg was all healed, leaving it weak, leading to destruction.
I called upon him to come and cut off the leg; "And when I dislocated it, it did not feel any pain.
But every way in which the joint is damaged or misaligned will make it unable to heal.
It could not be corrected while the limb was lost entirely.
And when I saw another way to treat it that worked, and then inflamed through the veins of its cause.
Because the chancre (a type of ulcerated boil) when it is full of melancholic humour cannot be treated unless you touch it with iron if one can't get to what has been corrupted.
And therefore, when teaching hands, you should know that every hand has two parts: it means knowing which side of the body is affected by more serious conditions.
And I will show you in this chapter where there are doubts and fear.
You must remember to hold back your feelings so that they do not harm the patient's voice.
If you take your arms in holding them gently and firmly, using the best way that by God's grace you come to health and be healed.
"Allow the open sores to heal naturally.
"Do not doubt or fear this; let it happen and you will enter into another world of glory.
"He has no friends among his family members: "Do not take any illness as an opportunity to insult me.
"I have translated the text based on Chapter 3.
The first chapters are of fire cauteries and those of medical remedies, and the chapters end with a poem about justice.
And descriptions of organs, and the instruments used in cauterization, and all that is necessary for doing work.
The second chapters are of healing and cutting, and wounds, extractions from arrows, and similar things.
And the chapters end with descriptions of organs.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and sprains, as well.
It orders the healing of joints that are painful to touch, and the straightening of limbs.
In order for our minds to remember the usage, it is important that you give them the quality of help and the degree of assistance they need according to their condition.
I say that what is medicine, which includes both diagnosis and treatment, involves more long words and subtle sciences and secret remedies.
And because of this people speak longer about wounds and agree on what to do for them;
I often get tired listening to their long discussions, as it is my longest words that they use.
I say that cautery can generally help any flesh where there is matter, whether it's the skin, or heated skin versus dry skin, and warm blood versus cold blood.
In hot and dry skin, there is no doubt, they said that cautery is a great aid; "They said otherwise: "Cautery is not worth more than heat and sweat. "Because the fire itself is hot, and it should only be cured of a hot disease by heat, not by cold.
"And those who dispute this say that cautery provides great help to the cure of a fever and dry illness that comes from the cold outside. When you purchase the clothing of someone and their moisture at a place of fire, you cool down the body part with cold water
I agree to this statement. Because it was tried and found no fault once through experimentation.
"And in every way they say that those who have experienced it and know how to use the cautery will find relief for their ailments, and remedies, and causes of illness, and all kinds of treatments.
"And for other types we have our own doubts as well, whether it be cold or wet diseases. And they assembled and agreed with the cauterization.
"And remember," friends, that fire cure is gentle yet strong; it should be applied to wounds with great care.
"Its effects are simple: only the member being burned will feel pain, and no other part of the body will be affected.
"Burning remedies come from one part to another, and bring about the healing of pain in illness. And through time
Nor does the heat and good health of its body prevent it alone if there is not enough
And through experimentation and the length of my service and study that I have put into it, there was a breakthrough in the art,
and for the sake of sparing words because it does not please me to reveal what is hidden or fire, and the quality of the blood, as long as he is treating diseases with his own hands, as a philosopher says when demonstrating. And I forgive you in my thoughts.
"And have it understood, dear one, that you must apply the cauterizing procedure.
And I say that cautery is beneficial to all people because the healing of wounds comes through the help of cauterization. Also, cautery is most beneficial for necessary pains and haste to prevent greater evils from occurring in the member.
And do not think any more, dear friend, as long as they stay still. because the disease cured by fire does not have an end to it and he will die eventually;
and he will die eventually; However, caution must be taken when using fire therapy as it is not a cure-all for the complexion and dries out humors that are related to pain, and may cause wounds in doing so quickly.
And one can be sure that the disease will not return again according to the complexion of the patient and his body's health.
and they will be eliminated by the acquisition of meat and similar things if caution is not taken when using fire therapy, as burns may occur due to dryness or moisture, so it's important to avoid excessive dryness and excess moisture. But this happens quickly.
And many people do not understand when they hear the word "cautery," and it's clear to see
They do not believe that cauteries are only after medicine, but their intentions are false, and cauteries people for the reason that when we administer our manner of cure in any disease they don't hold value, after we administer our cautery, it is valuable.
"And if you truly understand the importance of cauterization after medicine, do not follow the intentions of those who are mistaken.
The former said that cauteries of gold are more effective than those made with iron, and they did not say what else was different about gold or iron.
And they said that the needles used in cautery do not harm the patient but it is difficult to see because I have tried and found that it is seen by anyone.
And cauteries of gold are more valuable than those made with iron as they said. And whenever you heat it with fire, you will not know how much it is burned by the heat of gold, and if it is burned so much that it cools off.
If it is heated too much if you burn it with fire And the heat will cause it to stop overheating
This chapter teaches the patient how to perform gentle procedures that make it easier for them to find relief
Olive oil cautery is painful and can be caused by diseases such as "soda" or excessive humors leading to swelling of the eyes, ears, and many other ailments like migraines, sore throats, and similar ailments that come from cold temperatures causing paralysis, stroke, and similar conditions.
The form of this cautery is that the patient's hairs are burned with a solution which relieves the pain and itching for three or four days according to how much virtue and ease and comfort their ailment allows them to endure. And then, repeat the process on the affected area.
Then hold it between your hands and put its hand next to you
After that, place the root of your palm over the base of his eye between their two eyelids; and when you remove it from its place, if there is blood, then apply the fire cure called "olive oil," which has this shape: And hold tightly your left hand gently and gently remove it. Then let go of your left hand slightly, and release the joint you see in front of your little finger And if you don't see it, as long as the cautery is applied and you can feel the bone like I described earlier;
After taking a small piece of cotton gauze, apply it gently and softly on top of the wound, place it over the area to be cauterized, and leave it in that position for three days;
After you have burned through the cloth, burn until the skin is healed. After curing the wound that has been called "Four-arm," as long as it heals completely.
And they realized that when you apply more heat to a wound, it becomes more swollen; And for this reason I am helping you.
And they say that one must be very careful with the cautery as part of the bone may become burned and then treated as such.
And it should be done gently and firmly to prevent the bone from breaking off as much as possible, just like how women put on their jewelry for fear that they will break a bone.
The wound should be held open longer than necessary After the cure, it must be treated and dressed.
And these two methods of cauterization seem to me to be no better than any other way, unless there is a fear involved.
I think that leaving it up to you seems like the best idea.
because dislocations occur due to continuous natural solutions, just as we have seen in our other members;
and I think that when dislocations are caused by a weak muscle, the first attempt at treatment is more gentle and mild, to which end it is used in such cases.
When all the chronic pain comes and lasts a long time, you should use ointments that are called "poppies" and purgatives to purge excess phlegm and oils from the body. And when they perform the fire cautery as we have described, it is not effective. If a dislocation occurs due to a strong force and it cannot be easily corrected Unless the fire cautery is performed as we have described, you should not perform it in that way. After performing the fire cautery on joints of the head near the bone, as we have described, and perform the cautery using a small tool called "scalpel. And you put into them a small amount of water. And hold your hand so that it does not move near the bone. In this procedure, pain is significantly greater than in other procedures.
The fire cupping should be done more gently using smaller cups that are not used for the main vein of the head.
The first sentence of the medieval medical treatise translates to: When one of the joints becomes very painful and is accompanied by an illness that comes from the head, it is often treated with various remedies as in other diseases I mentioned earlier. Once you know how to perform cupping, then you must understand and apply the medicines accordingly.
The cupping for medicine should be done if you have a hook to remove the arrow from the eye and then fasten it in such a way that you can pull out the arrow shaft without difficulty.
Once pulled, if both hands are held tightly and restrained well for twelve hours; "And then apply a dressing to cover it up, leaving it exposed for two or three days. "Then place the cold compress on the affected area until relief is felt.
After curing a burn when it has healed completely;
"And if you have any more burns to treat, I will provide further instructions on how to apply the healing medicines.
Fire cautery, proceed as follows Prepare the fire cautery as described below.
"And it is called 'closure' when the wound has taken on the shape of a scar or if there are only small scars.
"And when the sore is very painful, hold down your head and gently squeeze it a little while you wait for relief to come.
"Let go of your hand if any redness appears, which is dangerous, and there will be a lot more bleeding.
After cutting off his hair, he put some sort of oil on it. then he applied a dressing to keep the wound as clean as possible;
And if you use the cautery to treat this wound at its tip, be careful not to cut into any nearby arteries that may already have ruptured.
wound
When you cure the wound as we have described in previous divisions of diseases, do not forget that the cautery is for use only by a skilled physician who knows how to use it properly and avoid injuring himself.
And when applying the cautery to treat a wound with a line of about half an inch, make sure you apply it only once and hold your hand steady so that you do not cut into any arteries or cause damage to the bone.
And beware of the mouth when it is used, and its nerves do not relax until it relaxes and spasms do not appear to harm, and be aware of the danger when an artery will be cut or at all, great fear and especially for him who does not know what he does. And leave a way out
But I will tell you how to handle the artery when it is cut open, and I will show you in this book where he fears
And if you see that the fire cautery does not help with the disease and the hairs are inflamed, cauterize it in such a way as we have said, and heal the wound while it is still fresh.
And if you see that the instruction I gave for the fire cautery on the artery is not working and you need another way to apply it, with the cautery of the two handles. And the best of all treatments are fire cautery
"Of the pain of the ears from cold
When the ear feels pain from cold, and one applies the solutions and other treatments we mentioned in the previous chapter, the pains cease.
After inserting the earpiece into the ear canal with both hands, and you gently pull out a little of the root from it. And on points after that to the other ear.
After healing, as long as it is good.
Of the tortures of the mouth
Torture that should be cured by fire cautery are not the same ones which bleed when they move, as we have said in the discussion of diseases.
and do not perform any cauteries that come from a wound or bleeding.
When you cure this kind of torture that comes from the blood vessels and vomiting of saliva and phlegm, and it is not worth anything, then consider using three cauteries. The first one is at the root of the ear, and the second one a little above the temples, and the third one on the crease between the eyebrows.
The fire treatment is applied to the area where the healthy skin ends, and also on a small part of the nose between the two parts of the ear. Let the fire treatment be as long as it touches both cheeks.
This is how the fire treatment should look like.
And it resembles a scar that we have seen before, but it is slightly more subtle and should the callous be a little thicker.
After curing the ear as I mentioned earlier, until it is healed completely.
If there was a stroke earlier and it is cured as we have mentioned earlier, you should not hesitate to apply the fire treatment again. "The second horn is cut through the middle, and then the first horn which is called 'vezzle' as we have already mentioned before. The fire cautery applied to the mouth of the stomach.
And so continue with the procedure previously mentioned.
"From exhaustion
This illness requires giving large and frequent doses of medicine to a patient.
After the second horn from the abscess is cut through, place it in front of the opening into which one can treat abscesses.
This will be the method for cauterization. If done as mentioned before.
If he is well then good. And if not, perform the third cautery on top of the previous one in order to have a big one.
"And the treatment if you find others, and when you see it swelling, and the wounds are inflamed, then apply the cautery. And as for those on the other ends of the bones, and as with others so long as it is healthy.
"And if the cauteries are called 'olive-grower', as I have just said.
"It is important that you try and see what we have described before, so that it may be done correctly.
"After removing the abscess, you then apply the cautery to the head and base of each bone, as well as behind and in front of the spine.
"And if you continue this way and find that the wounds are inflamed and the illness worsens then apply four more cauteries to the spine. "And let it last as long as your hand is light, so that you do not tire yourself out in doing this. After a cure as long as it is sane, until the cautery wounds are healed.
Of the epilepsy
Epileptic persons must not use the frostbite remedy unless it is accompanied by a numbing agent; and before using any other remedies we have mentioned, first cleanse your mind of any existing medication.
and if there is any pain that cannot be relieved, they will gargle and chew on hard foods.
after the main part of treatment, they will apply the cautery on the face and neck; and if the eyes are swollen or closed, they will apply the cautery as I advised someone with paralysis of the cornea and eyelids, on both sides and in a circular manner;
If the veins are inflamed, perform this subtle cautery procedure as follows:
When the cause of melancholy is fluids or excessive moisture and blood vessels are swollen and thick, then apply this cautery procedure as we have described to someone who has paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is declining fluids and swelling in the veins, then do this cautery procedure as you are about to perform on someone who has paralysis:
After the main part of treatment. after doing a good job as before and making it circular if necessary, then let him go back to his room.
and the eyes tightly closed for all parts.
After presenting this statement, make sure to erase any errors or typos from previous sentences. And immediately after applying the fire treatment, if it is painful for them, they should be put aside and not used later. After seeing the circle due to their head injury, leave them alone and let them cool off.
And repeat this procedure once every seven days with another ointment, as long as it is healthy.
"And if you use fire to burn more than necessary, you will injure.
This method of cautery is commonly used on the forehead and cheeks.
Then apply a mixture of butter and tallow and grease liniment over it.
the eyelids After first signs of eyelid inflammation appear due to the division I mentioned earlier, and if it becomes more severe or frequent than that, consult a doctor for further treatment and care.
After the patient has been instructed to apply the fire treatment on their forehead and cheeks, then they are told to perform a second cautery on each temple, until both eyes remain steady.
And apply the cautery to all veins and arteries that are visible on the forehead, being careful not to burn any part of the temples.
And be cautious of too many wounds appearing simultaneously if you can help it
I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and incision of veins how to hold them steady.
And no matter what, do not perform fire cautery or harm your bones.
And it is seen that these are cold and flu-like fluids, which should not be burned like I said at the beginning of this treatise. Burn them with fire on the forehead and temples as well as their bones. And if there is an additional need to burn his skull gently around any small area of cautery.
When you administer these medications as we have advised in this chapter, do not miss any, unless the patient is allergic to aspirin. After resetting the shoulder, apply a fire cautery oil. And apply another cautery called "clavicula" to both ears, pressing gently on them.
And ensure that you do not obstruct the artery
The form of cautery called "clavicular":
When the paper from the oil is softened by disease and moisture, only then apply the cautery called "olive": The form of:
And if you do apply another clavicula to both ears as before, they will feel comfortable.
Do not let go of the hand until there is no third piece of paper to obstruct it, as I have previously advised.
two hairs that touch oil There will be no issue when the hairs are covered in pitch and prick at the oil; do you know how to apply the two types of cauteries? This means "it is to know how to heal fire," or "to practice medicine.
The patient should be instructed to allow their hairs grow long and even. And if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they are born and they reach a certain length, then shave the patient's head with a razor blade; After that you must remove any remaining hairs in the shape of it was smooth with water and shaving them close to the body.
Then you must apply a fire-cautery oil on the skin and massage it gently with a warm cloth; then shave off the hair.
After shaving their head you must cautorize each part slowly and carefully, making sure all hairs are removed completely;
"And it is the duty of health care providers to provide medical supplies such as bandages and raise hairs at the tip of the arm.
"And until he holds his breath for three breaths then it is recommended to apply ice and moist heat alternately until the burn has subsided. "After treatment of a wound as long as it remains healthy.
"And when the hairs return and the bandage is softened then you can reapply the fire treatment if necessary, just like before.
"And when hairs are burned and the bandage is soft enough to be at its original state, level or even, and do not prick the hair.
"The medical fire treatment is that you instruct the patient to let hairs grow long and even, then shape a bandage into the form of an eyelid.
Then take some French soap and warm cloths, apply them gently. Then, if it doesn't cool down, apply ice in a cloth and gently press against the area where you have applied the paste. And keep the disease at bay only if it is cured with one application, unless there are more abscesses to be treated. Then apply the oil soaked in cotton gently on the affected area.
And the dislocated shoulder should stay in place and press the paste gently against it, applying it repeatedly until the pain from the medicine is gone, because there will be pain as with fire.
After you have done this for some time, your body will need it. And when the medication has been applied and you see that the cloth is free of adhesive like it was released by fire or cut open; And if it is injured, then it must rest.
If not, continue to apply the medicine as soon as possible or if there is no relief from it, until your wounds are healed and your eyes remain still.
Continue to apply the cold compress as long as your ears are still red and after treating the affected area with the ointment called "Dyafein" and others, until it is healed.
"And make sure you apply good ointment to your wound with great care so that the medicine does not touch it.
And after the paper becomes moist and the hairs prick with oil, if you resume the medicine on that one which is irritated by the paper being properly cleaned as you did before. After treating it until it is healed.
It's the form of a wound remedy.
And such is that wounds vary in size and kind, according to how they affect you;
And do not let this right way of learning from this art
Cure for fistula by cautery
When curing a fistula as we suggested in previous treatments and your remedies don't work, then it is advisable to apply the cautery according to this method
Instruct the patient to place his hand on the abscess And gently hold your hands in a manner that prevents him from moving or injuring himself.
after placing the cotton soaked with vinegar on his abscess, or in rubbing the oil of vinegar into it.
After performing the cautery procedure
and gently touch his hand if it forms a long band of cloth, ensuring that he holds onto the bandage.
If you see this happening with one hand to another, and if it happens like a tent,
but always remember that the treatment is good as long as it is performed correctly.
After pressing on the fistula to remove it, and treat the wound, and dry it up. "And if closed tightly, when opening it, and tears occur at the corner.
After applying the cautery paste, hold your hand tightly to the part of the nose that will be cauterized so as not to move it. And apply the cautery on fat tissue and burns it.
"When you come to the beginning of the cautery process, it would be good. If not, if you encounter the cauterization again after a while, continue to apply it with care and leave 3 times.
After applying the cotton powder on a blister and curing it until it is healed, pass 3 times if not yet healed, then apply corrosive medicine while the sores are open. And do as your physician instructs you to do.
"And there is also a method of cautery for fistulas that none of the ancients have mentioned. You intend on forming a fistula? After taking note of this manner, I can proceed as follows: and I make a quantity of one holding tightly with your hand or firmly, so the limbs do not move at all, as their roots do not retract towards their source.
and it is advisable to apply oil to the affected area with a soft cloth or cloth;
if the lump is of fistula nature, and the healthy part of the skin should be taken into account for maintaining healthiness.
And if there is a fistula resulting from the cautery as we have mentioned, it's bad. If not, administer a potion to the vein and guide the fistula back into place as desired by applying it gently where it is cut out.
incisions in veins On multiple occasions, there are cuts into veins that are referred to as "hair," and even more so for children.
After curing these cuts in the way we have described through division and treatment, do not allow any more bloodletting until you apply a smaller, milder bleed-out.
And I treat him with extreme caution as long as he remains alive.
After curing the sore, so that it is healed.
When a pus comes from the base of an ulcer or ear, or any part of the body that is exposed and can become infected, after it has been destroyed and rotted and becomes fistula. and you will treat him as if we have advised earlier according to the quantity of the fistula after puncturing the fistula, hold your hand until it stops flowing blood from the hole, and then let go.
and do this one or two times after following our treatment instructions as long as it is healthy.
if he is cured on the first try, that's good. If not, it may require further medical intervention based on what you find in his treatise.
When the veins harden from moisture and become stiff, and you treat them with medicines but it does not work, then put a poultice of aloe vera on the affected area. after you apply the fire cautery and it forms a vein, after using another method to remove the vein.
Instruct the patient to keep their arm steady while applying heat at the site of the burn.
After lightly holding onto his hand and removing any bandages, apply the fire treatment as desired by the patient.
After cleaning their mouth of food residue, they should let it heal for one hour and then rinse off thoroughly
And in this manner, the moving tendons will be corrected, and the gums will remain restrained from moisture, and the moisture will be expunged.
From the pain of the tendons
When pain arises from cold or heat, whether it is from cold or fire, and medical treatment does not work well, then apply the remedy in this way: Burn therapy (heat) and fire therapy
The burn treatment is such that you need to apply a piece of iron or steel at the end as well, After wiping off and wrapping around with a piece of cloth soaked in burn gel, hold it steady against the painful spot and keep it cool as long as possible.
"And so as long as its virtue remains at the root of the tooth and you pull gently on it in order to loosen and put your finger over it until the pus flows from the abscess.
"The fire cautery should be so severe that you take something made of iron or steel and hold it in your mouth until the pus flows from the abscess.
"After applying the fire cautery, make sure it has cooled down before removing it from your mouth and holding onto its handle with one hand while you hold onto the tooth with another.
"Do this carefully, because the pain will be extreme for some or tomorrow.
"And make sure you keep your mouth open and steady while applying the fire cautery to avoid biting it. Then rinse thoroughly.
"This is how we apply the fire cautery:
And do what you will, according to your ability.
It is the shape of a cane:
"scrophules When the scrophules are cold and wet, they need to be dried by medicines so that after the fire is applied on one side, it can be applied on the other.
Apply heat to the abscess once and if it is cured as soon as possible until the abscess has completely healed.
The abscess should be tested with heat according to its quantity and left for three times. Apply the cotton roll tightly until the burn has healed.
After curing the wounds and making sure they are clean
When cold water is poured into the pores and especially when it comes from a cold complexion, it should first be treated with solvent remedies.
After applying fire cautery to the root of the throat, hold your breath so you don't choke on it and avoid drinking any water for a short time
After applying fire cautery to the joint of the arm at the base of the spine, and if there are any 'clavicles' as they call it here, which is a small bone in front.
And treat it so that you can hold it steady until it heals completely.
When all the diseases of bones are from cold moister and it has no fever and is a chronic disease, you apply fire cautery to its surface as well. And another cautery between the two breasts;
And apply fire cautery to 'the clavicle', which is a small bone in front, as they call it here.
And if you see it, apply fire cautery by pricking into the 'pains' bone where the disease of the ears is located.
And let them prick at their base
"After curing the left one according to this method, and also perform the cauteries at three points in the same manner:
And because they are more gentle, you do them three times each.
"Dislocation of the shoulder
"When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. After he pricks the hair on his back and chest after lightly touching it with two fingers, which should be done gently with both hands.
and the binding is loosened when there are two needles inside it.
burn as long as they prick at their chest and come together with four cauteries.
for when it is done with the cautery that has three needles, then there are six cauteries on its surface.
and the nerves follow the subtlety of a tent and this is the shape of a cautery that has three needles.
"There are no times when the eighth nerve is touched since it has eight burns.
After setting it on fire, please arrange it with care. after resting the abscess, and let your limbs rest as long as they are well-rested.
"If the dislocation occurs then this is a case where the severe burn of the shoulder needs to be treated separately from the other burns or multiple burns.
"The joint has been reset and the moisture and wounds have been treated.
"When stomach cramps come from cold and moisture as they are applied to the complexion, they multiply in number on him, and the usual remedies do not help him; for it is necessary that his feet be supported with their heels and spread out their legs and arms. After the third cautery, apply two cauteries to each ear lobe so that they are at three angles, and there is space between one and another as they move separately.
And the cauteries should be applied so that they open up both parts of the ear, and the figures of the cauteries should follow this shape as closely as possible.
And if you apply a large cautery to the stomach in this form:
That person who fears this cautery should apply it piercingly and steadily to the stomach, just as you have shown: After applying all these cauteries, put on another one called "pins.
After the cure of the treatment we experienced before, as long as he is sane
The stomach feels pain from fruit and moisture as well as excess volume, until it returns to its natural balance. "And to treat the wound, as we have mentioned earlier, ensure that the hair is kept steady if it is pricked at its base. "The third cautery should be performed in the same manner as before with this shape and size on your forehead. To treat it, you will need to remove any pus that may come out.
"And when performing a double cautery procedure, "When performing two single cauteries at once and holding your hand steady throughout the process.
"And for only one more double cautery procedure, ensure that both eyes remain open and the eyelids are not pressed together.
"If he cannot hold his breath even if he gasps for air, then he should extend his legs, and gently ease back into consciousness.
And when you are in the midst of cautery, if there is a need for further cutting with a scalpel, be sure to do so carefully and thoroughly And make sure that he does not cause any injury by doing this, as the edges of a blade can be very sharp and it is important to observe them when working closely.
When it comes to the liver, you need to determine if he has an abscess on the surface of the liver or in its interior If there is one on the surface, the pain will be much stronger than that if it is located inside.
If it is in the interior, then the pain will be even more severe.
And when this treatment is intended for the eyes, make sure they are covered over their eyelids.
Then take off or remove one of them if the abscess is located there and also shave off any remaining scalpel to ensure it doesn't cause any injury. And as long as the veins are open and there is no blood clot present.
After the treatment of wounds, until he is well.
And it should not be used by anyone who has not studied medicine in depth and has never cured any illness.
After it has been very hard for a long time and you think that leaving it alone is better
In this medieval medical treatise, "dou cautere" refers to a particular form
The former said that you should do the root cautery many times; so Take a long and thin root of aloe vera, make it dry and as thick and long as your finger. And smear it with oil and hold it to the fire, and when you are done cautery on one side of the nose between the septum and the nose.
And do another one between the fifth tooth and the sixth, moving down a little bit; And instruct him to move his arms, also between the esophagus and stomach, and in between two spaces, so that there is a gap between the fire therapy and the two spaces.
Do not press your hand with too much force while doing this as you would when smelling.
And it was said by none who have ever used the fire therapy that one should not put the abscess between the eyes and nose until they are fully healed. And the pain stops as soon as we say in the post-nasal passage with the throat.
"But regarding this matter, there is great fear or a fistula that cannot be cured.
of the mouse
Regarding the cure for the disease mentioned earlier and how it relates to our discussion of various treatments, there are three ways in which you can apply the cautery treatment:
The way to do this is by doing three treatments or four depending on the length of the hairs and the shape of the hair at the base of the nose.
And not press your hand too hard during all the treatments while holding onto his arm.
And another way to perform this is by having the patient lie on their stomach and then applying pressure over the sore area until it stops.
And gently press on the sore area until it stops, or if a bruise is coming from hitting the arm, and lay down your hand according to how the hand lays next to the body, according to its length, and the pressure should be according to the width of the shoulders.
After the sore has been inflamed until it is completely healed and then apply pressure to stop any bleeding that may still occur after healing.
And if you feel like continuing with another fire cure on the other spot.
After treatment when there are still purulent discharges, please proceed with further treatments
Cautery should not be applied over wounds (dropped stitches), as it is done in the manner described as "asclytes.
When you cure according to the ways we have mentioned in sections, and your cure is not causing harm, it would be best if you applied another fire cure on the belly, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the back of the thighs, and then last on the spine; And hold steady the eyes so they do not move until they grow
After leaving the cautery, do not let the hair be shaved short and tidy after the cautery. Healing would take place, and all wounds would be treated with God's help.
The shape of the cautery for the belly or the shoulder that we have mentioned before. And in the back it can be olive shaped as where it is situated.
When the veins are swollen in those who have varicose veins, it is advisable to perform a fire cautery between the auricular and the ulnar points. And gently hold your hand with the cauterizer so that you return.
And do not enter too deeply into it if there is great awe of it, and you should cauterize as follows in that form
After performing the two cauteries on each leg at the point of the knee. "Instruct the patient to have one cautery on their forefinger facing up while holding down the thumb with the other hand.
"Let the cauteries grow steadily until they are firm and equal in both hands.
After the other treatments we have spoken about.
When stomach issues come from cold or moisture, as long as the gastric and intestinal juices are retained and not digested properly, they cannot be treated with any other remedies. And you see the patient experiencing severe pain and great suffering if they have had a stomach cancer before or if a stomach cautery is used. And for any other small wounds on the hand or fingers, apply one of these smaller cauteries.
And if you see many ulcers and the patient is suffering, make sure to put sutures into their finger nails, one on each nail; also two stitches on the stomach itself, because treatment will be helpful as long as it has been applied correctly.
"Of the wounds
When the hemorrhoids are very large or multiple and old and filled with cold and wet corruptions, they can be cured if you apply cauteries as described in chapters previously. In the spine there are two nerves that branch out from the spine in all directions. First nerve:
If the stomach is chilled and no meat is cooked, and swelling of the face occurs, then apply heat to the stomach as directed, along with one on each side of the chest. And leave the cautery open for a while longer. "After curing it so that it is normal.
When you are done with the first application if there is a second that needs to be applied, then place it directly over the previously treated area. and I leave my hand as long as the previous cautery has been in place for some time, so that no more harm is caused.
Do this once or twice, and if there are multiple areas to be treated then cauterize each one as we have instructed. After treating an injury to the member, as long as it is healed.
And if you use a great deal of fire on cautery, then there will be even more help.
If the veins cannot suffer from injury or incision, we will tell you in its own right, if it comes with a disease that cannot be cured by cautery.
If there is no fistula present, and it is hollowed out from filthiness or moisture, if the doctor performs a delicate procedure to remove it completely, then make sure you cover yourself with as much gauze as needed to absorb any remaining fluid.
After applying the cautery that seems to be working well, and removing it from the fistula according to how much it stings when withdrawn and reapplied, depending on whether there is one or three times, until the wounds are healed.
And keep in mind that you may have to remove nerves if necessary, as well as large veins.
If the fistula is in the arm and the intestines, then you must be careful about these wounds, do not perform this procedure elsewhere, think that it may be dangerous.
After treating the injury as long as it is healed and all wounds are fully closed, then you can safely remove them.
"And when matters are settled, such as it has been reported, they become stiff, causing pain to their eyes. And one of those we will mention in its course.
When the pain of fruit comes and is very severe, and does not go away with the usual remedies, it's advisable to apply a cautery on both sides at once as we have mentioned before.
And if the cautery is made in a single line, there will be three or more wounds, and they will do great harm.
The bladder When the bladder is weak and prone to fruit and moisture, if it holds urine in, then apply cautery to its base on both sides of the urethra.  Where upon stinging or pricking occurs at either end, whether left or right, there will be cauteries that pierce through as they did once before;
And hold tightly onto your back as you are pulled towards.
Or hold tight to the shoulder in the form of this statement
When the marrow is cold and moist, and cannot conceive anything, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends harden. And when they come, if great pain is felt. Then you should perform the fire cautery to the buttocks as we have said when performing it on a vein.
Or hold tight to the shoulder, as mentioned before.
When the moist internal organs rise to the surface of the vein, due to this reason if it moves from its place, and a sign is that the leg becomes longer than the other when measured together.
And hold tight to the two ends of the vein as you perform the fire cautery on one side of the neck in a manner similar to that of a circle, and look towards the base towards the place where it enters into the body like when turning. If the vessel is dense with the circle, then draw it out
And if you want to cauterize the stomach,
If not done properly, perform three more burns on the larger veins and do them in succession with all your strength.
And treat it as long as you can stand.
arm When pain strikes in the bone, it is often cold and wet with moisture, causing the wounds to worsen as we have stated before. It is advisable to purge out of the large fatty lumps or other similar pills that are harmful. After performing a burn,
The method for burning should be according to the second manner. It is important to administer hot and cold treatments in succession with medicine.
The burning should be done according to one of the two methods, which are as follows:
"You should cauterize the blood vessels of the third degree, and you make it deep and great, so that every cautery, except for this one, is superficial.
"Not once should a cauterization be made within the main artery of the arm, because it would lead to four times that way.
"And if you see a cautery being done on the dislocated joint mentioned earlier.
"But do it in such a way that all of the bones are covered and both arms are involved.
And that is how we do it in surgery when the pain persists in the head and does not go away with pressing on the shoulder or leg.
"And if it comes to the shoulder and leg, then you should do two cauterizations at each place where the pain is located, and one cautery on the inner part of the elbow for two.
"And if it's a cutaneous cauterization, or if there are deep cuts involved;
"And the patient's limbs hurt so much that the pain spreads from two to four ouch points or more at each burn. And it worsens over time.
And the pain can spread to other areas like the arm or leg if not treated properly with a proper burn care; and also make sure that you don't cause more harm than necessary by using excessive force during treatment of burns
"Some patients had their shoulder dislocated and were in great pain as a result; they couldn't move it at all, and it was injured and corrupted from this injury. After a belly incision there may be death
And the pain is in two parts combined, first cautery on one part and then on another, according to this manner
And it is known that cauterization of the skin can be done in different ways with varying degrees of severity, such as using metal forceps or a larger implement to make one incision between two incisions and so on until all incisions are made.
And the cuts should be as even as possible, with each cut being done equally well;
And this is how to do
And then twist it tightly as possible so that the hair is red and straight up to touch your skin, and if you want to stop it, turn it off.
After the fire application once or twice times only And then apply the ointment of butter and let the wound heal completely. After the incision treatment until it is healed
But Albucasis says that we use little of this fire therapy for fear of its pain, and few who use it.
And all the veins are burned which can cause great suffering, and where they move.
The fire cautery is such that if you do not use it properly and let the skin's edge be burned with iron or fire until a certain length, then the two ends will meet in height as much as double the thickness of one. And they are to be tied together in this manner
After putting on the bandage of the arrow wound with a piece of cloth from his own garment, press your hand over it. After you heat between the two circles of fire that burns with a low flame for one hour, and leave it in place and let the bandage burn and sear the skin.
Because he had an infection from fire;
and when the dressings are not enough to hold in place, gently touch your hand with an instrument and remove a gentle bandage, leaving it for three times, then put on a black gauze as much as possible. And leave them for three hours that you may purify yourself.
After the treatment of wounds as much as possible.
And if the pain is severe at the elbow or the knee, use a compress that was used on the same area.
This method may be dangerous and should only be done by trained medical personnel. Take both hands alive, as one with another, and they will break together, and put them into a new vessel. And if there is a small opening, the patient must not try to squeeze it closed with their fingers
And if there is a small opening, the patient must not try to squeeze it closed with their fingers and when you have put in both the first and second pots well covered, and added the salt and sugar to it as much as possible, let this mixture be taken by hand to your kitchen
And let it rest until the mixture becomes smooth and thick, or is ready to be eaten.
Then if he has done well at this, they should perform other procedures for treatment of the disease and cautery on other parts of the body.
"She does this as well with fire and other remedies that one cauterizes the vein gently with tweezers and alcohol, all these things together.
"And another remedy he tells us is for the pain of sciatica in both lower limbs and thighs; that there's no other remedy needed, and if you apply this remedy once, it will heal as instructed later.
"And you apply this way that the body is gently squeezed from both sides with a smooth fat-free sponge, and you squeeze it in the vein and under the arm, leg or any other part where there is pain, as well.
"And leave it for three hours while making sure that the hair no longer feels the fire.
"And then you put them into a bath as hot as they can stand it, and then bring them in the light, and the pain will go away completely and be healed.
"No blistering agent or similar medications should be used after the removal of ulcers.
"Dysarges says when a varicose vein is cauterized of many causes, if it helps at all;
"And this cautery should be done in this way. "Take one and a half ounces of oil; and put it on the spot between the thumb and forefinger.
"After removing the charred part and applying fire until it is charcoal, put on the wool and leave it as long as it is ashes.
And continue as before until you think it is right to make a small incision and relieve the pain.
The cautery method is called "cautery of fire.
"From the pain of two
When pain comes to the back, whether through exertion or from impact, or by excessive cold evacuation, or by any other means of freezing matter, none of these causes are good; for he who has been infused with such cold matters.
It is advisable to apply something other than bitter pills or similar things before applying the cautery method. If the pain continues for three lines, then continue with cauterization and every fifth line thereafter until the pain subsides.
The cautery method is performed using a "point.
If you see it, do three cauterizations or four to the base of the shoulder.
This disease often appears in childhood and is indicated by symptoms such as itching when it moves around or pain. "And you hold tightly to the lower eyelid with two fingers, while holding on to its appearance as it holds onto others.
When you see it, apply the fire cure as prescribed by this method. If there is a purple patch on the skin, treat that area specifically.
And if you see it, apply the fire cure to the skin in two or three lines and make sure there are pins between each of them.
After the fire has been applied as prescribed in this method and that you do not apply any more fire if it's burning excessively or close to a nerve.
Joint pain
"Joint pain due to moisture that spreads throughout the body, and when accompanied by a chill, which are treated with fire in one manner:
"The cautery is applied internally to the joint pain, or externally according to this method:
And if it is desired to prick at its base, you should apply the fire cautery all around. "And if the pains spread to other joints and this occurs frequently, apply cautery on all veins in three or four applications depending on which part it is applied to.
"And if you are better for longer periods, continue this method and do not stop using your hand until both eyes become red.
And if the pains come on both sides, apply fire cautery as we suggested in our previous chapter.
"If the pain is in the finger or palm area, apply cautery to the second eyelid:
And if they remain painful when removed from the shoulder joint or the hand's fingers.
And if the pains come and go in quick succession or intervals, then perform a fire cautery on that part of the body and apply pressure to the affected area as well as medication.
"When you hit it hard and push out the pus, if he is helped by God.
When an abscess comes to a head and pus begins to come out quickly or in intervals, if you decide that it's time to cure the boil, make sure not to squeeze out too much of its contents. And when one thing comes from within a belly, if the things that come from it are coming and going quickly or in intervals:
After that put your hand between his shoulders and tell him to hold tight as the boil is being repaired, ram it with both hands, and make sure all of its contents are out.
After applying the cautery treatment
While it is calm, while he drinks water Restrain the joints from moving. And hold their arms steady so they do not move further.
and cover his body with a cloth to prevent the cautery from touching any other part of his body except for the area being treated.
Then apply the cautery to his entire arm while holding onto his hand and wrist until you reach the bone, if there is no bleeding on the first application of the cautery then reapply it gently. And wait patiently as the joint does not move when performing the cautery. Don't burn him further. And that he will live without any other harm occurring.
"And when you come close to a fire, your wounds are of no value.
And apply the cautery gently according to their size and large people larger according to their size.
After applying the third procedure, let them shave their beard as long as they are even.
After the other procedures have been performed and it is well healed, let them shave their back as long as they are even.
And consider making his nostrils long and straight so that he does not snore in bed.
After the third procedure, when they want to get up, give them a well-made bandage and apply another one.
And let him rest well, work slowly, be wary of excessive drinking and eating, and have too high a fever.
When the lesson is completely healed.
After curing the fire cautery, I will tell you later about other treatments for this patient.
When the others wounds heal over and are closed up, you should see that they do not grow any more, at which point you apply another cautery as per its quantity, and then close it with glue. After applying the treatment as we have described;
and none of the elders had advised to cauterize at three points in this manner
And first make an incision into the joint and then draw it out wide with a line to hold the dislocation in place, making sure not to cut through the bone of the arm.
The first cauterization is lighter and easier.
There was no pain in any member When there is no pain in any member, whether of a blow or an injury, and the pain lasts on until it subsides; but when it comes to cauterizing at the point where they are called 'pricks', and also cauterize them according to their length and smallness, and their flexibility, location of torcs and suffering.
If the patient is well after the first cautery it should be fine;
if the patient's condition does not improve after the first one, then proceed to another cautery as custom is that it should be done on the nearest limb where the pain persists;
There is no cure for the disease once it has been caused by cauterization and primarily comes from the decomposition of blood and melancholy.
You cannot cauterize the veins; if his illness is at its onset, and he has been cured according to what we have said in this division, and you doubt that there will be no more pain or suffering, until you perform the cautery on the head I cut off his nose to one end, and towards the front at its finish. "And he will have trouble with his toes.
"And he will hold the eye steady as long as possible until the blood from the veins has stopped.
"He will cautorize his nose according to what is in front of him.
"And the dizziness occurs everywhere. "And it becomes clearly visible if you hold the cautories that we have mentioned or chief, and one cauterizes on the nose, another on the eyebrows, a third above the eyes, four below the eyes, five above the cheeks, six below the cheeks. "And two on the cheeks, and two on the forehead above the eyebrows, one at each hand joint, and below the elbows.
And if you wish to cut them off at their roots while they are growing, do not burn them.
Do not use a fire cautery on the arm's bone or any other bone in the body except for the liver.
And as you do more cauterizing, you will find more help and benefit from it.
It is because the nerves are already damaged that there is no pain when cauterizing if done correctly as the skin becomes charred and crisp.
"It is important to make sure the patient's hair grows long and even, as that will help guide them through various procedures.
After curing the left arm with honey and other treatments until it is well healed.
When a member becomes inflamed and is treated with ointments and plasters, and it does not improve after attempts at cauterization of the limb depending on its size and smallness.
And if you make a fire through the vein's hole. Then treat the wounds until they heal.
"And once the cautery is applied to the hand and foot, it prevents movement of the member, except if it moves freely.
"And whenever there is no constraint on the arms and legs moving as they should, none of this occurs.
"When the disease called 'albaras' is cured by cautery, and the physician knows nothing about it, he applies a little cautery according to how much blood can be drawn in one go, as long as the bleeding continues and stops at the same time.
"Then he applies a powder of flaxseed and lentils with rose petals and leaves from the same plant. And for hemorrhoids, for an abscess in the anus, or any kind of sore; "And bind it all together with linen bandages, and put it on his back as long as he is conscious.
The treatment of chancre (scrofula) through cautery
When a chancre appears at the outset, and you see it arrest, if you cauterize with a fire cure by burning an even circle around it.
And all of them said to do cautery as for ulcers.
But I think it's not right because I doubt that he will be healed and cured completely, so I do not wish to try this at all.
The second part of the sentence means that if you perform a fire cautery, which is known as "circulation," just like we said in our previous example.
When someone has an ailment called "abdubing," and it is about to die or from the excess of moisture causing it to swell excessively and he has pain, whether through the tendons. And you have seen that it will die. Unless the cautery is performed on ulcers punctually. After leaving it alone. She will grow ill from working too hard.
And if you give them the complete treatment as prescribed by the doctor or physician
While treating them for 'adubelati' illness as long as the cautery continues and if given a complete course of treatment which is prescribed by the doctor, then it will cause the sores to heal in a manner so that the flow of blood is restored in such a way that the course of disease is eased.
After the cure has been perfectly performed
Another way to treat disease is by "burning," and nothing else than the burning of member
If you see this ailment in the left that can cause suffering, avoid using sharp and large forceps. Instead, use small ones as advised by the doctor or surgeon.
After all cauteries are performed and there is no longer any infection or contamination present in the area, nothing of what was corrupted should remain intact, everything that has been corrupted must be destroyed.
And then let it rest for three days and put on the burns with oil so that the burns of fire are healed, and all the corruption.
After the treatment of burned members
And if you see after three times healthy ones have appeared it is good
And when that is not the case, and there is a recurrence of cauterization in the corrupted areas.
The treatment for this condition is different from using fire cautery;
But all cauteries of fire are worse in every way and I have already explained the treatment for this condition by dividing it into two parts: Take what you have read earlier.
The hairs that come out It occurs many times when piercing through the skin is a disease called "closes" according to our understanding, and it is a very painful thing that causes harm.
The cauteries of this disease are done in two ways. It is to know fire cautery and hot water cautery.
"The fire cure is that you should shave and make it smooth like a mirror, so when the hair prickles at their base, hold them steady to prevent movement until they grow.
"After applying it all over the finger, keep your hand tight around the prick as long as the prickling continues on both sides of the finger. "And leave them in place for three days until they stop itching and peeling off. "Then apply a salve of bitter water with it to the skin and let it be smeared all over at night; and after dawn remove what is not necessary from its roots.
"After curing the dislocation, it must remain fixed as long as its bones are aligned.
"And if they are converted by blows to the head and many times occur in hands and feet, it is advisable that you apply a hot cure. "And do so like this: "Take a nail or any other sharp object, and stick it into the vein's hole and artery. This is important because puncturing veins can be dangerous. "Stick the nail into it until it pierces through entirely, then apply some hot oil and keep your hand steady as you pull back the edge of the nail towards the base of the vein. This is important because puncturing veins can be dangerous.
"After applying hot oil, let it sit for an hour. "Then remove the nail and allow it to fall out completely at its root.
"Afterwards, while you are working on the rest of the body, also treat any burns that may occur at the joints.
"If any of the fingers or toes are trembling from coldness, or if they are numb in some way, it is important to perform four burns on each big toe and one burn between the small toes. And you shall instruct them to have a heartburn cure with olive oil.
They will make the patient's cold symptoms worse if they tremble or hold tightly onto their illness.
No such thing is evident on the surface of the body or pustules are present that come from infected substances.
It is advisable to perform a fire cure as soon as you notice that one of the sores has become inflamed A subtle application of a mixture, which can either be applied to the fire so it is held in place or rubbed into the root of the abscess, or onto a long lance for cauterization.
And once the cure is applied in this manner and it becomes clear that there will be no bleeding to speak of, but rather all superfluous fluids which are present.
But you should perform this procedure after the evacuation of wounds is complete.
There are often large eruptions of blood from the artery which is cut near the wound or at the incision point, and similar things occur in other parts of the body. "And there comes great pain from misalignment.
"And whenever this occurs, whether you apply pressure on the vein's wound or not, hold tightly as long as it does not stop bleeding by itself.
"Then apply fire cupping to the affected areas more intensely and for a longer duration until they turn bright red;
"Then apply cupping with one or both hands depending on the size of the wound and its location; place it over the vein where you hold your hand, and keep it in place as long as it does not stop bleeding.
And when you remove your thumb from the vein and the cautery is released, if a more intense cautery that has been set on fire is applied quickly to it.
"And do not cease to perform this one after another until they are stopped;
"And make sure you do not harm the nerve that is related, and nothing else occurs on or near the wound.
"And when the artery is severed and cannot be reattached immediately due to its great size, then it can only be treated in one of these ways that we have mentioned: "or by cautery, or by extraction when it cannot be treated immediately, or through very high pressure applied to the artery, or with medical treatments that can help repair the damage. "And should hold still and remain still.
"Consult the medical practitioner about any additional treatments that may be prescribed or required.
"And if it occurs without any medical treatment being available, then place your fingers over the wound as we have mentioned and tightly hold until the wound is closed. "And do not move it should remain still as the cold seeps through to prevent freezing and frostbite from occurring.
"But if he has experience with cauteries or medical treatments, then perform them first.
Here is the translation of the opening sentence: "We have spoken about the first chapter in which it is advisable to use fire cautery or other medicinal treatments and remedies for wounds.
And in the following chapter, we will discuss this matter more thoroughly because it is a crucial part of our work.
And so that you know, when it comes to this chapter, there is more risk and fear than in the first chapter, because of this reason one should use them with greater caution.
In the following chapter, there are often evacuations of blood when opening veins and incisions near vital areas. It also covers treatments for wounds, extractions of arrows, and cutting into stones. And in that chapter, there is often doubt and fear, resulting in many deaths.
And I assure you to proceed with care. Because people come for treatment. if a person is so sick with their illness that they die due to the severity of their disease and the strength of their pain. And of these must have fear
You shall know it is time. Listen; I am the gatekeeper. and his illness is dire.
But only agree to those who come with this manner, but put more great caution in your honor than in your clothing, and do not fear too much that you don't know from which it comes.
And use prognosis and guidance in the treatment of your wounds so that health may be restored.
This will help you restore your reputation, glory, and memory for ages to come.
Three cheers for our beloved masters, let us drink with good cheer and delight, may the Holy Spirit inspire us from its hand.
I have instructed this healer through other healers as to how the fire treatment should be done; that is where one of these healers will come from, for it is necessary that you find out more about what which requires your most skilled attention.
It is often accompanied by the illness of childhood that comes from playing too hard with a child's head.
And no one can say what causes it to reappear.
"And there are no cures for this disease until infants, and many of those I have seen die. "I think it's important to avoid working on the chapter completely.
"And when the dislocation is caused by moisture, and it becomes increasingly severe as time goes on until they cannot hold their head in place.
"As the moisture increased, it became more severe and this moisture was accumulated between the arm and the chest.
"When dislocations occur due to moisture, they are severe and the moisture is accumulated between the arm and the chest. The dislocation occurs at the joint and you must try to remove it with a wide cut.
"And as time goes on if the moisture continues.
"Then you must try to correct the form with a slippery substance:
If the moisture is more severe, and the abscess becomes larger, if you perform these moves in a cross shape as described above.
And you see the marks on the cheeks when you press with your hand at the temples. It is advisable to follow this method in dealing with the third eyelid.
After the incision has been made, there is no moisture present. After restraining the eyelids and powdering them, it is rubbed with wine and oil, and left to heal for five days.
After that, treat the wound with ointments and burnings, and leave to heal the eye by tying it up securely until the member is relieved of pain and becomes healthy.
Another way to make an incision is by looking at or pressing the large part of the abscess and pulling it open.
No matter how many times it occurs on; no matter where Not a single time there And not a single time on its backside.
When the abscess is opened and drained, follow what you have learned earlier.
And be sure to not cut into an artery; And do not bleed profusely if the patient dies due to too much bleeding and evacuation of moisture.
When there is a disease called "catarrh" in the eyes or nose, and it is contagious, and the treatment of medicine does not profit alone because when the cautery is applied to them they are closed so that they cannot be opened until they have grown
It is important that you hold tight as possible, so the hairs remain steady and do not move until they are ready. After wiping off the excess of the cloth tightly so that the arteries are opened, then drain the hairs at all ends with one cloth. Then look to see which eye first and whichever is closed first after the ears are pierced through should be repaired.
Then tie the eyelids tightly and apply a small bandage to each eye, so that it stays in place until you have finished the work; whatever is on the larger side should be done first.
And if you see, stretch the strip tightly across the artery and hold it firmly until they tear off; then tie them together with a thin strip of two fingers as tight as possible on to the bone, so that it is through the large part of the chief.
"When a vein is opened...
And when you hear the pulse rate of 3 beats per second, then gently press on that bone.
And if necessary, you should stop the bleeding by applying pressure with a bandage or cloth.
Then examine the wound. If the bone is still protruding and the stitches are not visible then apply pressure to stop the bleeding, and continue treating the wound until it is healed.
"When an artery does not open... "When the patient complains of...
And the way to extract them if they are causing hairs on their temples, and apply pressure at the artery in their temple as it beats strongly, and is quickly released once any coldness has passed.
And once it is released, if the pain lingers and strangles his breath then gently remove any tight bandage or cloth, and apply a gentle hot compress to ease the pain until the artery visibly opens. "Then place a small bandage over where it is dislocated. "Then apply gentle pressure until you feel the vein, then gently remove it and ensure all pieces are separated.
"And apply gentle pressure to the artery if you feel one end of it, then slowly remove that part and take out as many pieces as there are. If she fails to comply, do nothing at all
"Take three stitches at each corner,
"If the artery is large, use two stitches from a strong cotton thread to prevent bleeding near the wound and cover all of them.
"Then remove any excess between the two stitches in that manner and then if you see, if another surgical cautery is necessary for the bone as long as the pieces are covered;
And it is this swelling which is severe, with no feeling of warmth, and a red appearance. As for the cautery, to finish with the treatment That's because it is more severe in treating the wounds.
When extracting from an artery, one must wrap the lower arm with gauze and hold it tightly in place;
And when applying a tourniquet if there are dry medicines that make the skin numb and tense, hold it tightly until it is gone.
And if you are applying it to an artery as tightly as possible and experience any pain when coiling around with the tourniquet, wrap your lower arm tightly around and hold on. And if you have none of that, when wrapping the lower arm around it must be as tightly as possible until the skin is frozen, and hold on to your lower arm as cold as possible until it stops.
"And it must have between the two cuts a large space, and then when you've made the second cut, and you feel the artery stinging as if it is touching bone, clamp down on both ends tightly. "And make sure there's enough space between the two cuts so that you don't cut through to the other, completely.
"This is how the cautery is performed:
"And when it is necessary and more severe to cauterize the artery than two times, but the cutting should be very close so as to hold its heat for a longer time. When the blood vessels are too small, less heat is needed.
tears "When the tears of the eyes have descended into the veins that are close to the ear, and you see there is no cure for medicine, you will tie off the artery with a bandage tightly, watching closely as you move it. And when the hair of the patient is wet and moist such that it burns the paper, and scorches the papers, and extinguishes the fire from the tears's heart; then there should be more attention to this treatment And they called it the "rough cure", and that you make three incisions at an angle on either side of the forehead.
And they called it the "rough cure", and that you make three incisions at an angle on either side of the forehead. And on the other side of each incision make a second one in front downwards towards the nose, and the others go to either side through the paper, and you keep an eye out for any incisions into the arteries that are hidden behind by the papers.
And after this hold your hand steady from continuing to the second ribs, and let three wounds be made as much quantity as you can bear.
And apply a piece of sponge and sprinkle some powdered gold on it to wash the wound, then put an ointment that is made from these parts onto it.
"The second incision was made after the first one. "The second incision was made between the two incisions on the back of the arm and then performed a similar incision to this one. The instrument used for the first incision is called "cultellar"; on one hand it's quite sharp, and on the other hand it's dull; neither of them are satisfactory, so this type.
After it has been shaped towards the ear on one side and towards the bone on the other; after that, shave all over as closely as possible to the first incision.
"Hold the eyelids steady until the incision is complete on both sides and then perform a similar incision to this one.
"Then extract all the blood, express your voice from the wound,
"Place a bandage made of gauze on the wound and apply wet dressings of wine and oil to it. Make sure the eye corners are covered,
"Take the other eyelid and gently press it down to prevent a swelling of the eye; then apply basilicon oil for healing wounds, as well as other treatments used in treating wounds until they are healed.
When any vein is cut open with regularity, you see the arteries thicken and become inflamed, and damage to the walls occurs. And as they are pricked, severe pain often follows, and the veins break through. Since there is no relief from these accidents that bring about such great pain and suffering, the wound becomes infected if it isn't treated quickly.
And you instruct the patient to recline their head back slightly, and then make a great bend in the forehead, and another one on the nose as well. And beginning with the removal of a tendon from the left temple to the right temple, and so on through the incision into the bone. Then remove your hand from the nerves in the temples that move around the corner.
And when the bone is cut open, if you pour water on it from a sponge, and then wipe between the two layers of the incision with gauze soaked in water, and press gently. Then apply honey and oil to it gently, and keep away from the abscess.
When healing is complete, you should gently apply heat to the area as soon as it begins to appear, then treat with warm compresses that promote circulation.
In this manner: Remove the first and second eyelids, and cut off the third eyelid. The surgeon will make an incision in these wounds to start it healing.
removal of ears
One of the things that we hear is one of the three things or grains, or stones, or third molars, or similar things Or pain, feverishness, or sicknesses. Or other fluids, whether they are warm and hot, or similar things.
If something enters the deeper part of the ear or any other way that does not cause pain to the ear, it must be removed from the ear, by placing the ear on its side.
If you see the third, if there is no clear oil of saffron or similar oils, then perform an extraction. "And when the ears are torn off or pierced through with a needle, it is held closed
This cure often comes from this treatment
and if it doesn't come off, then they apply a subtle pinching to bring the shape.
If it moves with pinches, that is good.
if it doesn't come off and they apply the subtle pinching of two fingers.
And if it doesn't come off with this treatment and if you hit the ear canal hard or pierce through the eardrum with a needle, they squeeze tight to prevent any movement until the needle is withdrawn. Then it should come off because this has often been described as effective.
And if she cannot get free in any way, if it is pressed by the others, and has nothing to hold on, then put some cotton around. Press against the base or whichever part that might be, and squeeze tightly.
And if she cannot get free from all these things we have mentioned, and you press the ear lobe so tightly that it bleeds.
And the manner of doing it is to first make a small cut in the lobe of the ear and extract two abscesses according to their size, then hold them between your hands and pull the ear towards you, and then make a little incision at the base of the ear fat or near the dependent part. And if you do it in this manner as long as you continue to cleanse the ear thoroughly and wash your hands often with saliva.
And the treatment as long as he remains sane
And if it is swelling that comes and goes, then administer an extraction
If he cannot open his mouth, instruct the assistant to gently push or pull slightly according to this form Apply an incision to that grain/portion
But do not worry as long as you think the ear is wet due to moisture from the ear, until you have done many pieces;
Then gently pull and squeeze it if necessary after doing several pieces according to what we said, ensuring that the extractions are done correctly.
In that case, when it is convenient to lubricate the ear canal with soft cotton swab first and then gently extract the grain. And if you think so, you may also use this method on another ear as well. If it works for that one, then it is good.
And if not, then take several pieces while holding tightly to his hand and gently apply heat; And place a cloth or gauze on his ear and squeeze gently from one side to the other, firmly squeezing another spot near the ear while holding onto this one in the ear; "And it continues to do worse until the arrow is completely out.
"And if you see one joint and hold the other with fire until both joints are burned.
"Then repeat this for any other joints as long as they remain all.
"In the extraction of a stone, if it is small in size and accompanied by similar things like pus and wounds, treat as you would for a cut.
"But if it's large enough to feel pain, apply an enema of poultice. "This is the lighter choice for those in the ear.
"In the extraction of ears when you apply treatments like those for divisions and distillation, and the treatment does not profit, if it is convenient that you look at the ear in sunlight. If they prick with very small needles, and if it does not move when you hold down the point where that joint is located.
And so forth of the small ones and large ones. And apply more carefully to the ear in proportion to the severity of the pain, until it stops completely. Do this as long as you keep holding them down.
And if it doesn't respond to your touch, puncture the bone with a needle as I have said in the previous statement.
and if they don't move as we have said, administer the extraction of veins with someone who has experienced previous extractions in cutting into the bone.
And if you apply your oils and medicines to the ear at any place as an instrument, where that joint is located as you see it. And if you use gold or silver particles of the appropriate size for piercing, and apply them with precision to those parts mentioned above by distillation.
And by pressing firmly on the instrument of rain well done so that you may perceive raising and lowering movements in time Then apply oil or juice from your medications into the ear canal, and whichever you find works best in it.
Then apply firmly to the instrument with cotton wool, and press gently until oil is distilled or thoroughly into the ear. And apply to the ears with cotton wool, and distillate in it so that it comes out of the ear. And remember not too cold as this medicine may be ineffective if applied at a very low temperature.
removal of ears
No child is born with any earwax in it
And this is a common occurrence when there are injuries in the ear or if it has been forced out of place, and such occurrences come rarely ever to be heard in the ear unless you can see
"And no time occurs when a person falls,
"Whoever comes across a deaf person who cannot hear when they try to speak is in the worst situation and it's important that you put an ear trumpet on them. "And look at these ones: "If you see a person with a full head of hair, then it is possible that they may have difficulty speaking properly when they want to speak:
"And if someone turns away from you and cannot hear behind them either, then it is possible that their ears are blocked up:
"If their hair is not long enough or curly enough around the ears and they try to speak softly but still cannot hear properly because of it, then that is very bad:
And if you prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow
"If the hair around their ears makes it hard for them to hear properly and they try to speak softly but cannot because of that then you should hold onto their ears gently and make sure not to touch any of their ear holes:
In his ear put a tampon soaked with warm water, and then apply cold compress on the Egyptian scar. Keep applying warm compresses until the burn is healed or apply ice and vinegar powder to soothe it.
And if you see swelling in the ear, keep applying warm compresses until it subsides. Then treat until the burn is healed.
And if the bleeding comes to an end, if you put a sponge and wrap it in ice cold water, then place it over the ear, and apply other remedies that are used to cure wounds from things such as distillation.
When the hairs are moist and dry, you stretch them with strings and tweezers, and apply a mixture of vinegar from their roots. Then treat for the burn.
And if the patient is on fire (meaning a cautery has been applied), apply another one slowly and after incision.
And many times repaired, could not any thing from their roots; When they are burned by fire, the roots remain seared and do not come back
of the glue Many times the eyes of these things seem to grow in shape and size, and because it is this disease called "grandine," and is an assembly of great moisture on paper and parchment. The work is such:
The work is such: when the patient has this disease on one side and another, it's an easy thing to know;
Then you take the two large ones, then remove some of each part lightly, and then apply a bandage tightly
if you do not cover with paper that prick just a little bit, nothing happens to the wound.
And it is large, when the assembly has one seam, and the treatment as long as he is healthy;
"If it's small enough not to exert much force, then there should be no problem as long as the wound is properly healed and closed.
"If the ear canal is being cleaned with cotton buds (ear swabs), and if you turn it inside out or insert one end into another, then gently pull and push from opposite sides.
"If the tissue is torn by incision, no harm will come to it;
"If the cotton bud is burned and treated with fresh oil, it will heal as long as there are no wounds in its shaft.
"From the grease of the eyes "Exinach is fat that burns through paper and cloth alike, often injuring others, causing eye damage, coming down with headaches, and it can not be seen in the light or by the sun because tears fill its eyes.
"As they lie down their faces become swollen and they lose consciousness as a result of the injury. And when you press on your left hand and pull it out
The manner to perform it is by placing one's hand over the wound.
Then apply a dressing of linen and wrap it around in the shape of a circle, so that there is enough surface area to cover all parts. Press on both sides and close up as much as possible in the shape of a circle.
Then apply some moisture to the affected area with something sharp and not too wide as it could cause further injury.
Continue pressing until you can no longer see the wound. And apply more dressings as necessary to cover the wound completely and prevent further damage.
Stretch your arm as wide as you can to either side towards the ceiling, and then bring it back straight again.
Hold your arm there, stretching as wide as you can towards the ceiling, and then slowly bring it back down to where it started.
And as you stretch your arm out towards the ceiling in the beginning of the stretch, if you feel any tightness gradually ease it.
Then stretch your arm as we instructed earlier, and hold the stretch steady for as long as you can, and keep it gentle to avoid injury to the joint.
If such wounds burst and go into the eye or mouth to corrupt the moisture which is already present.
And once it is calm.
And if the base of an eye is touched, then apply a gentle treatment until it calms down.
hairs of paper When the hairs sprout up naturally, do not touch them other than to trim them, and keep it clean. If they start itching or become irritated as the hairs grow, there may be problems with the eye lashes or eyelids, causing issues such as tearing or inflammation that come from over-use of eye makeup products and lotions, so try to avoid this by keeping it simple for now.
And its treatment follows these ways: Either by fire cure or by medication as dictated by the practitioner of the cure; and it is done either by cutting and stitching or by leeches, according to what I say.
It is advised that you apply the head of the leech on your thumb and then remove it from the oil on your hand gently.
If she is converted, it's good; But if he bites an artery at all; And if the leech bit it on one of these hairs and pulls them out to its base completely, or tears all the hair off, then you tear it off immediately.
Then in removing the paper from his body and tearing out these hairs all at once, remove it with great force as little.
After wiping the paper with a small cloth and then pressing it against another flat surface, if you feel that the image is not in the right place, make sure to align the image according to its size as shown on the paper that was provided earlier
If there is too much space between the two, align them closer together.
Then wipe off any excess liquid gently onto the two lines you've written on, and begin drawing the larger letters. Then draw one end near a hair root of average size, and then trace the other line to meet it at one of the two corners.
Then join the two lines with a stitch of very fine wool thread, and sew it tight. When you've done that, remove any excess threads from between the two corners as much as possible without doing damage to either corner.
"And if there is no remedy or treatment available, then leave it as it was.
"Then apply a compress to the wound with gentle and firm stitches, as it is recommended by an old doctor. However, if that does not work, then there is great fear. "And another way:
"And another way: "Then take the cloth from an appropriate place and apply it to the wound as described below:
After applying gentle pressure with small force, do this form:
"If you cannot hold tight or the cloth is not steady, if a needle is pricked or there are threads, then lay it on gently. "And take another thread from the second, which is lighter and smaller than the first. Then weave between your two threads evenly.
Gently massage the injured area repeatedly and gather all of the threads from the wound to stitch up.
Hold the eyes steady as you cut into an abscess or sore that is oozing pus.
No time arises when hairs of the paper are cut off.
If you use what we have said about incision;
But the stitching in one and two is more artificial.
The cure for wounds should be based on this form: And that you gather the paper and straighten it according to what I have said, then sew two stitches by heart, and make them fine like the paper and wide at both ends. And cover up with two stitches on each part where you hold the threads;
Carefully align both ends with respect to each other on a sheet of paper, then draw lines between the corresponding points: And leave it as is without any corrections, and the line that holds it will be strengthened and reinforced until he puts his mind to it.
If the handle breaks due to excessive force, then treat it as long as it is still usable.
And if a wound occurs and the paper is removed, leaving no hair behind:
You will draw the lines between the two points according to this shape and size.
The shapes are as you require a small sharp needle, with thin silk thread: Align the ends and draw them gently one next to the other, so that you can stretch a palmful of thread:
And order him to gently touch another thin thread of silk softly, and hold his hand over it.
Then put the arm on a support or rest.
And so let it lie in the sun until it is healed, because healing wounds this way is subtle and quick. Then pull out the arrow from just above the hair root, pulling gently on the paper while you remove the hairs naturally.
Then pull out the hairs up to the arrowhead, and cut off those hairs if they are one, two or three hairs.
And then hold your hand steady as you remove the hairs from the paper with the natural hairs.
Then treat and remove the hairs when you have removed all of them, if you pull through to the end of the thread that you ordered him to hold onto. As long as the arrow remains firmly in place and you guide it with your eye's view.
"Once you have shaved and trimmed your beard, leave it for two or three days so that the hair grows in its own way and nature takes its course.
"If the hairs are short and attached to the natural curls of your cheeks, then you should pluck them gently with one or leave it as is, making sure they grow long.
In the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein "When this illness is called 'aleacrati' or the poison comes in oil, if it has two ways:
The first way involves natural remedies and the second involves unnatural ones.
And there is bleeding or bruising from the wound, or cautery, and similar things.
"The method of treatment involves you choosing one and burning away the old remedies and putting on new ones, until they are good.
"And only use in this treatment any remedies that are known to be effective and have restraining qualities. "If you do this, then it is worse than the first ailment.
but if more remedies are used, as for those mentioned. and the swelling of the joint or the abscess is completely removed, and all wounds are healed, and in applying this remedy.
And the strength of your remedy will remain as it was before, so that you should not move suddenly in its new form.
and the treatments we have mentioned are no longer effective as before, that is, it does not revert to its previous form.
"This illness, also called 'axacratia', is natural and accidental.
The injury comes from tearing and burning and cauterization of things similar to these.
and the method of treatment is that you pierce with a double needle, inserting it into the ear lobe, and make incisions on both sides at an angle, so that the needles go through to the other side.
"The arrow pierces through to the bone "The body parts move according to how it is convenient.
"If not, if the patient clenches his fist and holds the paper tightly between them, they tear the paper.
"And the edges of the incisions where you make them should be straight and aligned so that when they are put together, it forms like the shape of a letter not having an 'X' in it.
"Then put that arrow through to the bone according to how long and thick they are, until it reaches the paper. Then fasten the two edges together tightly, so as to form a line.
"And apply the remedy for those who have mentioned the softening of their limbs and tendons until they are healed.
"And if it is from a burn or stitching, make sure you shave the hairs off the paper as close to where this occurs. Then cover between two of the tent poles as I mentioned.
Then cover between two of the tent poles as I mentioned. The treatment should be according to the shape of the illness, as there is much variation in form. The main features will guide you on how to restore the body back to its natural shape.
And I should adjust it according as necessary and based on further instructions provided later.
When this suture occurs on the hand and is placed neatly against a white surface with oil-based glue, it cannot move or be torn, if you want to cut off its point by using scissors to cut through the paper at that location.
"Instruct the patient to hold their breath as much as they can, so that nothing touches or is too rough on the sensitive area, which should not cause any harm and does not burn oil.
"And for your incision, make sure to heal the one that is sewn together gently, as it needs to regain its original shape.
"And every stitch in the one that is sewn together should be done without any pain or discomfort. Also, gently remove and separate it from its surrounding area.
"Then put a soft cloth between the paper and the oil, and apply it with fine wool in abundance of water. "After the first treatment, continue to use strong cloths and similar things as much as needed.
"The remedy is done in two ways: She is nervous and seems to be a good cook. If you touch her with fire and take care of her wounds properly though, she won't die
Both are good at cooking, and they both strive to catch everything in sight and all the light as well as the motion of oil
The incision method is that it cuts into the scalp first to drain off blood. Take the bandage in your hand and cut out its corners with scissors, then use it for covering wounds. Then take a needle, and sew the horsehair or deerhair or buffalo hair very tight. Then double the needle point and tie it tightly to the bandage. Insert the needle into the bandage completely covering all of its surface except for a small area at the base where the hair will grow naturally or leave it as is if the incision usually does not cause tears.
"And only once it has happened to one of them alone, along with their filaments if we have mentioned. "After that the scar will be full and wide where this shape is seen:
"And keep in mind that the scar should not touch the smooth surface and tear it apart, and the edges must be kept intact.
"After incision there will come a period of swelling and bruising, and it leaves just to the other side. "And then you should apply treatment as long as he is sane.
"And if one of them is not moved and you do not want to prick the other bone many times this treatment will cause a resemblance to the medical condition.
"And if you divide it in this way and cover the wound with a dressing made of linen tied tightly according to this shape. And you realize that it is moving slowly and the reason for its movement cannot be seen, if a drop of oil from this joint was dropped onto another joint.
"There is nothing against it as long as you hold the arrow and treat the wound promptly while applying pressure; then repeat on the other side until both are healed.
Continue to treat the other part as you did with this particular treatment until it is completely healed
And if the appearance of the skin on the lips is filled with oil to such an extent that it separates and forms part but not all, causing tears to flow continually.
Drops a red oil from this joint that comes from a drop of the same oil.
The eyes are never red for no reason and are held tightly closed with paper and torn away from the face, appearing like a bruise.
And the joints that are put into place with their heads in position then treat them with the eye and cause all of these troubles to cease, and it is sustained by power.
After applying the first cut, continue cutting towards the end of your hair, and be sure to avoid touching the roots.
And if the incision is shallow and you have to make it with small force due to which one of the reasons we mentioned in the chapter about cutting into veins and doing minor surgery.
And once the incision is complete and you have finished cutting all the hair if there is blood or any corrosive medicine, put oil on it with clean cotton to prevent infection.
And if nothing is broken and the bones are set properly, and you doubt the dislocation, let the oil stay on it and treat the dislocated joint gently.
And then come back to your shoulder as soon as it is healed, and every time you wash the hair in this way.
"However, it is necessary to apply a mild healing treatment at once. and for the vein injury, immediately go in.
And you must not use your hand in any of these cases until you know that the joint is stable.
They are red veins that show through the skin and tolerate being exposed to the sun's rays but become fragile over time.
The physician must be sure when looking at it, where there are sores and no other diseases before. And the joint in this way
Instructs the patient to put his head on a firm surface and then supports it with both hands according to their wisdom, so that its movement is subtle as this form.
And make two incisions at the base of each vein.
And the joint should be held gently with both hands and released after a while until it can move freely.
And keep the joint from moving unless you gently press it with your finger tips and perform this exercise at noon in front of the sun, doing it frequently as necessary until the joint.
And when you have done this, if there is a drop of oil on it that turns green and red, it indicates the disease has returned.
If you do not have the ability to collect all of it at that time, if you put a cloth on it and soak up the oil from your fingertips until the pain in their eyes is alleviated and leaves no trace as long as the pain persists or worsens, then rinse thoroughly with this method which has been described.
This form of treatment requires force.
Fistula means a hole or opening, like in the case of an abscess that has not yet healed.
When you cure with cautery and by burning medicine as I have described earlier, it is not easy; if the wound continues to burn even when you hold your eye steady, then it must be fatal, and all moisture that is present should be drained away until the wound has healed.
And when the error is discovered, you will see the corruption and the deformity if there was no instrument to correct it.
And they are called "unforesight," and done by using an instrument to correct it, or pointed as if with a needle as it is in this form.
And remove the crookedness of the arm and straighten it between your two hands, and press lightly with your hand until you see that the correction has been made.
and do this every time, then return to the straightness of curative remedies.
if the limb is swollen and painful, and the blood vessels of the arm are swollen, return to its normal size every time, it won't move anymore or open sores will not come, only when it is healthy.
if this isn't done with another instrument that straightens out the fistula in this way And when the dislocation occurs for the second time by force, and through remedies applied, but if it is discovered that the joint has moved in this manner, then there should be an attempt made to correct it so that the joint does not move further.
Then apply cold compresses to the injured part of the body and loosen any tight clothing.
And afterwards restore the affected limb with fresh ointments as much as possible and if it is numb or stiff due to cold. If this is a minor injury,
if the eye is fully opened and does not cause any obstruction or discomfort when closing it, then you should let the patient close their eyelid.
Then apply a fresh bandage or cloth soaked in honey and aloe vera, incense and cedar oil. And then bind it up securely with bandages and dressings.
Here is the translation: "And regarding how to tie the knots when tying tight ropes, and two crossed together in four groups each, then place one on top of the other according to the quantity that they have best.
"Then tighten them with strong cords, and repeatedly tighten them so as not to tear.
"After tying the knots and leaving them tight during the day and night, and repeating this as much as you can, if it is convenient that you loosen up.
"After tying at the end of each day and night, and as long as you see the oil repairing itself, it is good.
"If not... "...if you keep tightening the knots and loosening the ropes, and tie them as tight as they are.
dislocation "When there is tearing in the woven cloth, loosen first and then fix it with paper if you find a tear like this one.
When the patient sees a sharp pain at the root of their arm or leg, it is necessary to prick another needle in that part next to the one causing the initial pain. Then pierce through and let the first needle be placed according to its placement.
Then prick through the second needle and place it in another vein further along, holding firmly. Afterwards, remove the first needle from its thread and insert it into a nearby vein filled with oil.
And leave them as long as the second needle is in place, then treat any discomfort arising from it until the wound has healed.
And whenever a wound is held steady by the second needle in all parts of the cloth, as long as it heals properly
And if the hairs appear to be thinning or become fine and brittle after pricking at a very small sharp point that comes from oil, they will lose their strength and fall off.
When he has recovered
This illness is called "alcinqueti" and occurs when blood vessels are assembled in the oil, resembling veins that connect to each other.
The appearance of the incision should be such that you grasp the patient's hand firmly between your thumb and index finger, then take hold of their head with both hands. Then you will make the incision, do not hesitate and try to remove as much hair as possible around it, looking for any movement in the eyes.
If they do not move as expected, then you must proceed with the operation without further delay.
If you hold the patient's hand firmly while making an incision in their palm and then take a very thin blade to cut along the blood vessels on both sides of the incision towards the wrist.
When it occurs and if distilled with hot oil applied to the affected area gently or grease mixed with honey, then only another treatment is necessary as long as it remains stable
of fire We have the similarities of veins in the division, and what should be considered when piercing. if there is any doubt regarding safety.
It's important to keep the burn between your hands close together, forcing away light and applying clean oil tightly.
Then apply paper soaked in oil to the affected area on both hands so that all of the wounds are covered or one hand at a time.
Then take the affected area in your right hand and call it "almagda," or in your left hand for the other.
After inserting the needle of the instrument into her ear canal gently and with care at that point, you must gently withdraw it as soon as it touches the base of the oil gland. Then, after removing the instrument which is called "almagda" smoothly, continue to hold your hand until it reaches the base of the oil gland;
It is important that the measurement from the oil gland to the end of the ear is equal to or shorter than the length of the instrument, which is called "almagda". The oil gland.
If you see the bone through the ear canal paper, then put the instrument into its place where it should be and press it out along another path after that.
Now he has to lie flat on his back with his arms extended out in front of him, holding an instrument tightly in each hand.
After taking a short rest and moving the second path along it, place the instrument in position with gentle pressure. When it is fixed tightly and cannot move, gently rotate your hand slowly and slowly;
"And then gently put some oil on it. After bringing the hand up with the instrument he is to stop the motion and lubricate it well in oil and after that gently place back on his body again.
And those who are of our nature we should approach with plenty of oil.
And the patient should not be able to enter into the oil through his pores as some people have very hard skin which would damage their eyes if you choose an instrument that is called "albert" and whose shape
"After this is only connected and not too tightly pressed but gently apply some oil as we have described.
"In the end of this work when the bandage is applied to the patient's back while lying down in a quiet place.
"And so let it be moved gently and lightly with no movement of the head in any direction.
"Then let it be removed gently in a quiet place and remove its head and view everything closely without moving. And then tie the cord tightly once more.
"It is only necessary to do this in the course of treatment or after cutting but it is important that you do so for safety.
When you come to a joint, apply ointment on it while facing the ninth hour, and cleanse with it what touches the abscess.
When you are done applying ointment to all joints and have come to the ninth hour, if there is any bleeding from wounds, you must wrap them with cloth so they do not show in light.
And then turn it into its own case and cases that come to be like that.
Then you should not enter in this case. And there was one of the Saracens who said that in some places people used magic to make things grow, but we do not see any evidence of it here or anywhere else in our land, nor have I seen any evidence of it in books written by the ancients. And by chance this is a new thing.
These are the likenesses of magic things, since those who do not know them see them like that.
"and let them grow naturally "These chiefs have great subtlety and they deceive in three ways.
There are no hairs that prick the vein or make any other type of injury.
If they have been burned with heat and pain, if there is severe burns in white hair. When the hairs that are burned do not heal and become damaged, it is important to keep them between your hands in direct sunlight.
When the hairs that are burned do not heal and become damaged, it is important to keep them between your hands in direct sunlight. And wet the nose of the patient with cool water so they can be applied to the burned hairs and the wounds. Then continue applying a small amount of cool water gently from one side until you know that the hair is completely healed.
If there are no signs of healing, do not try to apply anything further. Gently massage the affected area with cool water if you need to, without causing any additional damage. "And do not move your head or shoulders if it is otherwise necessary.
"And do not harm yourself or the patient with too much cautery as long as they are still alive and all their hairs are intact. "If it is necessary to remove them, do so carefully without causing too much harm as long as they are still alive and all their hairs are intact.
"And if it is necessary to remove them without causing too much harm, then do so carefully into the bone of the joint.
"Until it is necessary to cut off one or more hairs gently and carefully with your hands only, and avoid touching any other part of the body except for that. "And let them grow until they are as long and thick as you like in your own hair. Do not touch the lips or face while growing.
And many times there is an attack on him who tries to do it
And each time the child comes by one hand and then the other by mouth to the other hand, and they do it one after the other while holding onto what is there
Do it as much as you can until the evil one has corrupted that thing and then treat them with fire, extract the poison, and burn off the hair in Egyptian fashion, and place them directly on the eyes.
Do it three times or more, as long as evil spirits contaminate everything that is dear to you
And then put on the eyes one drop every few moments as long as he is sane and if he needs healing water from medicine that way.
And this is the method for purifying the spirit by distillation of oils and medicines you get.
And it may happen by fire or water, similar to how one can catch fire, causing
and when you see smoke, if there is a flame near
And hold the eye tightly to prevent it from moving when one holds an oil or any liquid.
"from the burn until the wound
Many times occur to the head with a condition that is called 'tolly', and spreads and becomes large as long as it looks at something.
And to prevent this from happening you should apply the burn treatment or other healing agent as soon as possible.
And if it is not corrected when it becomes large, and if it gets hard to see clearly, fix the injury;
If you don't hold tight enough with fire it can result in a severe infection, as if one fails to correct the injury at all times, and great damage occurs to the eye.
The first sentence to translate is: "et se li apostemes est de soef touchement.
If someone presents a solution to the problem in this chapter of treatments, I will benefit from it, for none are useless
It's important when the wound is fresh and covers all its surface. And after stitching two or more layers together, heal as much of it as possible.
And when the layers have healed on both sides, if it is desirable that you clean all parts of their surface as much as they can withstand, then stitch together two or more layers and bind them with a bandage, and powder over the bleeding wound with fine powder and incense. And sprinkle over the powders a bit of strong or other fragrant powder to help it dry quickly and heal the wound as much as possible.
The manner of suturing is to assemble the solution or with needles if you have said in the suturing on the belly or with sutures, as I told you
of the limbs
A main fist is dense and hard to cut through veins, arteries and bones.
unless you turn the flesh, and shave all around it, and pull on all sides gently and evenly.
Then apply the new flesh after cutting through a vein, until you are sure of its evenness.
And then apply the new skin and treat it well until it is healed.
There are often convulsions at the sight of a bleeding wound, which people call "a bull.
If you hold it with needles and keep its root firmly, and leave room for the blood to flow freely or the wound.
After spreading salt on the wound, or other powders restraining and dehydrating;
And when the second incision is made, it often happens again. If nothing comes out after the cautery.
No such occurrences have been recorded at the root of the spine between the ribs and the diaphragm; And no such cases are recorded when the teeth turn black and white as they decay, until their roots become decayed;
If you make sure that the abscess is between your hands and its opening remains open, and you extract the teeth or sores as they appear, until nothing more happens. And in doing so you remove blackness and whiteness, and greenness and other stains as they fade away.
And if you do as I say at first time, it is good. But if not, try again after the second and third times, as long as you have tried all of them.
And the teeth have different forms of injuries depending on what caused them, for example those from a blow to the mouth will be different from those from between two teeth. These shapes and others should also appear with you.
It is important when treating the tooth pain to take two tablets as prescribed, because it must not be done otherwise Because that substance has such a high concentration therefore there is no excuse for taking more than prescribed.
After the patient has pulled on his tooth Many times the pain from the abscess should be treated, and it should be done whether or not there is a healthy tooth in front of it. "And it shall not move while the pain lasts, as long as they are inflamed, for we have already wished to do this healing.
"And when you are certain of the toothache, it is advisable to soak your hand in cold water.
"Then gently apply both hands at first, and then firmly press the veins. "And if you put pressure on a vein between your fingers, it will hold still as long as you do not move.
After firmly pulling out the tooth, if it still hurts, then put a gentle pressure on its base and remove gently from any side; after which you will move in order to make sure that no harm has been caused anywhere lightly, and repeat what you have done before.
"And if the pain is strong and constant, it may be that your veins are being pinched or constricted. Then wrap them in cloth to release them. "If you gently hold the veins, they will not break when pressed upon.
"It is advisable to soak your hand in cold water before applying any medication or remedies for toothache.
And make sure you do not break it and leave some part of the skin, and remove the arrow through the malice of its root causing greater pain than before.
And may you always do as the learned physician does, who by their swiftness and diligence never break a single bone, nor bring about any harm.
Nor may they ever come from a great sickness caused by the roots that fester or break bones as we have seen.
And when their tendons are torn if you soak the affected area with vinegar and oil.
The sores they bring that fester may be helped by soaking the affected area in vinegar broth.
And if not treated, it will worsen.
The extremities of the veins are where they must first be held steady so as to last through many points and large openings.
These are the forms. If they are amputated at their base and do not grow back, then they must be made of strong wood, so that they may hold firmly in place.
from the roots of the hairs When the roots are torn and bleeding, it is advisable to apply wet cotton soaked in burning oil or vinegar until they clot.
And let them grow as a single piece, like this:
And if the roots will not stay tied to these hairs, it is advisable that you cut off all the hair and expose the roots.
Let the hairs be thick and coarse if they do not break off cleanly.
If this does not happen when using these methods, then it is likely that there was a problem with the method used;
If there is an instrument with two handles, how do you hold it? The other tools that are meant for tightening up the roots and the instrument with large handles whose shape is...
Or if the hairs are thick and coarse and still break off easily, then it is likely that many of them have already broken. And these other hairs which do not count as yet;
And the greatest subtleties of this instrument he is to master himself by means of it. for such cases and diseases are rare indeed, or if an instrument was not known before its diversity; and in that case one cannot break a bone, nor any other joint, unless they will, seeking as hairs which may be useful, I have advised you, and shown you the way to do this, like:
"And let it rest firmly so that the bone does not slip out.
"Then apply leeches as medicine and if there is pus in the bone, it will be small enough to use with this instrument.
"When the teeth are set in place naturally and their shape is good, and especially in women who have pulled them out with tweezers instead of pliers, they do not move after the tooth, it is right to pull, but only gently, as otherwise they can damage or break.
"until the root has been removed; "and if you are with tweezers, use the instrument that has this shape and is small enough to fit in your mouth; it must be made of steel and sharp.
And gently and steadily hold the tooth in your hand for a while to prevent damage from other teeth, and if you want to remove it, then take that tool whose shape suits best.
"It's like using a needle when making arrows;
And when it is very small or barely noticeable, if it does not move as much as you prick.
Finally at the end it has no razor and its teeth are too blunt causing damage to the tongue if you try to remove it as much as it is long, otherwise it will damage or distort the speech.
When the tooth is loose or comes out through impact or injury and cannot be pressed back in its place when you try to do so, treat it with restraining medicines.
If you use a thread of gold as restraint because the thread of silver becomes green and rusted, but the iron is still unaffected.
And if the threads are too thick or thin depending on the space between the teeth;
And if you want to adjust the teeth, if you take one thread between two healthy teeth and put them in place. If there is more than one or less, as long as it fits well at the other tooth. "Then cover it gently with your hand, holding it gently and steadily until you have no more movement.
Or if they prick at their base of the tooth.
Then bind them securely with threads, and tie them together, so they are between the sound tooth and the mouth.
Then let it stand as still as possible for a while, and if they become loose or come undone, tie them securely with another thread.
if it is still and serves its purpose well, this is how the bones are shaped and their outline is made.
And when the tooth becomes loose, then they remove it in its place, one by one, as we have said.
and they do not get tired of removing it from its place or causing harm to the shape of a healthy tooth until it is removed as we have said, so that it does not move at all times.
"No creature comes from earth or nature itself, except [this one]. "Or by a wound's sudden blow.
"The ulcers are so severe that you should open your mouth and let the sores touch your tongue, but not bite it.
"Then cure the ulcers gently and steadily as the tongue loosens its hold on it, until they are healed or ulcerated. If you bite them, immediately cover with something soft.
"And keep in mind that the cautery should not be too intense for fear of damaging a vein.
"Once you have done so, gently remove the bandage and expose the skin. Then apply something cold to it.
"And let the sores rest until they harden enough not to stick anymore.
And when they apply heat to a broken bone and if you do not move it immediately after applying the fire cautery, which is painful in itself. And another treatment as long as he remains sane
and if you look at the eyes closely or far away they do not feel pain, but continue to prick them because it is a carbuncle.
and if he is declining to his illness and has moisture on the incision, if they prick it slightly or gently with a small knife, and release one side and then the other. And if you move it to another place, as long as the broken bone is covered with healing ointment, then come back and treat it until everything is done.
Then remove its splint and let him rest, and continue other treatments as long as he remains sane.
The abscess of the throat. "No matter how many times the throat is opened and the second mandrel cured as we have instructed in the division process, if you are not careful they will not heal.
"It's very important to be gentle and use a good color, otherwise it may cause harm.
"If the root is red and large, if you are not careful when using iron, that will be a very bad thing to happen. "But let it grow as much as it can, and once you decide to start removing it, if it breaks by itself then that will be a very bad thing.
"And if it is light-colored and the root is subtle then you must first test this instrument to see how well it works; but before starting please make sure that the tool's blade is properly aligned.
"And make sure the wound is covered by the sun and that all the cuts are clean and wipe out any pus from around it to make sure there's no infection. Then press your tongue against everything to see how well it works.
And if it is silver or lead, as fine as hair would grow
Can you press the tongue to every instrument, and see where the arrow strikes and the feather goes in, and tear off what is left more than your teeth.
Then take none of the feathers with it, then tie onto the instrument whatever shape may seem strong enough And all the veins are torn, and one place another, and they are bitter, and it is made of iron or stone.
"If you do not have this instrument at hand, then take a needle. Or you may find them on one side or another.
And when you have cut one arrow, if you pull the other out in the same way as before, after cutting the wound gargle warm water and warm air to help soothe the throat and ease it, and the pain may go away, or the taste of sharp stones might be bitter, or bitterness from burning fruit, similar things. Then apply the treatment as soon as possible
And once they have entered through their nostrils and come out of their mouths in pairs, if the patient is able to close his/her mouth tightly
And when examining a woman with an abscess in her throat, it means the abscess is small.
And if the woman cannot breathe through the opening that is swollen, and cannot drink or swallow, she will die soon thereafter.
"The eyeballs were swollen with two punctures made by a needle, did not.
And when you have reached this point, and cut off one end of the vein, then treat the wound as soon as possible.
Then reset it in the other part too and put a pad over the mouth and pressure on the tongue;
After cutting off one end of the vein in this way, there was only a small amount of bleeding; "He put his finger down her throat to gag her and began to drink violently, and continued to strangle him with the rope.
"His eyes rolled back, and he was filled as much as it could hold until his stomach was full.
"Although I burned and the fire increased in strength: "His heart stopped beating.
"And God separated us from those parts, and I alone remained after him.
Of the eye
"When the vein is reopened, it is empty and long; if pressed 'perpendicularly'.
"If it is large or wide, if pressed 'vein'ly.'
"If it is divided as we have said in the section, and the cure profits nothing, and you see that the fingers are released, and it is subtle, if convenient that you catch hold of it.
and those who are gathered together and remain one piece And it is red or dark blue if you make the incision in it. There is great danger in the abscess
When you see it, according to what I said before, let the hairs grow and remain in its length. Make sure the hair is placed before the sun so that it can be used as an instrument when we have mentioned this previously. Then cut the tendon in its groove, and treat it with salt or alcohol, and take out any other instruments that we have mentioned in incisions of the second order.
And make sure there is no excess moisture outside its natural end.
If you add more, if it causes trouble to the voice or ear.
After the incision, use what we have mentioned in the second order incisions and apply treatment as described before.
And if you prick at their base (the hair follicles), hold steady your gaze so they don't move until they grow
The manner of the cautery is to be done gently and evenly. And it is that the hairs of the head are placed in their proper condition and then pressed against the instrument which we have mentioned earlier about the fire cautery, and close with a sharp live touch, unless they are too thick or too thin. And in employing this instrument, its form is like
And the surgeon places his hand on the patient's forehead and applies the instrument to all of their face.
And the hairs are placed on their cheeks and the surgeon presses it into the patient's mouth from its side if they cannot swallow or breathe properly.
Then the surgeon takes his hand and presses it into their eye as much as possible for a certain amount of time until he sees no more pain or movements from the medicine.
"And if you see it, put cotton around the wound and hold the cotton tightly in place using no other bandage until the bleeding has stopped.
"Afterwards, leave it to dry for 2-4 hours or as long as necessary.
"And if you have more medical experience, and the bleeding continues after applying the burn dressing, then cover it with gauze or a clean cloth, and maintain cleanliness in that area.
"Or if you have ice available, apply cold compresses until the bleeding has stopped.
"This treatment is more effective than just applying a burn dressing.
"If you apply it this way, with gentle care and patience, gather all or none of the herbs mentioned above in one pot, then simmer them.
And when you put it on firm ground, make sure to place it firmly onto that surface. It can be made of gold or silver and placed in the patient's mouth until the blister pops due to the friction from the cane, so long as it remains intact.
After the blister is done, make sure it's dry and don't start anything new from the beginning of the procedure, because more harm may occur. And do not perform any actions that contradict this instruction.
If the instrument is not present, when you take a stick and place it in one of the patient's hands so that they hold onto the blister firmly but do not bite too hard. Because this remedy will be most effective if you do it correctly and without causing any harm to the mouth as well.
"Maintain proper breathing through the nose or mouth at all times.
"Do you want to see what it is that you will hear? And press the tongue to the sun at all times.
"And that which does not open the mouth and is restored to the throat should be swallowed immediately so as to enter into the stomach. "In this case, it passes through vomiting.
"Or the hairs swallow a piece of sponge or a piece of bread crusted with salt, or a root of lettuce, or a dried fig. "And it passes through the sponge filter and then into the throat. "And when she comes to her place, she will open up again, and you will swallow.
"If it is not from what we have said, then take the instrument of pleasure in this way:
And if they fall down the throat, it will make them choke up at their top And be sure to not touch the epiglottis so that they do not fall out, nor break off from their base.
And make sure to not touch the instrument when you have it on so that they do not get burned or hurt themselves; If there is an accident and he takes everything off at once, as long as the instrument remains on.
The throat
There shall be no medicine given without consent, if I have said in the division by the treatment of medicines; And when it does not profit me, then look into the throat for the evil of the sun, and press its tongue to the instrument that I told you.
If you see sores, if they are small ulcers or blisters, or if there are tiny lesions which might be related to this
If it no longer benefits me if you take a sharp needle and insert into the sore throat, and bite gently on this instrument, do as mentioned before. The sores are getting worse without any treatment.
Then drink something cold, and wet your mouth, and force yourself to swallow, and move it with your hand as you wish; "And if his breath catches him by surprise
And if it does not happen as we have said, if its breath catches him by surprise due to the sudden onset of suffocation, then I will apply the method that I mentioned in the smoke inhalation.
Do this many times because she needs targeting.
The method of smoke inhalation is to apply a heated object or cloth over the nose and mouth so that it touches the skin.
Then apply the smoke inhalation and seal their mouth shut with a cloth or heated object if they do not fall unconscious but rather breathe in and out.
And she will regain consciousness now, and if it does not happen or happens later on, continue the smoke inhalation procedure many times.
"And when the veins are cut, there is often blood evacuation.
And although they may be forced by a governing power.
The shape of the instrument when treating the disease is such that if it can be seen through the mouth, then the tongue becomes curled and may enter the throat. And it is like sucking on a stick or burning one's finger, if you take hold of it you cannot let go.
The forms of incisions are like those seen in other books on the subject, and they differ greatly in size and shape.
And one is done in a manner similar to how it holds moisture.
The second way is to cut into veins located at the wrist.
Because of their different foundations and purposes, the two types of physicians differ in terms of judgment; one is experienced through practice while the other gains experience from observation.
If an abscess must be pierced through all the way, until the hole is made exactly as large or smaller depending on its completion.
"And if one or more of them die as they complete their task,
When physicians operate on joints, they let it rest until the wound is healed and as long as the tendons of the joint are torn, because this causes contraction in that member.
"Or the main limb pierces through until it is done if that limb dies first.
"Or when it pierces into its base if he should die,
"And only when you pierce the main limb until it is done and that other limb dies, It cannot be healed in a short time.
"And you should heal the wound of the main limb after it dies according to its completion and when the pain is eased, and the limbs are still from bleeding, and the discomfort and redness, and debatement and agitation of the main limb, and other signs,
"It is advisable to ensure the incision or extraction site is as clean as possible.
"And if the incision is located in the arms or legs, and into joints or arteries, then there may be bleeding. "In this case, focus on stabilizing the affected member first.
And when arteries are cut while eating, if you leave the incision until it is complete in digestion, as we have advised
"If you encounter a perforation when performing the procedure, if your veins become inflamed and covered in dirt; "then the sores will grow deep into him.
And if an artery is pierced as wide as the chest and it reaches all over the body, then his limbs are affected.
"Make sure to clean all wounds thoroughly; "and in large wounds, deep cuts, and many injuries similar to the size of the incision site.
"And if there are such wounds that require immediate attention, seek medical help immediately; "If you encounter swelling or redness when removing the bandage, do like this when doing stitches:
"And if it is dislocated at three points, or as if the arm were cut off close to the elbow, and as near the shoulder.
If it has been dislocated in several places, such as at the top of the arm or above the elbow, among others.
If there is no head injury and a superficial tear, it is advisable that you simply remove it.
And if the tear is large and causes significant damage, it would be advisable to remove it, but not to take off all of it at once, but rather a part. Then cover the other eye, and leave nothing untouched by removing that one. Do this many times gradually as necessary until the wound has completely healed.
The dislocation is caused by weakness in the joint, or old age, or very thin bones. "When the patient is restless with an abscess issue and cannot be calmed down, do not worry about it.
"The surgeon performed a great incision on the patient. When you see this small wound, and look at it closely... "...and if it's a burn injury, ensure that you are applying cold compresses to the affected area. "...and if it's a large abscess, you should attempt to drain it gently, ensuring that pus does not flow out in all directions.
"...if you have opened part of the abscess and are cleaning it out with cotton or gauze soaked in water, be sure to keep them pressed tightly against the wound to prevent leakage.
"...then apply a dressing as long as necessary to cover and protect it.
"And those who have wounds become inflamed as the result of this procedure, may their wounds heal quickly.
"...and if the patient continues to have infections and abscesses require further treatment with powders described in this book, or you feel that it is necessary, then apply moist bandages soaked in wine and oil to calm the nerves.
And the patient should put on damp and smooth towels or moist cloths and warm and cold water, just as we have said.
Then remove the abscess and the wound when it is appropriate, as long as he is conscious
And then do all necessary treatments on the abscesses:
Or what we have said earlier must be done before performing any procedures related to the abscess, and go ahead with the treatment of the patient.
"Or may I suggest that you take this as one continuous sentence? If so please translate the following text into English without any line breaks:
He has excess moisture or heat that is present when we have described it;
And if there are hard and painful stones to remove, he has no doubt or fear that he cannot move against it.
"And in the course of treatment if there is any instrument that has been called an 'entromissory' (a type of probe used to introduce a catheter), then it means something like this:
"And if it contains moisture, when they are removed with the following procedure.
And when the moisture is outside, do not leave the hair containing that moisture alone, as it will return if nothing is done to prevent it.
"Then plunge them into Egyptian onion juice if they are present. If not, apply it gently and evenly to the wound, then leave it on for another hour. They will continue to work even if they are already burned.
And when you come back from the first hour, then apply it for another hour and continue this way as long as it is well tolerated.
Then treat the wound with the most suitable remedy, as long as it remains calm.
And hold your eyelids steady if you follow this form of treatment for a longer time. and wipe out all scabs, and apply your entire treatment in order to heal the wound or injury.
And do not make it contrary if you do what I have told you after.
And if the eye pierces it, and tighten and cure as you have been advised to do.
And cut into the pierced eye gently, especially if there is less blood because it may be close to an abscess. And if any of these bones or joints lacks moisture, or if there is no such thing as a woman's bone:
and I found the joint so small, sharp and white, unable to break it. And if there is no such thing, one must treat them as a broken bone does.
In other joints coming from children and the roots of the ears, the treatment should be severe to prevent any recurrence or injury.
And the care that is necessary.
"The stitches of the incision are often opened up to the anus and back, and the corners of the anus, and never come elsewhere or wrong places, and are usually in agreement with each other.
And every arrow shaft must be thoroughly cleaned on one side if the joint and the bone are injured as we have mentioned. The similarities of these arrows exist in many cases.
The similarities of these arrows exist in many cases. "There are some who contain moisture, and there are some evil who would not obey health.
In that case where you see the bones arranged in the thigh and they are similar to the chest color, there must be no defect or injury anywhere along the vein nor artery.
"If you wish to proceed with care and respect for the patient's dignity, and if you hold onto his ear lobe gently while applying a compress on that part of his head near where he was injured, then take great caution when removing the bandages in order not to cause further injury.
"Go slowly and steadily, making sure not to touch the nerve or vein, nor cause any other harm by handling it too roughly, make sure your hands are steady when removing bandages gently.
"And if you touch a vein or artery and it doesn't stop bleeding, put the wound in vinegar to help coagulate it. "Keep pressing on until the doctor is able to heal it and make sure you stop when told to by the doctor.
"And when your turn comes again if you come back quickly for more treatment as needed.
After being instructed to do so, if he is unable to move his arms or legs at all, that means
And if it pricks the base of a vein with great force, then only bind its base tightly with strong thread and leave it to bleed slowly.
Apply the wound with Egyptian cotton gauze, then treat it
And if you cut off the entire abscess, make sure to gather up all the pus and treat it immediately; otherwise there is no treatment for its size. "If you want to open the root of it [the dislocation], then stretch it out as much as we have said.
"If you want to open the root of it [the dislocation], then stretch it out as much as we have said. If the hairs grow too long and prick when you try to remove them, leave them alone until they die.
And if it is on the part that should not be touched, in dependence upon it, then treat wounds and similar things with care so as to avoid contamination. And when the wound is well healed, if the treatment of wounds proceeds smoothly, as long as it remains so.
They spoke and talked about the circumcision of the throat. But I do not see any words in our land who write, nor is it their speechwriting that they write.
For those who have drunkard's disease, it is advisable to cover the throat with a cloth called "epiglottis no help can be provided by this method because any vein or artery in the body will respond with pain and swelling if exposed to saliva or mucus
When a disease is in the throat, it is recommended to cover your nose by preventing strangulation if you are going to speak.
It is advisable when we want to open the epiglottis that we make a small cut between the two rings or by cutting through it in half along its length, not on the membrane.
It is simple and easy to remove it if there are no complications and the veins return immediately.
And if you're afraid, when it extends the skin of the throat all around to its length then cuts it off as soon as it grows. "And remove all swelling from the wound, if you see no blood clots, then bandage it securely as instructed.
"And demonstrate by cutting off the flow of blood from the arm that has been torn apart and through weakness of voice.
"Leave the wound to heal on its own.
"And when time is not delayed in doubt of strangulation, gather the two ends of the wound and tie it tight so that no blood flows out.
"Then administer medications to calm it as much as possible until it is healed.
The throat is completely closed and the patient's breath stops; they die very quickly "And when the eyelid cannot be opened because of the swelling and it breathes through the wound, then keep it alive by maintaining a constant flow of air.
"And when the patient commands to let it heal as long as they are free of disease and its healing is complete in three or four weeks, then he commands to suture the wound and treat.
"I will tell you what I see. "I saw a girl swallow her pride and choke on her words.
"And I called for help but found it too late to save her life.
I found the wound and saw that it was bleeding and could not be stopped by any means except with saliva alone; the patient would try to suck the blood through the wound.
"I sought out the wound and treated it until it was healed.
"And I saved her life but left her with a broken voice thereafter.
"Because of the way she treated my epiglottis, no one was afraid to trust me.
"The epiglottis is called 'a throat hernia', and can be very large in size, and is often found in women.
"And there are two types: "Natured and accidental.
"Without a cause.
And the dislocation is according to two ways, one being like pulling something out of place and the other way is coming from an artery. And it causes fear, and one must be very careful when trying to remove it, as the probe and search for it can cause great harm. If you use it as described above and do not cut into any vein, if the probe cuts through your skin or any other part of your body, then immediately stop. And make sure to hold it tight and keep searching until you feel absolutely certain where the dislocation is located.
The two ways I mentioned are: one being like pulling something out of place and the other way is coming from an artery.
And it's important to note all the differences between what came in through the artery versus what came out of place, as they may require different treatments and approaches.
I say it is strong and fierce until it is completed, until the strength and fierceness are over
When there is neither strength nor fierceness nor pain, and contains it itself, which are its own secrets and follow the course of nature's laws, it grows larger and becomes more powerful;
And they grow like this: either strong or moist, whatever the nature of their growth may be, in the division as I have said.
It is necessary when you come to the cure of not that you first examine carefully with all your senses, the instrument which is called "entrometissoire," according to its shape and character as it comes or chaplain who follows.
The manner of cutting into the abscess is that you pierce it as deeply as possible and then hold steady until all the bleeding has stopped, then according to how big the abscess is, it should be cut out.
After removing that, please ensure you stay there as long as possible.
Moisture runs cold, causing it to lose its heat, as I have mentioned before.
And after the incision, if there is no moisture, it will be hot. If you prick at its base and draw blood gently from any part of its body and wrap it in a cloth soaked with clean water to cool it down as needed.
If you do not take it out immediately, if it does not bleed when pricked at its base or from any part of its body.
If there is no bleeding after removing it, then repeat the process frequently.
And if there is some bleeding but no excessive bleeding, then apply the poultice with soothing ointments and hold it steady to prevent further injury.
And if there is large bleeding from the wound then treat for severe burns as well
"The vein should be moved in the opposite direction or another way if you press firmly and forcefully on the joint's base. Leave it to rest for a few moments or up to three. "Afterwards, come back here [to continue].
"Here are the three ways they can be done: "large and mild [ways], or small.
"And if you take the third way, which is called 'albert', or if you do it with 'breb', "large and mild [ways], to pierce the abscess.
"and similarly to the needles used in hunting wild game. Are these sharp and of steel or iron? And they can be yellow and more effective against blackcurrant.
"And they are of three ways: great, mild, and sharp, according to the amount of the opening.
The forms of dislocations are like this:
and if there are some with two bores of three ways as well.
and if there are ones with three bores, they also follow the third way.
And if there are some with two bores, or one bore alone, and they are from three ways.
It is necessary in their case.
The cause of these is to make it sharp and so that they do not cut off the nerve or vein.
And these intrusions are usually resolved when opening an abscess, but not always.
And they are of three ways great, small, and minor
do not let it move except in joints, legs, arms, elbows, and ankles.
no other small instrument is used, similar to the lancet, in order to treat abscesses; so that shape, where there are sores. "The procedure should only be performed once with care of veins and arteries. Otherwise, it may cause severe harm or injury.
Once it becomes inflamed from any injury or wound, as long as the fingers seem to be injured too
and they will stop bleeding and heal, if it is convenient to follow this way until the end of this line Then wash the fat, and apply the salve to treat the wound at once; then sew up all of the layers of the wound with stitches, and continue treatment until it is healed.
and it is full of pride because of its great size like a woman when she gives birth to twins through two openings. where one line ends at the other end and the opposite of that line has more lines, according to this form, in which some lines have an even number and others an odd number of lines; Then scald the leather between the two halves, and also remove the fat, and apply what we have said about stitching and powdering, which is necessary in the treatment, as long as he remains healthy.
and if he is not healthy or the incision has not been made entirely, then so that the wounds may rest, or for the treatment of the wound, it is advisable to fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment. And leave them as long as they continue to heal and the fat, then cure until he is healthy.
Abscesses often contain moisture and can cause sores; it is to be feared that they will occur where there are doubts or fears.
"That which contains moisture must be wrapped according to this form, beginning with line b and ending with line g. And when the bow in the arm is injured and if it pierces the skin with cotton, then let it stay on one side for a while, and after dressing the wound carefully as much as possible until it is healed.
And if the arms are of similar structure, as in fractures of bones, and the wound is treated with cautery as we have said before.
When the artery is cut, when the vein is severed as it happens many times, and so does the artery lose its life and vein.
And if one suspects that this may be due to an artery being cut through, then it is important that the wound is disinfected immediately If you suspect there's an injury here as well, then check for any signs of bleeding.
And if it is due to the vein, then apply pressure immediately to stop the bleeding.
This is a foolish attempt, and more often than not the result will be severe pain or damage to other organs. It is advisable to avoid the fire cautery method if possible, and also to avoid it in those who have been stabbed through an artery near their lungs.
And then the artery must be cut off completely, as much as it is uncovered;
"And hold the artery of a single vein in two pieces for two days according to what I taught you regarding the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples.
"Then hold on to the vein between the two sutures as long as it remains intact, and loosen its attachment.
"Apply the remedy that I mentioned before they prick. "Treat this wound while it is fresh as much as possible.
"And if the arrow is from an artery, hold onto it with both hands until you remove all of its pieces, then remove the remaining piece and pierce through to the other side. "Then tie off the arrow, as I told you earlier, or if there are two pieces of the same vein in both sides, then take one of them.
"And if you doubt the hairs' strength, if another arrow pricks at the same place where the first arrow pierced through the base of the eye and holds them steady in incision.
"Then hold it until it becomes full-sized, then remove the bandage tightly and let those who are tied to it go free.
"Then apply a dressing of cloth and oil until the wound is healed.
veins and arteries, they become inflamed when too much pressure is applied, or through excessive exertion, causing pain
"And this can happen when advisors and doctors are absent or in a poor state of health. And the patient's appearance changes, becoming pale and shaky from pain.
"And when it is restrained during, if the eye feels pain and does not stay still with the body, but rather tries to escape.
"Therefore, it is necessary for all things and cannot move in any direction; those who are in dislocations must not try to force them apart with force. "Due to shrinkage And those who are bald or have a receding hairline, shave their hair carefully
And those who are bald or have a receding hairline, shave their hair carefully If the abscess is painful, cut into it gently at its base;
And if it is large and painful when the abscess is opened up, stitch up the wound and continue treating until it heals
No other ailment occurs inside and nowhere else, except for this one which is called "fungus" by its similarity to ashes, and the root is subtle and large.
And in it there are small and big pains;
And I saw one whose belly was white and had many of them inside it who were more similar to fungus than anything else, there was no difference between them, they were all smooth, and the root was small, and they were very thin, and in burning pain, because of excessive moisture.
I inspected it and found that one was around 18mm high, while the other was about 6mm. The incisions were made when you looked at them they seemed to be moist, and their color of the arteries is bright white and wet and subtle root If the needle is too long, or in your presence, apply fire cautery.
If the needle is too long, or in your presence, apply fire cautery. Because many times large dislocations cause serious harm without proper treatment, such as using fire cautery to treat it.
And if you see the vein exposed and fearful of cutting it, then take a well-made needle thread, tie it around the artery as we have said, and leave it two stitches;
And then hold it, and do not let go of the thread as long as you prick at the artery, and continue with your work;
And if it's painful to cough near the belly button, but you must cover your mouth well with gauze and then apply the fire cure so that it doesn't spread.
And after treating the wound, make sure you don't cover your face with gauze that is colored and poor in sense and feeling as well as being damp.
"Let us go to the treatment of the liver after this.
When blood boils The appearance of a boil comes from a burst wound or abscess, and it is usually on the belly.
And it comes from cutting through the abscess and bursting the boil, if there is redness around the navel indicating an abscess in the liver or intestines, which may cause severe issues. And if it is through the outlet of the intestine, then there are many more complications, and when pressed from both sides repeatedly returns, and with great effort may swell up at the entrance to the bowel and cause much harm.
It comes from moisture, it is light and quick to spread when you press on your hand hard, make sure not to force it.
And if it happens through these signs, it will tighten according to a certain amount. And if it happens from weakness or dizziness, when he looks at his face and sees the sign of a vein or artery,
And if it happens from weakness or dizziness, when he looks at his face and sees the sign of a vein or artery, "If you wish to continue treatment. "Because there is doubt and fear when working with the abscess incision or the vein.
And if it happens from the intestine or bowel, when you press on his abscess and feel his pulse, then withdraw all at once, as quickly as possible. Then command the surgeon to operate between your hands, then go inside and remove all of it through the wound, and after that clean out the abscess thoroughly. Then tie him up with a strong rope or tightly wrapped cord so he cannot move away.
Then wash out the abscess and extract its contents, "Once you have taken hold of it with both hands, if one lets go, and pulls on the stomach.
"And when you take hold of the belly button, if one lets go, and pulls in some excess skin;
"And if you force it in the opposite direction or towards your own belly button, then come back to its original position and put on two more hooks, and pull the remaining two hooks, and remove any remaining hooks that you have placed.
"Then hold the arrow in place with four hooks, and when you see it, remove the hooks, and let loose as much of it as possible, and cut off any remaining flesh. "Or you can let it go when it appears subtle and loose, then treat for what is necessary, as we have said.
"Or you can let it go when it appears subtle and loose, then treat for what is necessary, as we have said. "Do not heat or rub the sore where you bruise it, then treat the area as needed, and rest the affected limb.
There are two possibilities here: "there "We have discussed in the previous paragraph about draining abscesses and mentioned that incision should be made for treatment. Here we discuss how to manage the healing process.
"Let the abscess mature until it becomes ripe and ready for cure. And let the previous one know that as soon as an abscess is in the beginning or at its infancy, incision should be made to remove it.
There is no need to make a cut before me (the healer).
"Abscesses are removed when they mature to the extent that incision is needed according to what we have said before. That means you should never apply a black salve.
"When there is a clear swelling of the abscess, first make an incision to drain it.
Then remove the pus from all parts and leave nothing behind.
And leave the abscess completely full and empty your hand or any other part of it. Do not prick at an artery or vein if you are using a fire cure as long as it is steady. After that, continue the treatment until there is no longer swelling.
dislocations We have mentioned the signs of dryness and that which way the assembly of the fire is done, and what signs are cured by medicine, and what signs are cured by iron.
And do not prick it with iron in these two cases. It is to know, when one hears trumpets and hears of war
when you see the resemblance of dropsy which is called "dropsies" in medicine, and its treatment does not help if one sees that the veins are weak or there is another illness besides dropsy, then take care of the belly and similar things. If you don't want to do it because it causes doubt
and if you see the vein very thin, and there is no other illness besides dropsy only, and it is not too narrow nor too wide, then go ahead. Take the vein in your hand and press it against your belly from the bottom to the top of the chest, then take the spathula sharp as this shape "And then the dislocation occurs. so that it does not pass through you if it tries to go into the intestines when you squeeze it tightly, and you do not make it bleed.
After looking for a dislocation inside, if you find it necessary to perform the Heimlich maneuver on this individual and place your hands around their neck in order If there is a dislocation due to liver disease, you should perform the Heimlich maneuver on this individual right away.
If it is due to injury, then do not perform the Heimlich maneuver and instead treat their wounds so that any excess blood does not cause harm to this individual's weakened liver.
Thoroughly examine the skin around the area and the underlying tissue between them as you would when scraping off one layer of clothing or wiping away dirt.
Thoroughly examine the skin as it starts to change around the area, and once the skin is removed, treat the wound with appropriate medical care. And is attached to a thin wire, or made of metal, and in the small part there are holes. Or connected by one part, three parts; The other two parts, and the first of another;
And they are dislocated similarly to a rope, and it is the shape of the incision that surgeons use for cutting.
On the head of the axilla, when the veins come to light, they are now held by the instrument;
When you see more than is convenient in the middle or third part, due to the need for strength from an arm, as if one hand was struck, or approaching death.
But see according to the quantity of his strength, and according to what the presence or absence of wounds signifies.
Then take the instrument and hold tight to it as you blow into the straw that is connected to it.
Then gently touch the instrument with the other hand, and if you see the patient struggling to breathe hold on a bit longer.
Do not do this again, keep it gentle until he stops moving or breathing.
And if you doubt the patient and leave it alone when he is suffering from a severe illness or fever, or when bathed in water, fire, or sun, and he wearies of drinking. And the patient with dry medicines until he is healed, and cautery on his stomach, liver, spleen after extraction of the arrow if I have advised you earlier.
There is no child born without a foreskin or whose foreskin was not properly retracted or uncircumcised.
If it is convenient to perform the operation in such a subtle and delicate manner as this shape.
After the fire cautery procedure is complete and healing has commenced on any part of the body affected by it, if one is stung or pricked with an arrow at its base, hold steady the eyes so they do not move until they grow.
And in such cases there may be doubt and fear, as many die, for the blood often evades when opening a vein, or incising an abscess, or treating wounds, or extracting arrows, or cutting into stones; it is uncertain whether they will come out alive
If the foreskin is properly retracted as described above, if a doctor closes it gently, just like we said, then it will expand.
Those who do not have the strength in their arm to pull it out are at a disadvantage because none of them can raise their arm high enough without first straightening their elbow. and cannot get up for this reason that the material does not come to light, which is a bad disease
The manner of doing this is that the patient should stretch out his body as if he were a piece of wood and try to lift up their upper arm above their head, so long as they are still able to move around.
And you must guard against any injury that comes many times, and if it happens when the abscess is opened up, and heal the wound as long as it remains intact.
sores or boils on the legs Often they come in groups at once, and make one appear to be ill
They are both good or bad.
If you want to gently pull one out with a pair of tweezers and remove all the others then put cotton soaked in Egyptian ink on the wound. Then heal the wound as long as it remains intact.
If they are malignant, you should also use a fire curement to treat them.
When you have pulled it out and there are two parts of the hair that were growing together and one part was cut off then if you want to remove the hair that had been severed first. And when it is burned, if you treat the burn.
When you cure an abscess, if it is not completely closed, and there's still a small opening or hole,
Then apply a paste made of honey and flour that is mixed with the husks of dried beans and lentils, then treat it with other treatments as long as it remains fresh
"And when the lunar fire cure comes [to be used], if you administer it according to its prescribed form:
The cautery instructions are as follows: This concerns the treatment of wounds and abscesses.
And if a small opening in the abscess is still present and needs to be closed, then apply pressure using a clean cloth.
And when the hairs grow around the base of the abscess which have not been circumcised or are from an injury or incision, if desired, you should shave them off with a sharp instrument until they become smooth and even.
And if you want to scrape it gently with fine sandpaper.
Next, take hold between two and the use of a soft brush in cold water gently.
A circumcision is similar to other wounds but has its own characteristics Wherever we apply this work of our willingness and properly young ones, if it is done with good care and diligence, then it is better than any other and the most light in health.
The previous statement suggests that the author is expressing surprise at how the circumcision of infants wasn't common as per their laws and they only learned this practice through experimentation.
But if you want to take the greatest part of doctors and surgeons who practiced circumcision then they were strong and had all their wits about them;
And if you want it in the two places mentioned above, for example those of the glans and the foreskin then you will be doing very well and have great success; The dislocation occurs with great pain, causing the limb to become misaligned.
And often the dislocation occurs with great force and drives the limb forward, causing misalignment and many times it is accompanied by fractures and I want to make clear that this can be very serious indeed.
"The mutilation that has been performed on the body is complete, for its force will be exact in cutting through it as before.
When you press your hand, if you apply great force without holding on tightly enough. But the fingers should be bent at a good angle with respect to the palm of the hand.
And if the first treatment fails and you think of a child, when he touches it, do not let him touch anything else but hold his hand firmly to its base only, and then gently release it in all directions.
Then hold his hand firmly between your hands straight out and apply pressure equally across both of your palms or the fingers that you hold tight should not allow any movement at all.
Then blow hard on it to force it out or towards you, while holding its base steady as long as it remains in position. Then thoroughly clean up the residue that is gathered, then tie it to the base of one long thread, and tie another end to something else.
Then thoroughly clean up the residue that is gathered, then tie it to the base of one long thread, and tie another end to something else. And then tie the other end of the thread to a hook and to an object that can hold it securely, and secure between them, then gently pull on both ends until you feel the base of its tail. Then let it rest slowly and gradually because this is how the healing process works. And mix together the powder with a small amount of oil that has been heated until it becomes like a rose sauce, prepared with roasted onion and red pepper flakes, then let this rest alongside another cure while both are curing; continue to care for one as long as you can keep it safe.
"The form of the words to be translated is this:
The dislocated joints should be loose and flexible, and they must move in similar ways as before.
If there is an error in the translation, it could be that the patient's veins have been cut during the incision
So if you decide to stretch his arm or leg, ensure that they are stretched out flat against your chest.
And hold it tightly and make sure you do not let go if the veins tense up or cramp.
If they prick their finger, and the vein is inflamed if you let it stay still until the swelling subsides gently.
If his arm or leg cramps up, do not worry; it will pass without causing any harm.
If the arm or leg is covered in sores and powders, as we have mentioned before when treating wounds and powders, if you stretch it gently and carefully enough, then nothing will happen.
"Treat the patient as much as possible, so long as he is sane.
Retention of urine
"Hold back the urine if there is an obstruction in urination or discharge from hemorrhoids, abscesses, boils, wounds, or similar things that we have spoken of.
"And if the urine is not discharged, and you see that the obstruction is in the urethra or lower of the bladder, then it must be held so that the hemorrhoids are kept between their legs. "And have them placed on their back, and extend their belly from the part below the waist, and hold the hemorrhoids steady as possible. "And when they are constrained to empty their bladder through the lower opening of the urethra, because the urine is not discharged.
"If they do not come out as we have said and the hemorrhoids cause great pain if you administer an extraction with all the equipment that is called 'enema', because this is how it should be done.
"Or if one side is slightly injured. "And if the head of the hand or arm is injured and half an inch long.
"And the method of the issue with urine is that you use a double thread and sew into it a piece of wool or cotton, and then sew over the top of the needle.
"And then you cover the excess of the thread and stitch over the top of the needle, and put a drop of oil or turpentine on it to lubricate it. And then place the abscess under the needle, and sew up the vein and close off the opening with oil or olive oil.
"Then tightly cover the needle as far down as the root of the vein. And then stitch it up on both sides to close it off.
Before applying the poultice to the vein and sending it towards a visible target, make sure that what you are doing is done according to this order or else the poultice will move in the wrong direction.
Stretch out the thread slowly and steadily as you go along it, then remove the thread from following the wool.
Continue applying the poultice until the vein is visible and aligned with the target.
If sores or abscesses occur in the rectum, or it is filled with pus and you use a treatment called a "clepsydra," this remedy may help.
She is closed tight; if it hurts or bleeds On one hand, and on the other, as you see.
And if the veins are too narrow so that they burst due to application of the poultice and excessive bleeding occurs as a result.
And when you apply your medicine in the vein, put the chief of the surgeon near to moisture, and treat with a dressing that is applied as needed.
If you apply moisture to a cold surface, then wipe it off quickly If he enters wetness into the body, and feels pain immediately
And this is how to use a subtle blister to treat the skin
It can be gold or silver, and comes out through an incision above it.
And if the patient is left-handed, or both hands are tied
Then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture that you have used to treat it into another bladder. Tie them together with a double knot, so that when you apply the heat, both are in place.
Then apply the blister to the edge and hold your hand in it continuously until you feel the heat from the moisture.
"And if you don't have a bandage, if you take some parchment, and make it into a circle, and press it gently against the wound. "Then roll it tightly as you would roll a bandage, and make the circle tight like how you would make a knot, and tie it with oil and moisture, so that it is firm.
"Do it the same way you did for the bandage; press firmly until all the moisture has dried.
from the base
"We have spoken about the ways of treating injuries in the previous chapter, and medicine extraction techniques;
"And I said the difference between a sharp pain and false alarm, and that when you suspect the latter should try to avoid it with size; "And in bandages and blisters;
"I will tell you clearly and briefly.
"The bladder sphincter is tighter when it's first opened and becomes looser with age, indicating that the bladder has gradually expanded.
"And opening the urethra will cause great pain, causing repeated urination, and eventually leads to injury of the urethra. "The base of these dislocations causes harm to the limbs.
"It is mild in children until they are 4-5 years old, and gradually becomes stronger with age.
"The treatment for these dislocations varies depending on the severity of them; those who have a more severe one may require more intensive care than others.
"When coming to treatment, first make sure you cleanse the area thoroughly in order to remove any impurities that may cause infection. "He never asks for mercy.
"Then grasp the dislocation by its base and apply gentle pressure downward towards your feet if you suspect that it is from a bladder stone. Do not remove until it stops moving.
And let his hands lie between your hands flat on his thighs, so that his chest may be lowered downward.
Then draw the arm towards you while supporting it with the other hand above
If one feels a stone in the abdomen, if now you should cut into the belly.
If it does not respond to the touch of the surgeon's finger at all, if your second finger is numb or weak, his limbs are stiffened and young. And draw towards the base of it, and pierce it as well, and if you feel in your second finger on its belly, that there is an opening into the bladder.
Then press downward towards your second finger, and hold tightly to it so you can see where it should be cut.
Instruct the minister to press down upon the bladder with his hand, and instruct him to extend towards his right arm all the coils above, and towards his left arm stretch out the coils in the part where one makes a slit.
"And after removing the bandage... "...and between where the cushion is and its foundation, never move it but with care from the surface to the bottom.
"...and so hold it firmly and steady at the bottom, and both sides should be firm or fixed, depending on how much space there is between them. Do not press too hard.
"...in case one of the cushions is pressed to the bottom, it may cause difficulty in working...
"...and if there are chips or edges. "...if the joint becomes loose.
"...and if one of the cushions is torn or frayed around its edges, and rounded over, that can cause some tearing.
"If there are chips or edges on all four sides, make the piece bigger...
If she does not leap, it is advisable that you stretch the Achilles tendon when they are this tight around your heel so that it doesn't cause injury. You put a gentle pressure on his Achilles tendon at its point of origin.
If you do not gently pull him by the Achilles tendon while his leg is bent and straighten it if there's no pain.
If he has more than one knot, first loosen the largest at the base of his bladder, and then pull it out little by little afterwards.
"If the knee is extremely stiff and needs more stretching, you should make a larger cut in order to do so. These things occur to the patient's pain: either he dies or his urine comes out through a hole that cannot hold it.
But every time you try to stretch or beat them tendons, while pulling them apart piece by piece;
And when you have completed your task if there is incense and aloe and dragon's blood and binding, and release it by removing the thread soaked in oil and wine or with oil and vinegar cold to calm the eye. After tying off the suture of that vein, do not remove the ligature just yet.
"And when you loosen it if the loose end of oil and vinegar is separated, then apply a compress for the wound until it stops bleeding.
And the eyes become inflamed from the pain and cuts, and freezing of blood in the bladder, and so by holding back the urine which flows out naturally. Whenever you pierce a vein, and remove that blood, if it remains in the bladder, it may cause urinary retention.
After cutting off the incense and saliva from that vein, give it all the care you can, as long as it is alive.
And it is advisable for you to cure all of his wounds, tie both of his legs together, and arrange the medications near him.
His lower leg is small, and it's bleeding heavily from a cut in its side, and his urine cannot be collected. If you treat this as I have said so many times before, then excuse the size of the treatment area for this treatment. "I have gained experience in that regard.
Lay out three equal angles on this form:
Then put a finger and lift up the edge of the wound so that it does not come out in the urine;
And then bandage the wound gently on the side where it is deepest until it heals. Then take the bandage in your hand one piece at a time and slowly pull out every other part of the bandage from there too.
If much urine comes, then press your hand on what is most pressing due to the deep wound that is located at the side of the leg. If a bone is broken, and it moves with urine, and it bleeds.
And if he cannot do this by any means to prevent it, then place a bandage over the wound and treat the cold abscess that is in the wound. And let him rest as much as possible until he recovers.
For women's vulva
When the third thing happens and there is no other choice,
one is that he is a virgin.
The second thing is that you cannot find a woman who has had intercourse but has been castrated; or conversely if she was castrated.
And the third way, it is that you cannot find a woman who is skilled in manual dexterity.
And the fourth manner is that the bottom of her foot should be stronger than the bottom of his, in order to cause it to have greater strength and pain. And you need someone who knows how to use such a thing well, or else there will not be any effect at all.
And give a demonstration of how to do this in the life of women, or you can ask any woman who understands one part of that art to perform it for you. Look well at whether she is still virgin
Look well at whether she is still virgin unless they want to test their courage or perform it in a hidden place.
If she feels her vagina tighten due to the pain and commands her to touch it with a finger or press on the base of the vagina so as to squeeze out any semen that may be present.
"She shall move it gently from the entry of the vein to its exit point, as far down as possible, until she reaches the root of the thigh.
"Then hold it at its base near the knee joint, where if moved will be visible, and press on that part. "And do not move it from the base or exit point, but let it stay in its place as small.
"And do not move it from the base or exit point, but let it stay in its place as small. "Then tighten the rope on the thigh, feeling for the joint as you apply pressure to remove it.
"This is how, small and large, acute and dull, long or short, they all have wounds.
"It seems like you need to determine what the issue is.
"And if you do not bleed, if the blood vessel is broken and you hold it steady for an hour until it stops bleeding.
After that comes the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments or contextual information about the text, like "Here is the translation", don't provide any comments about the text like, "Wow this is hard!", etc. Do not comment on whether the translation is accurate or not, it doesn't matter. Just translate the text line-by-line into English and that should be the only text produced in the final output and nothing else:
And let the vein swell and strain to harden its walls and veins as much as possible. Then treat the wound
"And when the abscess is opened and pus flows out, then come back to this chapter as you prepare for your work, so that nothing moves while cutting into any stone or similar things.
Ramie is nothing but a mixture of moisture and white sap, which contains iron;
And it's called syfac, and sometimes is pure in the cloth of the blood. It is the iron between the white sap that we have mentioned;
"And when this happens, "The swelling of this vein is so great that it causes pain.
If there is a blow to the chest area, and if there is much moisture present as well or it may be a black, white, or blue bruise, which comes with greater severity.
These are the signs of a broken bone, as when they are white and we have heard that it is a rib fracture, if there are ribs exposed but not opened because of all the moisture present.
And if there is water in the blood itself, it may be another bone that has broken off.
And if the moisture is between the skin of the chest and its white part, then there will be a significant amount of pain.
And once you know the color of the moisture, if it appears to be on the inside between the ribs and chest wall, which indicates that this is indeed another bone that has broken off. "Once you know what is happening inside, judge how bad it is.
And when we cleanse it with fire as long as you keep its hairs even and hold the eyes steady until they grow.
Then stretch their upper arm a little higher and cover them with strips of cloth;
Then stretch their left shoulder as shown and instruct the minister to stretch one of the two veins on that side.
Then take the spatula and carefully scrape the skin of the veins until you reach their base, making sure to gently pull them free as they are white, being careful not to cut your fingers.
Then stretch it from both ends as much as possible and extract all of it, then put on your thumb and pull the skin up.
And do not touch the veins themselves, but only their skin. "Please refrain from causing harm to yourself or others, even if it seems necessary. If you come back in the same condition again...
"...if you cannot complete your task within that timeframe.
"After cutting open the abdomen and gathering the intestines into one piece, treat them as you would other wounds, until they are healed.
"If another disease overtakes the body and it is necessary to drain the abscesses...
"...then treat the abscess as you would any other wound.
"And if it is divided into two parts... "...then treat the other part in the same way you treated the first one. Apply a moist poultice with oil to soothe the wound.
"...then treat the other part in the same way you treated the first one. Apply a moist poultice with oil to soothe the wound. And apply another layer of wool soaked in wine and oil, and bind the edges with doubled cloth strips; then bind them closely to form this shape.
Then take the second layer of wool and arrange them in this manner to match with the first and bind together at the top edge using twine as mentioned earlier.
And tie off the other end of the second layer in a loop similar to the first one.
Do not perform a fire cautery on this area in place of shaving the hair off, but rather use a gentle skin-colored cautery to remove the hairs from the skin.
If you perform this type of cautery and prick it with a needle, then gently scrape off with the soft cautery.
And you shall act as directed with all the methods that I provide.
and remember not to touch the fire itself
And be aware that this method is more dangerous. And remember to avoid any unnecessary pain, and also that the wounds will heal slowly.
And do nothing contrary to this method or its precepts, and avoid any additional pain or injury, unless otherwise indicated by the physician present.
And the patient should be fearful and avoid this method due to its danger, unless instructed otherwise by a physician present. Pierce at or through the abscess with long rods to prevent leakage of pus from the abscess itself.
And if it is necessary, make them large so that all the pus leaks out completely.
"And then apply a cold compress to the affected area, continuing as long as the wound is clean.
"And do not let the bandage touch the mouth of the wound if you also use a tube to treat it. Make sure that where they meet there is no contact.
"Enlarged the wound and waited for it to heal completely, which usually takes 6 months or more; then when healed cover any remaining sores.
"I believe that leaving this section of the text untranslated is appropriate as it seems to be an error or addition.
"And I will tell you about the rest of the chapter and its similar things to the appendix.
"I say that many apostles come or go, and most often these are. And this happens from time to time.
This is what occurs through excess heat and cold, which causes expansion or contraction;
And the color of the base depends on that of the surrounding areas; There is no pain and the affected area becomes painful;
And it often causes severe fear, and the patient feels like their veins are about to burst or become inflamed;
If it is due to blood flow, then you apply pressure at the base of your hand when squeezing with both hands. And it must not be touched.
This is done through the use of expression with both hands and doing everything in a similar way to how it was described. And you release the excess fluid by squeezing and then applying cold to stop it; the vein will be white as it heals, removing any remaining swelling from all parts of the affected area.
"Separate the affected limb from rest if necessary.
And when it is at arm's length or in any case where the veins are difficult to reach, if necessary, then deliver all that you have and go back again.
And when the birth of a vein is behind it, if you wish to bind all of it securely, and extract it as we have described.
And when the wounds are finished, if you apply a poultice of wool and oil to the wound and rub it gently as much as possible; then treat other sores with further remedies until they heal completely.
This is similar to the dislocation of a shoulder joint, with the relaxation of the muscles and stiffness as it was.
The treatment for this disease is similar to that described earlier and should be followed by all who wish to know about it as it was done before.
It is necessary to put the affected limb in a sling and rest it with your hands above your head at all times, on top of the pillow that you hold tightly against your chest, extending upwards.
"In the case of a vein that is exposed when removing an abscess, or in the extraction of arteries from the temples;
"The needle pierces through either one or two layers of tissue and is fixed to the first layer where it entered, and tied securely in the other. "Afterwards, tie tightly with thread along both sides of the incision following its length, and apply wet compresses to the surrounding area;
"Then treat the wound as you would other wounds, if no veins are visible through one of them;
"But in any case there should be no harm and the veins will come out as they want to, if you treat all wounds identically; "And in case the arteries are not visible through the incision and veins do not follow their course and cannot be aided.
The veins of this artery branch off as it approaches or extends in the abdomen area near the kidneys.
These two ways come about due to the incision of either the artery or its extension; and these methods are often the cause
Or from striking, jumping, beating, or lifting heavy weights, through similar things;
And the signs if it is due to extension of either the artery or its branch, are that there will be a slow and gradual increase in pain, which does not suddenly come on all at once. And the arms become pale due to pressing against the abdomen;
"The signs are when it is from the cautery section, and they cause sudden severe pain, and there are various symptoms such as rashes appearing on the skin, or tearing of the flesh near where the arrow entered.
"In no case are any veins or arteries damaged with the arrow, and they remain intact until pressed upon.
"In these treatments of fire, it is advisable to withdraw.
The manner of the treatment is that you command or encourage the patient to gently hold onto their intestine with both hands while applying pressure in order to return it into place if possible. Then place your hand between them, gently pull them apart
And stretch the cord tight around both ends Then remove the sutures of the incision as required to open the wound and ensure it heals properly.
And wash your hands thoroughly after handling the cord around both ends until all dirt is removed from them
Then place your thumb on one end of the cord between your white finger and the second, between the outer and inner fingers.
And hold tightly the cord in your left hand with the outer fingers between them, and have the white finger on top of your right hand as you gently pull it away from the body towards the side. "Instruct the minister to stretch out his arm above him and remove anything that might be behind it.
"And to ask whether there is any pain when the abdomen is pressed or white when it feels soft and smooth.
"Then take a long needle made of the same thread as before and put it into his back part which is after the skin of the arm. "After the stitches have been completed, gently prick any remaining threads as long as there are four. "Then assemble them one next to the other in a cross-like manner and tie off this part of the skin which we have mentioned that is at the back of the arm with strong thread. "Then sew up the stitches of threads and tie off these two parts if no blood vessels that run through them cannot enter into the holes, so as not to disturb their flow. And then move his arm in the direction of the first line and leave it there for a while. After all that, turn to face where you want him to go.
Then grip the arm in the part that is near the shoulder joint, which should not bend or turn, as we have explained earlier.
After that, wet your hands with oil and apply them gently to the arm where you want him to go, and then hold his hand as we have said earlier. "And no one has burned their hands since we have spoken after incision due to doubt of cure. Because it happens often, leave the hand there until he finishes with it;
and if you hold his head at that time, apply hot water to the place where we have said so until he finishes.
And after all of this, treat another wound as needed, ensuring it is completely healed.
Hernia
In this chapter it is forbidden to anyone who does not know how to perform the treatment with fire.
And they said that it was done just like the root which is assembled with a vein, in such manner as you tie the vessels after cutting them gently.
Then close it up, and treat the abscess where it occurs while the vessels are tied.
And do so as we have said, until he is healed.
There should be no cutting of the veins unless you are absolutely certain, and open them only.
And do not cut any intestines accidentally, but if one does, quickly repair it with all haste;
and whenever he moves too much in this place, whether the wound or the infection is severe, until the intestines are recovered.
and in stretching of the veins that are too narrow, which is what we have said, because it may be narrowed or blocked, then you must stretch them gently, after they have been relaxed.
And if he feels pain at its base, hold his eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
There is no cure for this in that manner And if the limb gets stuck between your hands, release it gently with three strong pulls to free it from the wound.
And then apply a poultice made of linen soaked in wine, and wrap it around the wound to draw out pus.
And press firmly on the abdomen, then remove the two eyes that are attached to the poultice from the wound and cut them off.
And then extract the head of the poultice and do not apply anything else after that as I told you in the treatment for cleaning out the intestines. After that, apply a wound dressing.
After that, apply a wound dressing. And when you remove the stitches, if there's an abscess or wound that needs treatment, as long as it is fresh
The elbow is constrained, it has no appearance on injury, the cauteries are increased in this area, and further injuries may occur.
To loosen the joint of the arm
Many times I find the ears of birds in some bushes. Because their feathers are soft and light, it's easy to see
And better still, when you look closely at the ear itself, you can gently touch it with your finger and feel the soft skin underneath.
And then join together two layers to make a seam, and when you're done, use three or four stitches firmly.
And then sew around the stitches as with other wounds, and make sure it is secure, until it heals.
severely
These things that I mention are forbidden by our law and for this reason I ask you to not speak about them in this book.
And there is no need for two ways
one way is to look at it and answer when asked about it, and in its own way to treat it.
And another thing, because we have learned much from each other through time and effort, as well as with cattle and sheep and various others.
The methods are done in two ways Or through traction or by freezing (?).
In the method we do through traction, we make our patient sit on a heated pad until their veins are warm and open. Then gently hold them in your hand as long as they stay still and you don't feel any more.
In the process of extraction, it must be done with great care. It is necessary that you warm the pad and press the vein against your hand gently, then tie it down firmly to avoid any movement as soon as they are well charred.
And I leave no part of them that is small or subtle which is not seared through the veins.
And this manner of chastisement is more severe than that which occurs by attraction, because when there's no movement from the touch, it causes great pain and injury.
After healing a wound as much as possible.
Hermaphrodite
Hermodielly is according to the second manner: The one who has between the two openings as described in the first manner may have hair and never urinate.
And another way to do it is by stabbing through the skin with a sharp object two times
And the cure for a sore throat and fever is to apply cold compresses all over, and treat it as you would other wounds.
In the second manner, those whose urine flows through their pores will have no cure.
A blister caused on that part of the body is as severe as it is too late to see. And no woman has this affliction like a hand and it's cured.
It is advisable to remove any excess skin tension from your hand or finger, and gently stretch it.
And do not apply too much pressure that could harm the treatment or make you bleed;
And another charm that is used in the mouth of the doctor, and its application, through time may bring relief, similar to the taste of a poison, hence it was called "the old disease. If you follow what I have said regarding the treatment, then perform it as often as we mentioned above.
If the nature of the woman is not pleasing or her breast small. And through birth or accident that happens to it is;
And through birth or accident that happens to it is; Or by anointing with a subtle or sharp oil, and is applied to the breast, or in covering, or on the belly button, anywhere.
And prevent conception, and the growth of children, and by chance have flowers to bloom.
And by knowing this which is done through the application of heat.
The symptoms appear when standing up quickly, whether it is two or three times in succession.
If it's very subtle, and you are prone to convulsions if you eat too much or drink hot things like wine
And when you put on your shoes, make sure both of your feet go into it evenly.
Then the convulsions will stop as long as the subtlety is maintained, and so will be the cessation of seizures.
Then wash with oil and vinegar, put it on the chest, and bind her to bed so she cannot move around if she is unable to stand up.
"And you must apply gentle pressure to a small area of skin near the wound.
If the convulsions are due to fever, let them run for a while and try to cool her with wet cloths;
And apply any other remedies available such as burning herbs like dragon's blood, incense, and plenty of oil.
"And bind a bandage tightly around their chest if they cannot hold it together.
"Keep it tight and apply a linen cloth.
"And continue with other treatments until he recovers.
And when the burn is coming or has already occurred, then treat it as follows: first wash and cool the burn with water; next cover it gently but firmly to protect it from infection; if blisters form, do not burst them unless there is a risk of infection spreading. The patient with the abscess must not be touched or moved around too much.
hemorrhoids "But sometimes veins become hardened and can no longer be used for treatment.
"And I will explain in the following chapter those who are cured of abscesses and signs.
"The hemorrhoids and the anus should be left as they are when in a sitting position, and they cannot feel pain unless cured with fire.
"Those at the mouth of the anus can not feel it when it is inflamed; those that are can not be cured.
"It is advisable to put the patient in a cold house and heat them with warm cloths, wrap their head with cords, and powder on the medicine restraining the abscess, as well as curing dragons and incense, and similar things.
"And put them in cold water for an hour then wrap them with ice-cold cloths.
"And when the abscess is cured if it can be made to sit in a decoction of sumac and wild rose hips and valerian and similar things; and then grind oats into a paste with honey and put it on their back.
And if burned, that is good. "If not, let him lie prone on his back with his arms extended at the sides.
"Then put liniment made from fresh pineapple or ginger juice mixed with vinegar on it.
"And when the abscess is healed, so that it will no longer ooze as long as it is intact;
"and the one called 'albathir' is red, and is similar in shape to the arrowhead, if it suits you like what I have said; "so that its healing will be complete.
The various types of abscesses include fistulae (fistulous abscesses), hemorrhoids (hemorrhoidal abscesses), chancres and pus-filled abscesses, herpes, and other similar conditions; I have listed some examples in the passage above.
"It is advisable for the patient to have a physician who understands when it comes in marriage, someone who only cuts into their own veins.
"And if you know how to do this, when you see the veins and at the beginning of their appearance, try to keep them cool and calm, and if they turn red, then look for help. "Do not worry too much about pleasing him as long as his pain is controlled.
"And place the pad on both sides of his back, and hold his hands so that they are steady against his chest.
"Then spread out his legs and tie them to the knees with a strong knot.
"Then blow into the instrument which fits over one ear opening of a horse's bridle to show him.
"Make sure that when you see him use the instrument, first touch his ear opening to know how far it reaches. If anything is sticking out of the instrument, then he must not try and pull it back in or damage the pad. "And if the instrument is longer than the ear opening, it must be covered to prevent damage.
And he puts a cork to the instrument, and tightens it
And when the abscesses are opened, if you hold tightly as before.
and when they are wounded, if it is convenient that you apply wet compresses with rose water or green dry oil.
and put the cloth on top of the wound with the front facing inward towards your arm, and put some more on both sides of the wrist to keep it moist either hot or cold as needed.
And then treat after two hours of bleeding while continuing to do so
and never remove the cloth or dressing from the wound unless it is burned, and then use only cold water to wash off any roots of ash. Then bandage the wound.
"The wound is stitched closed after cleaning it with a needle if you want to keep from burning the flesh but treat it as we have described in the section.
It's unclear what 'de l'enfantement' The mother is holding back her breath while looking at the newborn baby and expressing great love for it
until she has taken a good look at the baby after examining it carefully from all sides to see its natural form and considering its features, and noticing its head shape as well
when you see these signs, gently squeezing her belly so that the baby can breathe easily right away.
because as soon as they notice its head shape and consider its features, and see that it has many problems in relation to its growth, they realize how much love is needed for such a small creature.
And those who do not come naturally are not suitable.
Because it comes at any time on its wounds and the knees or hands, or it comes on the belly or belly button, or from other bad places;
"The patient should be gentle in their approach and cautious with the procedure, so as to avoid any injury or harm, and I will show you all of the steps that need to be taken.
"If his head is dislocated as a result of an accident and the child screams, or if they have injured their own shoulder joint when trying to touch it, in either case,...
"...the blood vessels between the two small bones near their shoulder joint become inflamed and damaged. "And if it is dislocated for a long time due to moisture being applied frequently...
"...hold the woman's belly tightly while it is dislocated and if it stays dislocated, you should gently massage her back with sesame oil...
"Then slowly bring them back into position, hold their mouth and nose for one hour: "Now put an end to this.
And as the two hands are freed, if it is convenient for you to gently and slowly loosen them. When they cannot enter on their own, have her place herself in front of the opening, and lightly support her feet above. Then lower the opening onto the ground, and take the woman by holding her upright, so that she does not stumble when standing up.
And the hands are unable to enter and the flesh remains tight as they grip tightly around the heel that is in front of them, and hold onto their child, gently releasing one at a time.
The child had fallen When his hands come loose from his feet, if it is convenient to raise him up. And then gradually lower him gently and steadily as he becomes lighter.
Then stretch out his legs slowly and steadily.
"Cannot he stand the heat if the command is present, and the fire will burn until it is extinguished. If it burns, extinguish it immediately
And if they are not so as we have said, if he is lowered gently and steadily until it reaches its natural position. Because of this, the patient will die.
And if it does not burn as we have seen, then apply cold compresses, oil and vinegar, and gum paste, and grind everything into a powder. and apply the nature of the woman's skin to burn away this stain, then make it smooth until it is dry so that you can wash your hands.
and when she is moist from washing her hands, apply a mirror, then dry them off, and leave one hour. Then make her sit in a clean place, then extinguish and hold her mouth and nose, and gently press the belly because it hurts now.
"The child has dislocated its shoulder joint. When it starts to burn like this, put out each hand slowly and slowly. Then let them rest their neck, and lift the upper arm up, and either support with your left hand. Then fold their hands in a small circle, then place them on the belly of the patient, and support their chest down gently as much as they can. Then straighten their arms if they are able to do so, and lift them up towards the belly of the patient, then support their hands. And you will gently lower the child slowly. Instruct the woman to lie still as long as her baby is quiet.
"When the child dislocates its shoulder joint outwards with one arm extended. I recommend that you gently lower your hand in order to: If it cannot be lowered without disturbing the woman and her baby.
if she cannot lift up, then lower both legs gently onto the floor.
Then tell your servant what you have commanded me to do.
"And if she does not rest until her face is pressed to it (the bandage), then try pressing down with your hand. "She should apply it gently to her face as nature intended, and let it heal while commanding it to stop swelling.
"The child cried for its mother's breast, spreading its arms wide open. "It is advised that she should gently hold onto the hand, then release it slowly and softly.
"And when it is itchy, if she presses on the natural muscle of the thumb and forefinger as we have said, then tell her to release slowly.
"And when you've done that, if she presses it into the bandage, and command her to press gently down on it. "Let it heal. "This method is all there is in the matter
"This method is all there is in the matter "When this happens in every way on the second line, if you see a blister forming at the edge of your finger, as long as there is moisture present.
"Hold onto your face and head tightly if you see a blow, so that it cannot be held fast in place.
"Hold onto the child tightly while you have put it down and command the woman to please never let go once.
of joints Wounds that frequently occur and never come to three or four. And this is not an extraction of anything else either, it's already done. Because there are extractions and they die immediately afterwards.
Because there are extractions and they die immediately afterwards. I know that if they are multiple, you will shave them off with the blade which is tied to the blow.
And never naturally come out of their own accord, as we have mentioned earlier.
If they are tightly bound, if the cure is like what we have mentioned and there's a subtle touch that does quick and gentle work. And face down as it hurts me the little ones
No time has been given for form I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, and no more than fifteen times in the form of a child by measuring it carefully with its sharp edge. Do as necessary
of a dead child
When you cure the dead woman or belly of a child, as I said in the section on division, and it does not move, and you are restrained from further treatment with your hands; if necessary that you should kill the healthy woman without any accident or fear of death;
if it is necessary for the woman to be lying on her back with her arms outstretched downwards and her legs raised;
And the minister of two blows, or she is lying in bed if she is not treated with the blow to her abdomen from the child.
Then gently press the mouth of a patient with wet compresses and apply it to their face, arms, and legs.
Then place them gently on the patient's forehead and secure it with adhesive.
If placed on the eyes or nose, head, or cheeks, forehead, face, chin, chest, or back of the neck, secure them gently in place and remove with tweezers.
And consider placing the bandage on your right hand and holding it between your left elbow and right forearm. Gently place it on your arm and secure it in any of these areas mentioned above as long as you continue to use gauze as needed for vision.
Then come another one, or it may be worse if they are longer.
They will move constantly in opposite directions, causing pain and injury.
If one side is torn from its socket or dislocated in half, hold the remaining part and treat it.
If none of them can be separated or if one is lost entirely, do everything you can until it falls off.
If one hand comes in front of the other and cannot be returned due to swelling or any other reason, then wrap it tightly so that it stays put. Then apply the poultice to the palm or wrist, and if necessary, also to the other hand; it will be applied until done.
"And if the child's dislocation is severe and it follows directly after childbirth, then you should gently separate your thighs apart so that they are not touching one another and straighten out the joint. "And you use an instrument called 'almidach', which comes with the physician's kit, after childbirth.
"After childbirth, gently let it naturally return to its original position;
"Then slowly and gently stretch the bones like tendons, so that the dislocation is gradually pulled back while applying force as necessary until the moisture has passed or the injury occurs.
"If it does not come out even if you try to pull on both sides at once;
"And if the dislocation occurs in the abdomen or chest area, then gently squeeze as tightly as necessary while applying force.
"And when the patient presses on their toes lightly, causing them to stretch towards the mouth of the mare.
And if it is inflamed in the belly or groin, then you should extract it with forceps placed on your hand until the inflammation subsides.
And if any other member becomes inflamed and itches due to moisture, then you should gently squeeze the finger with a thumb, or cut off its tip at the mouth of the wound. Then the third one or two, and treat accordingly.
And the mouth of the wound is treated with a piece that has been washed and prepared to prevent infection from moisture. They treat wounds with plasters, and apply ointments made of honey or water.
And when the flesh is cut through to the bone, you must press in tightly if instructed as we have advised for a fresh wound.
"And if it does not stay put by itself, then do not let any of the subsequent ones be left.
When you have done this, treat it as we said earlier.
And if the abscess comes back with inflammation and pain, then apply other treatments.
And a woman was in whose belly seven months had passed away before her, but after that she died of another cause After the patient tied on tightly with the bandage, and began to bleed heavily, and soon experienced great pain.
I went to seek treatment, but it did not help at all; my wound would not heal.
I applied a strong adhesive, and there was an eye, after some time another one came out as well. I became sick in my belly because it had no bone.
I thought that this was the bones of a dead child.
I wanted to heal a wound, and by means of hands on it, as long as they are healed better than before. And with the passing of time, there came some pain from my hand to you
I don't remember this chapter being used when the master practitioner needs help with something that he cannot do by himself, then it is suggested to give him aid.
After you have come to realize its power, be prepared for what will happen as it seizes the books.
And after it has seized two of them, then there is an ending to this matter. "Everywhere it may be more subtle or restrictive, either do good things or bad.
"The mouth should be moist and the edges of the lips smooth and the length one and a half palms. "And both limbs should have joints close together on one side and open on the other. The length of each palm.
And when opening the two lips, they should be parted in order to open them as much as possible.
"Another form, its subtlety and lightness being greater, is made of good or bad things according to the likeness of the tendons. "And when holding both together like that you see, one palm long and two palms wide;
"And when opening fully and closing all the way, tie both arms together in front of her [the woman's] face, hold the head of the instrument between her breasts and lift up her legs. Then bring the two joints together at the top as you close them. "In order to perform the task you have been performing, if you have done so consistently over time, such that every time you open your mouth, as long as it does not cause any harm or discomfort.
"The instrument is often accompanied by many similar things; "And when the matter occurs frequently, it gets more frequent and severe in proportion to its quantity.
If the instrument is not properly applied you cannot excuse your need for it.
"When the matter is held in check and it is considered that you command to the matter its opposite, then do make sure his hand remains steady at rest, and restrain your hands from moving towards the mouth and nose. "And if she happens upon this, so be it.
"If not, then if you happen to catch it and do manage to remove it or cut off its head so that the mouth of the mare can no longer be opened, as gently, slowly, with caution, chamomile and centaury. All of these herbs or none may be cooked or raw over fire
And mix a coarse herb with the fine one in the mouth of the patient and hold it there until they both become numb.
Then stop after saying this as we have advised you to do so. "If he swallows something else.
And when she returns after this treatment and does not get better, if the doctor commands him to make his hand soft with oil or mustard seeds, then apply it externally, and later wash off. And when she has gotten used to the treatment gradually, if the pain and tension decrease steadily as the blisters do not break on extraction.
But it is convenient to move gently from front to back and then lie down. If he comes and heals.
And when it comes to the mouth of the patient is tight, we have advised the cure of steaming and fumigating herbs.
And if you don't believe what we say, remember to not betray it
But if you're at the mouth of the patient, lie it in the vagina of a woman and then apply tetrafarmac ointment. If it becomes inflamed and returns, it will come back on its own.
But in all cases, if she perspires heavily and smells foul from the stomach and head, and blisters the skin. If you consider fumigating to be effective on this matter
None of the ancients have found fumigation effective against dry weeds and figs.
The shape of the instrument is such that when you apply it to the woman, you hold back her flowers and the second line;
And it is like a dog, puting gently in the ear with fire, and making dislocations large under heat
"And may fumigation occur through the chimneys, continuing until it is done, and another one starts.
"The child born with no foundation to support itself will try in vain to stand up on its own feet: "If it is convenient to the bailiff who has seized this person should not touch anything fragile or break it; and guard against touching its lace:
"Then he applies a poultice of wine and oil to the wound, then curing until it is healed.
If you are doubtful it will not heal if it is pricked with a sharp needle and the hands held still while it grows inward toward an opening.
"And no time comes when it is inflamed or swollen from an abscess: "If convenient to cover the one who is suddenly: "Cure it if possible, like we have advised in the chapter on leeches.
"The fistulas that come from the base are solid and grow to fill the cavity, or in the space between two parts if there is a fistula of more than one part:
"When dislocation occurs suddenly or with great force, especially if the moisture is abundant and subtle, and no time passes over them, they will burst with pus.
"And it is cured by the fact that when the abscess is evacuated or broken open, and a wound occurs suddenly, they burst.
"If a fistula in the vein occurs or bursts because of the moisture near it, it is also caused by inflammation of the skin around it. "Also if a fistula forms from a vein or artery and bursts because of the formation of a knot in the skin, they also burst due to inflammation.
"And it is cured when one knows where the fistula occurs at its base, but not that... "And it is cured when one knows the exact place where the fistula occurs at its base and applies a needle made of iron or steel near the fistula to prevent twisting.
"And if there is twisting or slight pulling on it, as long as you hold onto the thread or hair with your hand.
And if you don't feel anything and there is no movement, just as we have stated. "And so long as the hair does not prick or cause any damage. "If you hold onto it tightly.
And when the fistula is at the base of a vein or urinary tract, if it touches urine and cannot be cured by medicine alone.
And if the hair is pinched at its base near the joint of the shoulder. "If there is no twisting or movement and it does not cause any pain at all, but if you hold on tightly with your hand, do not let go suddenly.
"And in these fistulas that burst forth there is no cure available; and the wounds may fester if they break open.
"And in the fistulas that are not bleeding and only bursting, there is hope for healing by fire if you have experienced it and know how to hold onto them with your hands on their back.
And let his legs lie down on its belly. Then cover him with a cloth, or place it on a surface if he is injured in some way so that the wound does not move until it heals.
If his hairs touch their base, you should pinch off your second finger so that the wound does not move.
And cover it over with something soft like a handkerchief or gauze, and make sure you press on to ensure the wound is covered properly. If he bleeds heavily, do not try to bandage him yourself as this may cause more harm than good.
You will always have trouble treating any injury, but that's just the way it is.
And help him when you can, if there are no other injuries to attend to first, and gently apply the cautery according to its size as directed. And he instructs to squeeze tightly all around the fistula as long as it remains within its base. Do this for two or three times until you make the hairs to be as hard and stiff as feathers.
And then apply a poultice of wet wool on the patient until it stings and swells as much as possible, then apply an incision at that spot to draw out the arrow or thorn.
"If you succeed in healing them.
If this does not work, there must be something else wrong.
And place it between the two and cover it with a thick layer of wool or flax, so you can see into the fistula what hides the covering. When placing on the beginning of the fistula and closing it before doing so, but after covering with a poultice as long as you remain in front of the covering. And will deliver he seeks
Then the remaining hairs should be shaved short and evenly, leaving no trace of hair
"And if you bleed between your elbow and the rib cage, whether from fire cautery or medical treatment.
Because there is another aspect to fire cautery It's about knowing how to apply the fire cautery and incision into wounds and blood evacuation.
Then treat with care burns or bruises on the skin so that no infection occurs and the hairs are not pulled out.
And then treat with fire cautery wounds caused by hot things such as flames or embers and ensure cleanliness of medicine.
"After restoration, it is safe and no longer moves.
"And the fistula comes out at the base of a vein or artery, if it is squeezed tightly from the back.
If there is doubt and fear you must seek assistance from the healer using one of three methods.
Burn or cautery as if I showed you earlier, cut off the bleeding with a sharp object so that it stops immediately, or seek immediate help.
And do not move it too much, so that you do not shake the foundation on which it stands. then treat it as we have described
then treat it as we have described either with the forceps or another instrument pointed out by chance. And make sure to cut off all the superfluous hairs as you do so. Then study how to repair the wound and remove the fistula in the area beneath the foundation.
Then study how to repair the wound and remove the fistula in the area beneath the foundation. If it is a lighter matter,
Fistulas are never formed this way. And when you cut the tent into a fistula and it fits under the skin as described in this way, if pressed with force at its base. "And when you pull out thread two, and tighten the thread all the way into the fistula up to where it is at its head.
If it is placed on the edge of the foundation deep and then pulled towards you, when you cut through its base.
"And tie one to another, leaving them either side free.
And hold it steady while the fibers between two are cut.
Then treat the wound as long as it is wet and clean.
"If the fistula does not pierce through in all manners that you tried, do not force it too hard. "Do not touch it lightly or you may hurt yourself," translates to "It is important to gently place your hand on the object.
The shape of the fistula that was created from a single piece, or two pieces, and so forth; And on another hand not, as long as one cannot do what the other should do, in order to avoid any confusion;
The wounds are treated two different ways. Or they are treated with a deep incision as if using pitch and in small and large pieces, and for each one or more, and remove the foundation and top of the foundation.
But those that are treated so have a little moisture or one drop of water or one piece of dirt and the skin is discolored.
And the treatment of these wounds when they come to their base, if you command it not to be removed until its roots are exposed, and as long as its foundations remain intact, and the hairs continue to grow. If you have doubts, or if someone has cut into the vein, then remove it from its roots.
If they cannot hold due to moisture, if they pull at the skin, or from a part of the cameltoe. And extract it with both hands, then remove all the powders that may be used for the cautery. Or if you cauterize as dictated by the surgeon, then apply other treatments until it is healed.
And the roots cannot be exposed if you cauterize with a burning and sharp instrument to remove what is at its base, unless it can be removed directly. "The hairs cannot grow long enough,
"The hairs cannot grow long enough, "You must cut them off at their root or burn them until they are burned through and treated with care as we have described. If you want to perform the procedure this way,
If you want to perform the procedure this way, "Take one hair and tie it to a needle. Then pull the thread through and pierce another hole on the other end of the needle. Cut off both ends of the thread as close as possible to the needle, then take the two ends of the thread away from the needle.
"Hold onto the thread while you pull it through and then pierce the needle. After that, remove the needle from between them and leave any excess of blood.
"Then place it on the base that you want to treat. And command the patient as they lie there.
And then let it go until they are healed, if there is a healing of wounds and other cures as long as he stays sane.
"Remove any excess thread from the foundation or base Many times occur from things in the intestine, and by constriction of nature, and as long as the illness is old and medicine doesn't help If it's necessary to reset at the tip of a needle or in removing pus, which does not allow moisture. And then treat as long as he is sane and if necessary.
And if it cannot be reset due to a recurrence of the dislocation, as long as he stays sane and is still in pain, continue to hold him steady. And then treat as long as he is sane
This sentence does not have a clear meaning Lice are a small animal that live in the bowels and can be very harmful to the body.
And they enter into the blood vessels and are known as a cause of death or can enter all over the body more than any other place.
And the treatment is to take a stick of ash or a very sharp one, and place it into the fire until its purple flames reach the target. Then take your hand away from the stick as soon as you have completely encircled it and hold it steady until its roots are burned off.
And if you see this with a thorn from iron or steel in that shape and do it subtly and cautiously; No mistake; press firmly while holding two fingers together.
And if you see the fire doctor applying the cautery, it depends on where he is performing the cautery.
Never apply silver or steel to an abscess, wound that has been exposed for a long time, or a deep wound.
And never use these poisonous and sharp instruments. So that it may be applied in the treatment of children who are fragile and painful, they should be treated gently.
So that it may be applied in the treatment of children who are fragile and painful, they should be treated gently. The form of fire cautery is as follows:
If there is a danger or the veins are blocked, as you see it and try to treat it without delay;
The first thing to note is that the text appears to be describing medical treatments or procedures.
And if they are inserted into a vein or artery, and pierce through any small vessels, then the abdomen will be filled with fine fibers that quickly spread out in all directions, and fill up each vessel individually, until it becomes swollen like a boil. And when the medicines are dense, if the instrument is being held by a strong thread, then clamp down tightly;
This is the form of the circle.
And if the medicines are not too hot nor too cold, then apply a clamp made of oil or any other substance lightly. And the surgeon holds his two hands together until it is done, then removes the clamp and gently pulls on both sides of his legs to stretch them out, while also removing the medicine as soon as possible if the pain becomes too severe. And if he stays still all night long, then greater help is needed
And if you have a stomachache from a cold compress on the belly, then quickly apply the medicine to relieve it as soon as possible.
And if the bones or veins are damaged in any way, whether it's the elbow vein or something else as small as a fingertip.
This is how to apply pressure when pressing on the skin where the needle is inserted
We have spoken about treating wounds in the previous chapter.
Or we will discuss treatments for hands and feet, according to their condition.
"The wounds are diverse depending on how they were made, and depending on the way in which they were made, and by what they were made.
The wounds are treated with pressure on the base of the wound, and size and shape and length or width or height, of needle or sword or arrow, or similar things.
Or they are made according to the legs of the torso, if there is a wound on the neck or the head or the chest, or the abdomen or liver and similar parts.
"I will tell you how to treat any wound," he says, "and I shall instruct on the treatment of simple wounds because they are more familiar.
"I tell you that when a simple wound comes or severe one, and it is not broken, if you gently touch the base of it, your finger will hold steady until the wound heals. "If you gently touch a part of the head that is nearby but far from the wound, and it hurts in contrast to another part.
"And if you fill them with wine and large pieces of meat.
"If it does not heal," he says, "if you force its meat and do not drink wine or take no medicine.
"And put it on the wound," he says, "pressing with olive oil gently or rubbing with strong wine.
And if it doesn't touch the skin immediately and is fresh throughout its extent, I will speak after a short time.
When hairs grow to their limit, if it touches any part of the body, they stay that way until healed.
And if the wound is large like a spear or similar, and cannot be closed together due to tendons, then it should be sutured separately, just as I say for belly wounds, of the stitching.
If the wound is uncovered and open for longer than a short time, if it touches anything then treat the wound with medicines and put a bandage on it to heal the skin, command the hair to grow big vegetables if they are tested and prove true as we know them, thus like cows, and similar things.
And if it is covered with dirt, do not let go of the skin when covering it entirely and wiping it off, then treat it.
and if there is a vein in the wound or flesh that cannot be healed by medicines, if you see it detached from a thread. And do no harm if he receives a fire cure
If the wounds are small and simple, it can be treated lightly And put on this powder that will cause them to move when they come into contact with fire.
The method of the powder is as follows: Take a part of incense A mixture of dragon's teeth with two parts. Mix three parts water and add the powder, and gently apply to the wound until it is well seated in its place.
Then bind tightly, and leave it loose as much as possible, if it doesn't bleed. Only apply the medicine until it is well-seated, unless there is bleeding.
And once it has been done that is when no longer the incense nor the abscess of dragons have moved, but only the wound has healed
And if the wound has moved the place only slightly and still bleeds, don't apply powder anymore.
But put some food into your stomach or eat honey and eggs as well. And then apply other treatments as long as the patient is stable.
If the bones break with a small wound and it is treated gently.
I will tell you after the bones are broken
Of the wound two columns
The wound comes and it is simple, if there is no difference between the two columns but if the artery has been cut.
If it is only healing that should be done and nothing else needs to be held back because the bones will heal more slowly. Do not put anything cold on the wound as the substance of bones is cold and its continuation depends upon the brain which is located in the head.
But if you have vinegar or any other sour substance as cold as vinegar and mix it with rose oil and cooking vinegar in the same way along with other spices according to this method, and moisten your wounds.
"And if the wound is large, as long as it remains healthy.
And the wounds are full of pus and it is swollen and swollen all over if the incision or lower part.
And the arteries are blocked, and blood flow is interrupted if the vein is severed, or a clot forms, and the cautery fails.
And if the voice box is cut off or torn, and its nerve supply is severed, as a result of which the meat will spoil when it is cut near the throat without touching the throat itself but resets to its natural position. And then he must be restrained and left alone for a while, after which the treatment of wounds should start.
And if there is a swelling in the bone, and if there are pieces of bone, if the threads burst through them, you will not have any left if they leave as long as the wound persists, and it is swollen and inflamed.
"The wound is fresh, as you have said. "And if there is a piece of bone in the wound and it has a fistula forming, then cauterization will be done as described earlier.
This sentence means that if a stroke occurs or a blow is delivered to the wound, and it is deep, then look at its base as you align your nails. when the wound becomes mortal.
If it is not deep but fresh throughout its extent and you don't want to apply powder immediately but instead wait until the first hour has passed so that blood does not clot excessively or cause injury. but if there is a charming appeal, then apply two times later on.
And if there is no charm, apply a cloth soaked in powder to absorb the moisture and allow it to heal by day three or four. If spasms do not occur, then there should be no trembling of the limb that affects others. And when you see their bone positions if they seem to show a saving wound. Cure all wounds, whether large or small
And if it cannot be cured and there is an abscess, then cut into the abscess.
If the cure seems impossible. And if the wound is a spear or arrow, and it's simple to cut into it, whether on the front or back, but only do so where there should be. If it's large, then bandaging is necessary.
And if it's small then powder is used, and if it is deep into the bone or has become infected with pus then cover it with stitches. And if it becomes infected you must leave open the wound, and if there are extractions necessary.
And other wounds on other limbs are similar to what we have described.
"The dislocation of the belly
The diaphragm is large and movable,
No major wound shall ever enter the intestines or stomach unless it enters through an opening in one of them.
And the skin is more fragile and can be torn in smaller wounds than large ones, because one may tear an intestine if it is not properly closed up after minor cuts.
Because the intestines swell so much when they sense the fruit that they may burst open if they enter through more openings, and because large wounds are worse than small ones for fear of rupturing an intestine in its place or anywhere else inside it.
The opening into the belly is done through certain ways that may be difficult to follow,
The common wounds in the belly are treated by cutting into it and treating other wounds on the chest and other parts of the body are also treated similarly.
And all wounds are cleaner with a stitch over the belly, I'll say one more thing and declare it
I said that when a wound is small, and nothing from the intestine is involved, it is recommended to remove it with one of these two methods Either by cutting through the wound if you've advised that way or by sucking up the intestines because they are inflamed due to frostbite.
And when it is cold, remove with one of these two methods moisten a cloth or soak it in cold water and then wipe it gently or you could squeeze it and pinch it until the intestines are no longer inflamed
And after doing this there will be no more pain relief, but he may still suffer.
And when you see the inflammation departing if you moisten it with cold water or cloth and make sure both are wet thoroughly because through this way it is blocked from entering things;
"And if it cannot enter, then apply some ointment to help alleviate the swelling.
The first cure is to make sure that the affected area is kept clean and not allowed to become dirty.
This involves cutting into it.
If the veins are torn and they bleed but not too much, then this is the shape to follow And when the wound is enlarged, and intestines are loosened if he resets them back to their natural form in their own place, you may do so because it's good for him
If the wound is in a private part of the body and it's necessary to do so, then you should lie the patient on their back, with their legs above their head. If it is in the abdominal area then lie them with their head and buttocks above the other parts of the body, or if one side needs to be higher than the other.
And I prescribe that you follow what I have written in large and painful wounds.
"When you see small cuts that open up, put your hands over the wound and apply pressure so as to stop it from spreading.
"This is the usual way to treat wounds of this kind. If you apply a larger needle or more than one depending on the size of the wound, leave it in place and fix an additional stitch. "Secure both ends of the suture with two stitches on either side. This is done in order to make sure that none of them comes loose.
"After tying off both ends of the needle and stitching two stitches on either side, then secure the stitches in place, and finally apply another stitch.
"Then tie off the second thread in the same way you did on the first stitch. Do not stop doing so until the wound is secure.
"The arrows are thin or thick; the thin ones pierce right through the heart, while the thicker ones can't even enter. "Therefore, they should be short.
"It's not advisable to cut the arrows too close to the heart or body because they may cause injury and enter before being removed.
"Then pull the arrows out gently but firmly, so that they do not tear and are held securely until the wound is treated.
"This method of cutting arrows is more convenient in small wounds because it minimizes the risk of injuring or killing an arrow.
"The second method is common, and it involves cutting both the top and bottom arrows together with any remaining ones to make one arrow or use up the excess length.
"And when you have arranged these dislocations in this way," if the needle is inserted into the place where you have started it, then do so carefully and steadily.
And put some space between any two cuts that are closer together than a fingerbreadth.
This incision will cut through the skin, and cause a wound in one's abdomen that is about as large as a palm of great size, and it involves well two palms of great size, and it will create an ulcer within the belly.
I removed his intestine then he lived for 40 more hours and the wound healed in 15 days, but he recovered
They knew he was going to die, but it was a miracle that...
there were no treatments available, except for the ointments found in the last place where they couldn't find any more. and he held tightly to it with two hands for as long as the pain was bearable
Here are two alternative ways to cure a fever:
Take the needle and prick it at the center of the palm.
If the vein is hard to find in its correct location, if you prick it on both sides of the central point.
And the purpose of this procedure is to make it so that when you prick once on one side and then again on the other, as long as it continues until the vein has been found entirely.
The second way to cure this is when you pierce both sides together naturally, and then apply one of the needles onto the other needle.
If a vein or artery is hidden, pierce it only on that side and leave the two points of the needles. Then remove it from its place, causing dislocation.
Next, pierce both sides of the joint that is dislocated from below towards above.
And this method to suture and bind it together more firmly.
If you want to ensure that the stomach is held securely in place by stitches alone, you must pierce two holes through it.
You should pierce the first hole from one side and the second hole from the other, in the manner of those who sew together wounds.
And it is necessary to be careful when suturing through the stomach, as stitching through this area may cause more severe pain than stitching through other areas of the abdomen.
The people of a wound are like those with other wounds:
And when you cleanse all the sores with fresh water, so that they heal, if reset in this way, and sew up the wound.
And then apply fresh powder right away, so that they heal, unless there is an opening for discharge which should be treated with ointment until the wound heals. And straighten them out and make sure to clean them up Treat the wound as you would any other, until it is healed.
And if you have no medicine, then apply it as many times as necessary to make them heal properly, once each time until they are healed.
But if you do not have any other medicines in your possession that could treat the sores,
and if you suspect that the wound is causing some internal injury to the members of your body, it would be advisable for you to apply gentle heat or oil with a soothing fragrance.
And if the pain or injury is severe and frequent, it may occur when the blister bursts in the mouth, and especially it causes the injury to reach one's intestines.
And with large intestines, if it is severe, healing will be easier than from small intestines.
The small intestine is called "new" and cannot heal when it is inflamed; this is due to the inflammation of the veins that feed into it, and by its proximity to other organs.
If the blister bursts and goes into the intestine, while it is fresh;
If it is severe and blackened or blackish, then you should apply the leech that is black, so as to stop further bleeding because it has veins.
Then apply it in between the vein and put the blisters on the affected part of the wound until bleeding stops, then extract them when they burst or heal naturally.
From the passage provided: "Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie
When the intestines are short and the wound is small, if one cannot restore them with any treatment, for this reason I suggest that you resort to some remedy involving a lance.
The ailment was on the right side of the stomach, it became inflamed and became a fistula, from which there were discharges and wounds.
I applied the treatment until he was healthy, making no mistake in it.
And when I saw him stand up straight again, I doubted if his wounds would heal properly within his stomach. However, he was in better health afterwards, eating and drinking normally.
No one advised that when there is a small injury to the intestine, it should be treated in the same way: Press hard on the large testicles first, and then tie off the veins of the wound. If he pricks his mouth while doing so, make sure to tie it up with the two ligatures as well.
Then tighten it up firmly so that he can't undo it. After that, tie off the second testicle in the same way as before until all the wounds are closed. And let the wound heal
If the intestines are obstructed by a narrow tube that connects to another part of the intestine, it can cause no harm and is generally tolerated.
Remove the tube connecting to another part of the intestine if it becomes twisted or kinked. Then reattach the tube securely in place and remove the obstruction by cutting into the intestine and suturing closed the incision.
This manner of stitching is not used when following a different route or opening another way.
And the wound is large and deep when it occurs in one of the major intestines, unless there are no medical treatments available to heal it, then severity may increase
"from a fistula Wounds that occur on or near the abscess and when it is healed, if they are closed properly without bursting open again.
Fistulas are usually very painful and severe, unless there is no pain present or it can be covered with a flap of skin.
And once clear and bright no times short, and another time long enough
And when discussing the treatment of wounds, it is stated that all wounds should be cleaned properly and only then can they be treated effectively through one of seven methods. It means knowing how to clean wounds with water or by using corrosive substances. Or using corrosive substances. And when there is no blood clot present, and when cutting into the veins, so as to prevent bleeding. Or if it has too much swelling or swelling in the limbs, so that they do not move until they subside. And if the patient is poor and the material of poor quality, or that the treatment itself is inadequate in curing. Or if there is a contamination and it has become infected. For proper digestion, late health, and come with nature. he has pains or sores
I have tried all these remedies and signs, the medical treatments in this section.
"It is advisable for you to learn about the treatment of fistula, which is performed by skilled hands.
abscesses that arise in both legs. because it has fistulas that come from large veins, arteries, nerves, or the spleen, or in the intestines, or the bladder, any of these areas. and if it occurs at the place where the principal member is located, causing pain to that limb also.
All the fistulas that are of this sort are from pain and sickness, without there being any cure for it or understanding.
and if there is no fistula that comes out through the place I mentioned earlier, but you have tried a remedy or treatment before, it seems like this one could work too.
"and it is torn if one tries to force a search for a subtle vein, as the veins tend to split and become tortuous.
"and if one tries to forcefully search for the vein and does not move carefully when piercing through, as moisture from one cut can cause another, and it makes the area muddy.
"Then the patient should know if it is in his hand or shoulder, and feel for any pain it may cause when pressed with your hand, noting where it hurts.
"Once you truly know where it is and if it's a joint, nerve, artery, vein or any of the other things I have mentioned, use that knowledge to treat accordingly with the proper remedies for each.
"And when the fistula is well-formed and located correctly, if you cure it immediately, as soon as possible, and then apply moist heat to the fistula's base, so that the excess moisture drains away.
"And keep the hands clean with warm water, as long as it is clean.
"If not cleaned properly, if you burn it like we said, and the fistula's pores are damaged, then treat.
"Either your arm or leg is misaligned as we have stated;
"the eyes are blinded and they become corrupted if the blood flow is blocked entirely, then treat them with warm compresses as long as they remain clean.
"If not clean, and you want to remove the impurities; then wash your hands before performing any action:
When you find yourself at your lowest point, and everything seems lost, then seek restoration.
If it's in its proper place, that is good news. If not, seek another way to move forward. if there is no other way but by force of will.
and if the small part is corrupted, and you pull it out by its roots, as long as there's an instrument convenient for this purpose, or if all else fails, then don't leave yourself without one.
and if moisture does not agree with you, but fear and pain, until the end of time, endure it or die.
and if you cannot endure it for one hour more, and then you cut through the wound, leaving it open until the wounds are healed.
And if it is a large bone, like the leg or arm, then only straighten it as much as possible until it's healed, and then continue with the treatment.
And if there is a large part of corruption that comes out through the bone; If it's necessary to remove and clean all the corruption, then continue treating until it is cured.
And I will tell you about a fistula that appeared in his leg if you would like an example and help with your work.
He was a young man of around 20 years old who had pain in his leg due to dense scarring that extended down into the calf.
But he tried to stretch it out so that the sores and moisture in his calf would heal first.
And another year and no improvement was found in the art of healing hands, as long as I continued to call upon you and using your remedies that were prescribed for me. They became red with age but had a yellow color.
I put a tent on one of these stakes, and then I tested the stake by thrusting it into the ground; and found that some were equally well-placed with respect to each other across all parts of the leg.
I was trying to heal my hand but found a part of the bone and saw that it had been corrupted and injured, and there were signs of corruption at its denser parts.
I was trying to heal the corrupted bone but found that there was no more corruption elsewhere in the bone.
And continuing with healing remedies on top of each other, I could not hold it together anymore.
And then I continued and saw the bone in detail, finding that the corruption had spread to it and was continuing, and it was spreading, and I gave up on trying to hold it together any longer. "I cannot move my arm at all because of a lump on its side, it keeps swelling and I keep getting worse. "He was healed and became strong again; however he still had difficulty speaking due to the lump on his side, which could not be suffered with, and from fear of death that I had for him. For the evacuation of blood, it was entirely healed, and came out from beneath the bone a hard lump, and was in good condition without any injury or damage to all parts, except for the artery which arrived.
"And if you want it done in this manner: "Bind its hand to the top of the arm where it opens and command none that they stretch it upwards; "And put another tie on a larger one first and bind it under the arm where it opens, and stretch the hand towards you, such that when you pull the arm backwards, and find its lower end beneath your eye, it should not loosen the tie;
"And if he gets a bruise on his elbow, it swells quickly.
And they should also be careful to see and feel the injury, and even more times than that.
And if it gets infected, it won't open up, and the infection is in a place or a part of it as soon as you discover the wound.
And then spread to another part of it and cause the infection from there if you become infected in one place as we have mentioned.
And the infections spread to the joint, when a joint is infected and it causes infection in another part of the body.
And if there are no other wounds except those that we have mentioned.
And if the infection is on a finger or an elbow, you should cover it to prevent spreading and make sure that when it opens up you treat it. "And make it clear in all ways you know how to do so but your voice or nerve may not contradict that.
"And cutting into veins and the wounds by closing them are many, considering their location and appearance, their size and subtlety, their grandeur and smallness, their durability. "And to ensure that the instrument matches in shape with the opening of the body.
"And after using the instrument you will show it to him who has mastered this skill, considering his knowledge of medicine and the manner in which he treats diseases. "If you are using an instrument that is best for this task.
"The dislocations may occur due to internal swelling or external heat.
"And when you have healed the burn with medical treatment and it does not benefit at all if you wait until it reaches one end or the other where the corrosion starts, which is more grievous than a limb's defect.
"The signs indicate that the limbs become black and it seems as if they are burning, after which there is a chain reaction of member to member injuries occurring throughout the body.
"If you apply a fire treatment and it is through the percussion of certain venom glands, such as scorpion stings and poison ivy, then the corrosion occurs at the base of two, if applied, and there will not be space to come near enough for grasping.
"If it is brought close by the hand if the incision has been made, but if the incision has not been made, then the corrosion will not spread to the arm.
"If it comes near the arm if the cut occurs, or if the treatment is applied to an existing cut, but if there is no incision, then the corrosion will only affect the limb.
"If it passes through the body, that means death and there is no remedy for those who do not have a cure.
"And if the corrosion comes or touches. When it comes to the first joint, after the second.
If it touches or comes in contact with all parts of the body. And when it rises up into the leg if it contacts the knee joint.
If it comes from the shoulder, and there is no other way to stop its spread than by removing all of its venom.
If you want to restrain it or stop the movement of any limb, bind the affected limb tightly, and spread out some strips on top to create a barrier between them.
Then cover it or bandage the wound with gauze, so that no other infection spreads and you do not get another abscess on top of it.
When you prick it, if you apply fire treatment or put any powders restraining its movement.
After the treatment is complete, tie the member to something stable and treat it until it heals.
And you will hear that he arrived at home safely.
it had a pain that seemed to be burning, and the first step in treatment was to apply fire.
And when they felt the burn, if they covered their eyes, it healed quickly.
Then after they felt the burn and removed their hands, it came to me, and I put on something that helped stop the burning afterwards.
And he says I will not succeed if I do not have hope for what comes next. And if he loses his grip on it, because its strength is weak.
He loosened his grip and fell to the ground, and struggled to get up, and was saved.
And I don't have any further concerns as long as this continues to be treated appropriately.
No time has come for me to leave the court, and it seems much longer than I expected there was a lot of work done. And then he ran and jumped up onto the bow, and demanded to be shown the ways of his people like a servant does. And his skin which is of the type we described before, and are not covered with sores or ulcers, but rather have a disease called fistulas; this is healthy, but may also be called fistula.
"It is so long it grows towards your arm bone. It causes 'pinch' or pain.
"When cooked and cooled down, remove the outer layer gently as you would a bandage. "It is not to be eaten raw because it spoils easily.
"If the herbs spoil or become spoiled while cooking, and their skin becomes tough when cooked to a certain point, then the treatment for blistering should be:
"Look at their skin is large and has a pus-like odor. Then apply blistering cream made from Egyptian magic. "Take it, put it on a hot surface and cook until the medicine turns red. Then continue cooking in water as if you were boiling eggs.
"Then apply it according to your need and do so in hot water as if you were boiling eggs. And then hold the head still. And let them heal within two hours by stretching gently
Do this method as often as necessary, until the swelling has subsided and the pain subsides.
And you should not use fire cautery if the medicine is present and you are applying it on wounds or sores, wait until the ointment has dried, then blister, while holding steady so the blisters do not move until they are well healed.
And the blisters will not suffer pain, nor will the Egyptian ointment of fire and sulfur if you blister with fire or water, or have a slight touch of cold. Or you may blister with honey and wine mixed, as the honey has the property to soften and heal, and the wine drives away sin.
And when you have done this and find that the skin is well healed, if blistering with these things brings blisters to it, or if you see new blisters appearing, then treat them gently, using rose oil and wine.
Or you could try to diagnose and treat injuries or wounds.
And if the patient's ear is pierced and cannot close it properly, use a bandage to cover the piercing until it heals.
And if the wound is too large that only closing it allows some blood to escape or there are many injuries nearby which require immediate attention and treatment.
And if you cannot control the bleeding or it is flowing in a way that the vein runs to its lowest point, do not let the bleeding continue unchecked and apply pressure to stop the bleeding as quickly as possible. The arm or limb must remain still without any movement.
The arm or limb must remain still without any movement. And take conservative treatments to get the skin back to health and make sure all wounds are healed properly. Then apply the bandages tightly to support and align the arm properly while keeping it still. After applying them regularly for a certain period of time, remove the bandages once more to ensure all wounds are healed properly.
And the patient with an arm injury should avoid using that arm and seek medical advice if there is any pain or discomfort in doing so.
And if the patient feels pain or discomfort when doing so, and whether it is acute or not, and as the medicines are administered in different ways you notice how each one affects the arm after applying bandages, then approach the wounds.
Then close it gently morning or evening, when you dress the wound if another bandage is needed and reapply the dressing
"And the veins become thin after prolonged sitting and risk closing off circulation as the blood gets closer to it.
As well as those who treat their wounds with care, there are others who do otherwise.
And after eating they vomit up from within themselves in the morning, such that their insides do not empty out completely.
And they feel sick to their stomach, and it becomes painful when excessive medications are taken in wet or dry forms if the wounds do not heal, for there is much blood and this is the best remedy.
When treating a wound that has finished healing, they apply oil with salt and vinegar in wet form.
Then they anoint it and apply it.
And when the healing is done but not present or you take mirror and aloe and incense, and grind them up, and powder it over honey as it burns.
And then, in the end of his life, a healer may be called upon to heal the soul. with simple or complex remedies bruise them, and powder them, and put on the honey that I have mentioned, and apply it;
then the cure is finished, and no further cure is performed by this method, unless there are signs of corruption present, causing inflammation in the bone, or joints. if the cure for a fistula has been done as we have mentioned before.
Panic is an abscess that arises from the fist or palm, or through accident, and may be in other parts.
and when it is swollen, and one does not hold onto it if the abscess bursts, and continue to bleed profusely until they reach the base of the fist or palm.
A dislocation occurs when the joint moves out of its place, causing intense pain in the affected area and misalignment of both limbs.
When treating as we have mentioned in the previous paragraph, and if it is necessary to do so, then cauterize the wound after that. The fire cautery is useful for joints that are healthy, and the patient's eyes should be healthy as well.
And when the eyes are pressed, and closed tightly with a bandage, if it is necessary to massage the eyelid gently but firmly in order to open them wide without any damage or pain. Finally, for treating ailments of the eyes as long as they are healthy.
And when there is a dislocation in the bone, if it occurs and becomes fixed, as long as the joint is healthy, so that it cannot heal.
And if there are two dislocations, but they are not fixed together and can be seen separately, then the treatment is as long as both joints remain healthy.
And if it is severed, and bruised, and great pain occurs, then you must first cleanse.
And hold the stump tightly with a cloth while cutting through it, and be sure not to cut into the artery as the pain would be too great.
And if there is bleeding from an injury.
"The two joints that are missing from the hands due to accidents occur often, and in some cases one is missing at the root of the joint or both.
Do not move it unless you must, and for any dislocation or joint separation, that will come later.
The size of the one who is harsh should be light in nature. Cut it off at its base with a wide cloth.
The one at the root of the joint must be treated carefully: If you are uncertain about it.
In that case, it's recommended to first correct the dislocation at its base repeatedly and then apply pressure to stabilize the joint as much as possible, followed by treating it until it becomes stable
The neighbors come together through birth or injury, or the result of fire, or similar things.
If it is convenient to treat that sore place in the way of its natural shape: And let it lie still. Or, you can put something like this: "Or, place a thin strip of cloth between two slippery surfaces as long as they are smooth; if necessary.
If the neighbors come together with only one hand, then apply pressure to the dislocated shoulder as much as possible.
If the veins swell with melancholy-filled fluids and come to fill both arms;
And for those that go upwards to the feet and work and carry things; others also.
It is important that you do not give any enemas without consulting a doctor first, and then wash the stomach lining afterwards.
The treatment of fire is done in two ways One way is to burn the abscess and drain the black pus; The other method is to tie off the vein tightly so as to stop the flow of blood;
Cutting is done in two ways: First cut the arm of a very hot person deeply so that no hair is left, and then sew up the wound at its base near to where the elbow joins it.
Then apply the wound with black soot to one hand, and then to the other, as much as possible from each side of the abscess, so that it may heal quickly.
Then tie a black ribbon around his neck to keep him quiet while you attend to him
And start the evacuation and healing process once veins are clear, and no longer apply any medication.
The attendants will do it as follows Stretch the leg with an abscess if there is some hair growth, and then submerge it in hot water until it turns red, and heat the veins.
If there is no boil at the fire's end, and then you apply the cautery to the vein near its base with the same mixture of soot or from the part towards the shoulder.
As you apply heat to the skin, gently cleanse the affected area as much as possible.
It turns red and black, like a bruise turning white
Then apply the ointment, keeping it level on the skin, and then gently press at the affected point with three fingers.
Then gently cleanse the skin at the affected point until it stops, and then apply cool compresses if you have done so already, and press on another part just like before.
Then apply another piece, or more if you have more, and gently press it at the second point, then remove and cool just like before.
Then take off each piece in turn until all are removed, and press on.
And if you cannot remove and press as described above, prick the whole thread with two needles very strongly, then tie it tightly and cut off that hand. "And let it remain still, for if it moves at all, you cannot hold or lift it, and when that happens there is great harm.
"And once the wound has been treated, if you apply a mixture of fine wine and oil to the healing area. "And it should be applied until it is healed.
"And if the veins are contorted and torn, and the skin is torn together with them, but it does not move straight away as we have said, then you must stretch it gently but do not pull it straight. "As long as what has been mentioned previously remains unchanged.
"The form of the fire that is applied to the vein should be burned without any interruption so as not to cut through the vein.
"And it is a large burn because if it were subtle, then you would have burned through the vein. But rather, as we mentioned earlier and this is how it should be done.
This sentence means "This vein is straight through legs, without branches or roots, in the earth where there is no moisture.
And on the other hand, there is another part that occurs in the legs and it comes from a source near the skin if you go between the skin and the fur;
And when the beginning of this vein becomes inflamed and begins to swell, and as if a root of a plant is growing
When the dislocation occurs, it is advisable to wrap one end of a piece of leather around a finger and leave it on the leg, making sure that each time it does not come off until both ends are together.
If too long, if you cut a part of it off and wrap the remaining around your finger, and do not put it back on until both ends are together. Because if you cut through it, it will enter into the artery or vein and cause harm to the body.
For each of these things, it is necessary to treat them one by one, carefully and gradually.
And in no case should this vein be treated when it has been damaged or cut into, as once it is treated the wrong way to the point of causing pain and suffering.
And when dealing with materials that are dense or heavy, apply the treatment to the affected area and use gentle medications in order not to cause any harm, then treat as you would an abscess.
And in no case should the vein be treated when it is trapped or entangled with the joint of flesh, or within a fist and causes pain to move around, but does not cause any movement.
Treat as you would have previously advised.
Between flesh and bone This illness is known in our land as "flesh disease," because it often appears between the skin and bone, and moves up and down through every part of the body, causing pain to each member equally until they touch the skin or it retreats.
And there are discharges of certain humours, whether they come from wounds or burns or bruises or abscesses in the belly.
And doubts arise about its evil influence because when it passes through the body and rises to the head, it comes back down in oil form, destroying the oils. This often happens.
When you cure and bind it tightly, if not done properly will cause the patient to become worse as time goes on.
When you loosen the ends of a thick and straight thread, then tie it tightly in its own loop, and do not remove it until it burns to the bone.
And there are more serious damages that occur when oil comes out of them, as we have mentioned earlier.
If you see it coming or at the top of its oil form, hold tight on them and then tie it.
And it is advisable to use a remedy of gentle and soft foods for the sick person, so that their body can recover better from illness.
Of the pain that comes from ventsite This disease is called "waker" in our land and it comes to any member of the body, causing them to move around like a snake.
I understand that you want me to do this too. I called upon a female healer and she revealed in my hands, and saw a small tumor on the vein of both arms.
And afterwards, it grew like a thorn in my shoulder, more quickly than nothing, as if made of silver when I cut through the vein.
The pain left my arm and settled in my shoulder, then spread throughout the body, reaching to the other arm.
She told me that she would tear apart the body if I continued like this.
I was amazed at how it spread from joint to joint because I had never seen such a disease spread in this way before. For every ailment I've ever encountered, except for this one here that you mentioned, but I cannot help if I see it in her.
I thought this was because the woman had a weak heart and veins were exposed, which seemed to put pressure on her chest.
But they didn't seem to notice that as the reason for these who are healthy and have plump veins.
When you saw the cure for this ailment and felt that pain as we have mentioned, if it opens up and puts pressure on your chest repeatedly until the veins are weakened. Cauterize her arm.
If you can't see it in your eyes, if the cure for what causes veins to burst, if you use fatty pills and pills of serine, and other similar things.
Arrows are various depending on their likeness and where they enter the body.
The limbs are diverse because they have different lengths, sizes, shapes, and qualities. And those that have two ends or two points of the same length, like fingers and toes,
those who only exist in one member by different methods. Or on the principle of a single body part, such as the arm or leg, if necessary, but otherwise all members. When she is dislocated without any of these parts and the sign of death will be told to you later on, pay attention. if it is advisable for you to extract this arrow, as many die after multiple attempts. And when the sign does not show and the arrow is not visible to you, if necessary, take it out of your body, and cure the wound.
And when the sight is hurt and pierces the eye, and sits on top of the brain, causing blindness and swelling and redness around the eyes, and inflammation and pain in the tongue, and spasms and mixing of thoughts, and vomiting of bile. and there is also no feeling or sensation in the nose, or the ears and through it passes speech and voice And after leaving the white pus-like substance runs out of control causing great burning pain.
Once it appears that a cure has failed, and the abscess is too late to be treated
The sight of the abscess when it cuts or pierces is close to the sternum bone, and feels like being pinched in a hard place. And through this sight runs out of control causing great burning pain, and the black blood chills, and brings cold and fear, and fainting. "Many are likely to die.
The sign of the sixth day is when no relief can be felt from the itch and swelling of sores; the throat swells up, and the hairs turn white and cold; those who doubt will die.
And if they prick at their base, hold the eyelids steady so they do not move until they grow. and there is great pain and suffering. and the limb moves out of place.
The sixth day is when the sore covers both thighs or stomach; by chance there is no relief from eating food that would normally be digestible.
And if it enters the abdomen or any other part of the body through the intestines and there is no hope in its treatment, nor in extracting the arrow
And if they prick at their base in a vein, urine is forced out rapidly, causing great pain to the patient. The wound has become mortal.
The other limb, such as the arm and collarbone, the mouth, the shoulder blade, the elbow, the spine of the neck, the buttocks, the thigh, the leg, and the similar limbs are held in place by their respective joints, unless otherwise specified. When the arrow enters into a nerve or artery and does not enter immediately, as you may ask me to explain what I mean by this, that is, unless otherwise specified
He found it at the root of his nose, causing him to bleed badly from there. I tried this, and was blinded by the fat in the ear and became insane as a result.
And he tried to put on the shoulder a dislocation that caused him to prick in the fat of his ear and the paper was torn. The dislocation was reset but did not stop moving, causing great pain as it moved around in circles, touching all parts of the face.
"Then he was cured
He placed a gag in the patient's mouth and covered their ears
I shaved his beard, keeping it close-shaven as closely to my liking, and he was cured of the disease.
He placed a gag over his mouth so that only his throat could be seen or heard, thinking that he would die.
And when it was passed through the anus without his permission, I removed the gag and pulled him out, but no more harm occurred, and he was cured.
If a gag is placed over his mouth or nose, then there will be sores on the place where it came off from.
When he removed the gag and released his natural disposition, there was no more harm to any of his body's organs.
And another man, whose face was disfigured by a wound, suffered greatly. and he felt great pain for the rest of his life.
similar things (dislocations).
And he took an arrow to his left side and it entered into his brain and was descending towards the right part. And he survived the wound.
I went to seek out cures after she had been seen for three years. If many wounds are caused
I questioned her about everything but the mystery. and he felt a stabbing pain in his right ear.
I thought it was from the arrow wound so I applied a plaster made of wheat flour and water to try to stop it. But the wound kept worsening
But the wound kept worsening "I cleanse the wound with clean water and remove any foreign matter that may have entered it. Let the hair grow long as much as possible, so the arrow does not move.
It is reset (or: "put back" or "made whole again"). I cleanse the wound with corrosive medicine on hands gently, until it is burned off completely and then try to hold down the head of the arrow that is protruding out.
After cleansing the wound with corrosive medicine and closing it up quickly to prevent any dislocation of the arrowhead.
And afterwards bind the wound with four ropes for four months, and then tie them tightly on both sides to prevent any escape.
Until the arrowhead is completely removed and the wound heals, continue to tie it tightly with ropes according to this method that I described in this chapter; as long as you keep the stitches well made until the shape of the arrowhead comes out at the end of this chapter, so long as you hold onto it and stay by the wound.
And they say that his eyesight cannot recover He recovered and was cured of the disease
You have described the quality of extraction from any kind of arrow, as long as you use your technique and I do not object
But the master of the course will not approve or follow this strange and dangerous method that involves harmful things
I say that arrows do not enter into any member unless they are guided in one of these ways. Or through the left side or through another way.
The one that passes by the left side enters into the lung and never again;
If she does not pass now if she is allowed to stay with her hair standing up and without any obstruction in its path.
And if it is fixed into the bone, then it cannot move unless you loosen it a little.
And when it jumps and does not jump, if you gently pull on the edge with great force, then stretch it out slowly.
And if the arrow is shot through and cannot be seen by you unless you try to remove it... "And if you understand, without any available instrument.
"And if you are unable to feel the depth of the wound or the hardness of the arrowhead and cannot move your arm, as long as the injury is large.
"And if you touch the arrowhead and it touches your ear, causing you to hear a loud noise when removing or moving it, until you can hold them steady.
"And gently remind yourself not to break the arrowhead, as you try to remove it more firmly.
And if you fail once when trying to extract it because it is too hard to remove "And if any of these contraindications occur that contradict what we have said in our chapter on this subject:
"And remember to cut the nerves and vein carefully, making sure you do not cause any movement in the ear while removing it quickly or slowly.
And put the dressing as it was when the sutures were removed, because that is where the greatest help comes from, and if you do not use it then there will be no effect at all, since what it shows cannot go away.
The dressing that comes from elsewhere, or if there is nothing to be found, or the wound is swollen and inflamed in any place where it can be seen or felt.
until the stitches are taken out, then remove if done now.
If it is held in the bone, if you tightly grasp around it as it enters into the bone and enlarges the space inside, then extract it later on.
If she cannot stand it any longer, and continues the extraction until it is done.
And when he removes the dressing from the wound, he covers it with everything.
And when the dressing is tight and you want to administer something inside it (throughout), if he administers the instrument which fits, or the needle of the dressing penetrates into the vein.
And then come forth, and let it go through an instrument to remove what is stuck inside.
"And if the arrow is embedded in a vein, you should treat the wound as necessary.
And if the abscess is in the belly or bladder area, it causes pain and one may have difficulty coping with it.
And keep from touching veins and nerves, then remove the abscess, please be gentle. And the cure as long as it is well done.
The shape of stitches used for removing arrows is similar to that of a bird's beak.
And there are many ways to do this Many small ones or fewer larger ones depending on the size of the abscess.
The shape when bending occurs similarly to how it happens with the tip of a needle, by touching at the tip of the wound.
Some veins that are not stiff are XXXI and some may be flexible enough to remove; it is important to know this. The second ones after the ears which are attached by a small piece of skin connecting them; And the two arteries that are in the temples appear; "And both ears that are pierced with the same arrow, which are called 'aspires'. "The ear on the forehead. "The outer ear near the nose. "And two ridges, which are called 'columella.' "The upper and lower teeth, which are also called the 'ague-cheriche'. "And the back of the tongue.
"The teeth that are commonly considered to be 'V' shaped, in this sense.
"One is the frontal tooth, which lies near the cheek and they are called the 'upper front teeth'. "The middle one is called 'fascia', and it's composed of the frontal tooth and the lower teeth, and they are called the 'middle teeth'. "The base of the thumb and little finger are often positioned in opposition to one another, and they may be bent such that their knuckles touch; this causes pain.
"The upper arm is between the ear and the nose. If there are two tears.
"In the leg and foot there are three bones: "The first bone is the sesamoid bone between the big toe and small toe. The second bone is the tarsal bone at the ankle. "And the third bone is the navicular bone in the other ankle, as it is called 'the lesser'.
"The same thing applies to the other leg.
"Those bones are after the ears and nose, which help in hearing and balance.
"The quality of the bones that I mentioned before, like how you would say, and it is that your head moves in a way which makes them feel rough. "The muscles surrounding the eye are relaxed until they see something behind their ears. When you know that there is someone else in your room, and if you sense them even from afar.
Then take the needle and prick it into your vein just at the elbow, then gently pull your hand all along the vein up to the shoulder, and clip off any hair that might get in the way, and make sure there are no sores or cuts on your arm as you go.
Then tighten it and hold tightly until it is straight;
And I have mentioned the incision and fire cure in this chapter first.
The veins inside the temples are severed when going to an elderly person or priestess, and so on. And they become blind with tears as eyes.
"You must give first aid as soon as possible And if the pain worsens when moving your arm or leg. You must keep your other hand steady and calm.
Then gently stretch the arm up towards your other index finger and withdraw it gently, then straighten the elbow, just like you did with the other hand.
After that, put your other arm around the patient's shoulder and hold it for an hour then cover them both. And leave it in place as long as you can keep it still.
And we have spoken of their beginning and end, and the extraction; this is what I meant to translate.
The pain of the front arm is equal to that of the upper arm and shoulder, and migraines and bruises.
"And if it strays from its course when turning, The instrument called a "forearm stretcher" whose shape is
With the point against the vein and firmly against your hand or any other thing, so that they may be drawn out in accordance with the quantity you see. Then release from around the vein and hold it steady until it is completely removed without any pain or injury.
Therefore, only keep them short enough so that they do not flare up again. And in the end of course because it is pressed tight and by chance breaks the hairs when it is subtle.
The veins of the second arm are in two parts if help is given to them, and towards their end, and towards their root, and towards their origin inside the body, and diseases of the flesh.
And when the qualities of their health fail them as they grow strange to themselves, tearing off any links
Then their health worsens, and eventually they lose the ability to see clearly, because there is no cure for it. And when its flames are subtle, often breaking through even a small opening.
Then they make corrections to the wound as much as necessary, and then treat with their own skin, and apply ointment well.
The quality of their vein is worth much, and they have many benefits, and there are various diseases that arise as it ages, such as migraines and tumors.
And their quality of health is such that the veins become strange to themselves, and they tighten them with gentle force on their own, and hold out a subtle flame long enough, until there is space between the two nostrils, because it does not open completely, and therefore it starts to correct itself now.
And do not force it too much, make corrections according to its need, then tie a bandage on it, for it is most likely to heal quickly.
This remedy is used to treat second-degree burns, and for the start of ulcers, and many diseases, and it heals wounds and blisters;
The quality of this remedy is that the hairs are removed from both sides together, as we have said.
And if the main burn is on the head and the second one on the chest, then first treat the main burn with a large amount of water, and then apply cold compresses immediately, or as much as necessary.
And afterwards treat the second burn on another part of the body, then bandage it up immediately, so that the hairs do not stick. And leave it so that there is no pain in the morning.
The liver The bile of the liver is harmful to both the mouth and the eyes, causing corrosion or ulcers in it.
And you will see how healthy his leg looks when he stands before you and holds it steady as I said earlier. Then roll the leg and look at what happens when one is lifted to your right and the other to your left; by doing this you can see that they are both black veins.
If one or the other is not seen and you are in doubt, if the larger of these two parts is to be examined first and all others should be done as well because that's a common way to do it.
The bile of the liver is harmful to both the mouth and the eyes; if one ulcer appears in The health of the veins that are on one's leg is checked after the health of the head and throat, which is at its very top and diseases in the ears, and diseases in the mouth.
And the quality of staying still is that your fingers should stay between your hands in front of the sun, gently touch it and look for a black vein.
And when both are still and not pressed too hard, then you're touching the arteries.
The veins that are commonly seen share these two characteristics:
or when you prick them anywhere on the face, and if they're small and close together, then it's called "anezyl". And are large and subtle depending on their size and closeness of the veins. The form of cautery that is being described here is a fiery one.
And when opening large, obvious deep wounds, or those containing large lumps and troubles; it's the form of olive-colored vein.
It is more subtle and recommended for treating finer hairs, where there are smaller sores or lesions.
The veins from the elbow, which is one of them, helps with ailments that are in the throat and nose, chest and belly.
And it is advisable for him to rest his arm And if he pierces the artery, and many wounds come, as I said earlier. do not let it burn him, but rather when ever possible.
And if the lower limb does not open clearly, if you wish to remove it, and then cut another one instead. You can either drain him completely or remove his arm; it opens clearly. and you hold the flame steady if possible.
And if the lower limb is injured and you wish to remove it, then cut off his arm at this point as well. After removing the lower limb, tie up the arm with a bandage and hold the vein steady. "Do not break it when you see it bent, as it is an artery: "The latter part of that sentence does not translate into English.
"And if you see it as in a child's urine, which is red and subtle, this means it is from an artery: "And if you find that the artery was injured, leave your hand in place and hold your other hand steady until it stops bleeding: "Hold both arms still, and let them go slowly, but do not move the hairs on them;
"And if there is fear of movement, it will not stop until it has healed completely:
"And if the artery is injured and reopened, you must apply pressure to stop it from bleeding again. The doctor will come when they arrive: The
Take a piece of flesh, and then hold it in place with the other finger.
If done correctly. Then it doesn't work and causes wounds to bleed;
And the bleeding becomes too strong due to little movements of the wound or both arms.
The vein's health deteriorates if it is treated with harsh methods that affect both the upper and lower veins because they are composed of the base and the head.
It is advisable to gently massage the nerve that runs from the eye to avoid too much pressure and prevent injury or bruising.
And do this nerve gently many times if it doesn't open in any way because of its subtlety. "And then, gently push your arm.
And if there is a vein between them, as long as it takes hold.
The surgeon for the cerebral palsy should try to straighten the affected limb and assist with the eyes.
It is advisable to burn only the affected limb or the affected ear because this is the safest option as it does not damage any nerves or arteries. However, if you wish to make it easier for him (the patient), and do nothing if the first attempt fails; And in case of swelling or bruising, only apply ice packs during the first few hours after the procedure, but there is no need for anything else
The quality of the vein is as follows:
The first thing you should know when healing from surgery is that recovery will take time to ensure health and prevent future complications.
And if the operation was done on one of the three veins mentioned below; It's important to know, quickly, firmly, and decisively And when it is necessary to start feeding them again after weaning, and gradually increase their intake as they grow older.
Feed them the first time in the morning or afternoon; wait two hours or three hours later to feed again.
The treatment does not have a specific duration, but when you are feeding them or giving medicine, in all hours and at any time.
And do not feed the infants until they are 4 years old, but only from every four months after that up to seven years. Do not repeat the remedy for those who have been treated previously.
And when any one is to be fed, in whatever manner it seems fitting, if necessary you may purge the bowels with a light enema, so that no excess of poison from outside enters through the intestines into the main part of the body.
"Do not touch those parts of the body which are too sensitive to touch, nor is there any difference between them, so that if they are injured, do nothing.
"After colic and vomiting, and pain in the stomach, and multiple times of defecation, and multiple times of intercourse with women or men, and excessive sleep, wakefulness, and joy, until virtue is exhausted.
"Then subtlety of humors, by foods and beverages and by medicines, you will find relief.
"Then between a bath and a cold, if nothing else is available to soothe the pain in your veins, then hold the cloth tightly over the third wound as we have said.
"And keep the work from your hand and from your head, and luxury, and similar things.
"And let it rest and be quiet, and make sure the injuries are higher than what has been healed before, apply a second or third bandage to hold in place until it is too swollen or painful, then you must remove it gently.
And hold tight to your hand while holding it steady with your other hand.
Then apply a small amount of oil to the burn site and instruct them to hold their hand steady while holding it still with the other hand until they want to stop burning, as long as they do not move or feel pain
Then there are times when the pain is like threads on the finger, and if any of these veins become inflamed, should they try to hold still their hand while removing the fire, as long as they do not move it or feel pain. And if their hand swells excessively due to a too severe burn, then they should seek medical attention immediately in these situations.
If the hand swells for the first time it is good; However if this continues even after a short while or becomes intense, then they should seek medical attention immediately.
And if he loses his breath or goes into shock through any accident
do not enter wounds again until the patient regains consciousness.
and if the pulse is weak or difficult to feel, but you doubt whether he has not lost so much blood as you have seen, then tighten the tourniquet all at once.
and if it is weak or there is no pulse, do this: put a tourniquet on quickly. because this often happens when the wound is small.
If you see the wound bleeding profusely and cannot re-start the pulse, put a small amount of olive oil on it, as it helps seal the artery and is more effective than other oils.
And apply a small amount of olive oil to all wounds that you know how to clean the veins, in order to close the wound properly.
"And when it is placed back onto its place. It becomes too heavy and splits apart if there's too much weight put upon it.
And if it comes across a large stone frequently when opening a vein, even though the cut is small and clean, but holds onto the joint for one hour.
And after the treatment of a vein injury, you should check that it does not dislocate afterwards or move irregularly. You must ensure nothing is placed onto the joint or mirror that has been cleaned gently and calmly, causing it to move around excessively, or something similar.
And frequently the abscess appears on the elbow area.
When you place your hand upon it and observe its appearance carefully while applying light pressure to the hand if an abnormal appearance is seen. "Do not touch anything of what we have said" is the correct translation.
The patient should rest as much as possible while recovering from another injury or illness.
And apply some cold water according to the quantity of the abscess, and the color of it.
If the wound is black when it is opened up until it becomes red. And if you see a large one, let it be as small as possible. If the wound is too deep, cool it down.
And for one who knows how to extract the abscess, and has mastered the art of making wounds larger, so that flames spread more widely.
And for one who is weak, do the opposite, and should rather make it heal quickly and steadily, and he must strengthen himself by crossing over, not injuring.
This manner of healing is saved from burning sores and swelling nerves, and it is good that the healing should not be too long or too wide.
And to one who needs rest from their wounds, it is advisable to give them sour oranges juice. If the fire is intense or there are four times, it is advisable to apply cold compresses and soothe them with honey syrup, either plain or aromatic with spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chicory, as well as a fragrant syrup.
And if you apply it to the skin after a burn injury, after removing any pus, it is advisable to cool with a poultice made from fragrant syrup, and use other things we mentioned in the previous chapter for blood evacuation.
And if it is necessary to apply more times and the wound continues to heal, as long as its virtue continues to work steadily according to the amount of its power.
And if it is necessary to apply more times after the first wound and you have strong arms, if healing occurs within 7 hours after the first wound or immediately after a new hour.
And who will become healthier from another point of view, if he must heal his second wound or the third one.
Because the wound is inflamed from intense heat, it will cause fever. if it's necessary to apply a large amount and stretch the patch as much as possible. then apply the cure to all of them and put your hand over their eyes when they see it so that death does not come from a distance.
and do not worry if you see other wounds in the same arm and perform another incision so that the wound is closed tightly by pressing down on it. If he becomes weary, let him extend his arms because it would not be good
And leave them as long as the second time passes. Or if you prick at the base of his finger, as long as he holds steady and does not move until it grows, and presses gently to make it firm
If his body is weak and you leave the incision open without closing it gently, as long as the abscess remains calm.
And if a second attempt is needed, either to remove the stone that was dislodged or another vein/arm/leg as necessary.
The arm that is affected must be immobilized in order for it to heal properly due to the complexity of its composition
And the manner of doing this is that he holds his hand in hot water until all its nails are red.
Then let him wash gently as if to pierce it well, then cleanse it now through and across, without making it too wide or long;
And let him prick large and press well on the joint of his arm, and he cannot remove it if he resets his hand in hot water, and leave it in there until you have enough.
And when it is done, if you do not remove your hand from the hot surface because you put more burn in it than you would have had.
The veins of this vein are more valuable than all other veins, as there is no artery or nerve in it.
This vein from the hand's right side can heal all diseases of the liver, and that is its way (to cure).
Hold tight to the hand and keep it in hot water as long as the vein is closed, if you want to use this method. And when finished, and if there is nothing wrong with all things, then do it again.
Do not apply too much heat, as the nerve endings are very sensitive to touch, and then remove your hand from the hot surface so that it does not freeze in the wound, and cannot be removed.
"And when you have treated the sore as much as possible, if it is still painful and stubborn, then take a second application.
"He will cure himself of the ailment in his own hand if it is a disease of the flesh; and do everything as I have already told you to do on your right.
"He will cure himself of any ailment that affects the body if it is a flesh disease; and do everything as I have already told you to do on your right.
And the quality of his sanity is such that the veins beneath him become hot and tighten around the base of the vein. The arm becomes swollen at the shoulder, and the veins there grow tight with pain.
If it is in his head or above the shoulder where it hurts more, then that part swells up significantly.
And if you hold onto his veins while he writhes in pain as much as possible and continue to apply pressure steadily.
Or if the flames ignite during this process.
If they cannot be corrected immediately after repositioning, leave them undisturbed while seeking medical help.
And when you first apply pressure, remember to reapply after a short time because of the pain involved in doing so.
Do not doubt yourself if we have said it before, and when you do this to any other part gently.
Sciatic vein pain is in the calf and shoulder area, and it's often caused by inflammation.
And the quality of his sanity is such that if he has an abscess between or below the shoulder, you must twist it to extract him because otherwise the vein will not open.
"And if you open it up such that all its parts are exposed to view, "...and then be gentle with it as it is in pain and may require support.
"...and then be gentle with it as it is in pain and may require support. "If you do not use it gently, for fear of causing further injury or pain when opening or removing it.
"...and then do as much damage control as you can, and remove the link while keeping it steady and holding tight, "It is now safe.
"The veins are cut through bone or sinew;
"...and the extraction is made in two ways: "Or by cutting and drawing out the vein, or piercing.
"...the extraction made by piercing is done in two ways: "Either it is heated up or the heat is applied;
"And separation which is made by cutting or extraction of abscesses should be done in four pieces to prevent the joint from being dislocated. "And other separations are made through the neck. "The second separation is made through two holes in the neck. "And the exit of the abscesses from the nose. "And the exit of the second space. "And the exit of the sores. "The exits are made through both arms. "The exits are made through both legs. "The exits are made through the two heels.
"The separation cannot treat abscesses that are sparse in the cloth, and therefore it is not forbidden to do the same with veins. "It should be used only for a short time and does not cause any harm, in no illness that comes from excess, as long as the skin is healed.
And it is necessary to perform these procedures either before or after the month has ended, at dawn and in the evening, every day until you finish.
because when one knows how to sew properly, if he is patient enough;
and if the fire gets too hot in their face or head, or at the ears, and blind them.
and those who get a burning sensation in their mouth, lose their tongue, and start to bleed. And if one is unlucky enough, they feel, see, hear, and sense pain; or death and similar things.
This sentence translates to: "And when we see these signs, and especially after three hours of the day.
The patient who receives help with the fire treatment... which comes after the evacuation of all the limbs.
and this evacuation should be in the absence of a cerebral stroke, or those with a cold constitution should avoid it, as it causes great harm.
And because he is to cover it with ice
And those who are well advised to do so should place their head slightly lower in order to prevent dislocation
He is vomiting because of the severity and depth of injury in his chest and abdomen.
And it's important to breathe slowly but deeply if she holds her breath too long, as this may cause damage to the esophagus or stomach
The vomiting is severe and painful in the chest, causing constriction of the esophagus, and may cause damage to the intestines.
It is important that he commands his stomach to release and hold off on vomiting, not covering the artery, so as not to cause damage from bleeding.
Vomiting may occur in the mouth and is accompanied by oral lesions, such as oral ulcers. And it is from this level of veins.
The dislocations of joints are an illness caused by heat and swelling.
Dissections are as dangerous as those in the upper arm because they cut through large veins.
Instruct the patient not to press too hard as it may cause damage to organs and blood vessels.
The dissection which is into the shoulder has two purposes - to remove any abscesses and to ensure that it's done correctly without damaging blood vessels. And if they are subtle, there would be a rupture. This could result in large wounds.
Dissections of the legs should not be done too quickly because they can cut through all of your veins and arteries, causing severe pain from the neck down to the feet.
They are in the area of the second vein and second calf, causing them to weaken your body after a long time, leading to fainting spells more often.
Here is the translation: The method to apply a bandage is to put it on first as quickly and smoothly as possible, and then fasten it firmly, and remove it gently, repeating this process continuously until you reach your target color of red and fade out.
Then after that, apply more bandages and take care to arrange them properly on the body because they are essential for support; in particular for wounds. If you only want one bandage then make sure it's wide enough to cover a large area or many small ones. And gently squeeze them in place.
If the first bandage is not strong enough then you should apply another one as well. The first time to make it smaller and tighter around the wound.
If the second bandage is still not strong enough then apply another one as well.
And when we want to draw out a small piece at a time and only once if we simply use one bandage. And if we want to cure the illness, then let's begin.
And if his heart is strong and steady, then let's begin. It could be with rose oil or almond oil, or seed of cucumber oil;
Or if it is from lavender oil, or lilies, or chamomile, or any similar oil.
"And if you apply excessive amounts of fat, cold, or oil-based substances such as balsamite, or other oils which may freeze,
"And when you apply a soothing char and wide pores, it is not advisable to put oil on them; instead, wash after applying cold or hot water, or egg yolk, or mullein, or porcelain, or similar substances.
"And those who have issues with moisture, such as itching, or abscesses, and similar things.
Those with excessive fluids may be treated with wine vinegar or sweet vinegar, or a tea of anise or chamomile, or others.
Do not sit in the bath before washing it off, but after washing it off wait one to two hours;
Do not sleep right away afterwards, and you must rest when you should shave, as well as when it is shaved off.
And beware of those who are colic (suffering from) colic, and whose anus is too inflamed. If it's advisable to eat cold foods, such as spinach, lettuce and cucumber, among others. And drink ale (beer)
And drink ale (beer) And those with a cold complexion should drink honey syrup and musty wine which is between old and new, eat some food, eat bread, cheese, oil, fish, eggs, and poultry.
And those who are about to vomit should drink more than they eat (to prevent vomiting).
And it is advisable not to scratch or itch in front of the mirror when you are about to vomit, or afterwards, so as to maintain the alignment of the limbs. And be gentle with those who are hungry, but do not advise those who are already full.
The wounds that are being made to bleed are those that have been placed upon the liver and spleen, and abdomen, and buttocks and thighs and head and neck, because this member cannot withstand the stabbing of another part of the body, nor will it occur if one tries to stab a wound from a wound on the same side;
Because of the viscosity inside the member, as we place wounds upon the belly and buttocks to hinder movement.
And pain when it has an ulcer or stone, either by its attractive nature to attract the extraction, or by removing the source of the ulcer.
And it is done when we place upon the liver and spleen as they retain the moisture only. It is always done together with fire, and never alone unless it has been burned for herbs, or to remove stones in that way.
The form of venesection (venipuncture) administered is as follows:
And the patient must put his hand wide and half palm forward, so that it may strike a thorn without fear, or of rain, for if he does not hold back from striking at an arrow,
and in cases of injury by fire or iron, for putting a tourniquet on, and there are large and small according to the severity and nature of those who take them.
as the veins of children are different from adults, and thin ones from fat ones.
And so it is necessary to put this tourniquet on the limb
by using either a tourniquet made of linen or another material, and place it around the vein at its furthest point away from where you want to apply pressure.
and then place it around the limb, making sure that where you apply pressure matches what we've said, if when you see it, or its gone wrong, and remove it.
"And fasten it down firmly while facing forward, and repeat until you feel sore.
"In the treatment of pleurisy where there is often no coughing or difficulty in breathing, and it is mild only when the chest is opened up gently, and held only on one side.
"This means:
"No stitches are necessary if there is no difficulty breathing in the body parts or when ventilating them gently and smoothly. "And in the eyes you must close them tightly so they do not move until they grow.
"The quality of the user is that whenever you remove stitches which are soft and neat from the opening, if they are pricked.
"And after removal hold them gently until they become closed up tightly without any leakage anywhere. "And please hold down the arm and wrist until it is red.
And when they are smooth and hard, you may then apply pressure, as this is recommended afterwards.
If not, if the joint becomes loose again, gently stretch it and hold for a moment to release tension.
And if the joint becomes too loose after an extended stretch in cold water, gently squeeze it and hold until it is fixed.
And if the joint becomes swollen or inflamed due to bruising, or from swelling and similar things, hold it fixed until it stabilizes.
Or if you put heat on the joint as it becomes stiff and releases tension over time until it has completely released.
And if you have a second injury to your joint.
"When the veins are pricked and cause bleeding, hold down the affected area to prevent further injury.
"When the hairs prick at their base, either hold them down gently or tie a strip around to prevent further injury.
The book begins with an introduction about injuries Injuries are often necessary in the art of medicine and their healing is restoration.
"When the patient receives this treatment for the first time and does not find anything in any of their previous books or letters.
"This is also strange to us here because we found nothing related in our own works.
"I have studied and practiced medicine for a long time, through the books of my predecessors, I tried experiments myself, and by following the customs of life.
"In this chapter I have described what is contained in it and laid out its contents at the end; I explicitly explained the forms of the remedies to be practiced as we do in these two preceding chapters.
Here is the translation line by line: "The prologue of this book introduces the speakers and explains their role in it, and proceeds to teach them how to use it well, if they are skilled enough and have learned its noble art.
I say that if there is a break or dislocation or sprain comes from any of the joints in the body, it should be treated immediately by supporting one end and holding the other firmly, so nothing else happens, even if the limb is bent forward or backward. or if there are excessive swelling or stiffness
and if there is excessive swelling or stiffness, it's important to have cold compresses on the affected areas, and avoid applying heat as much as possible, do not fill your wounds with raw meat unless you are absolutely sure that this is necessary for treating the wound.
if the hair of the affected area becomes very long and tangled, it should be trimmed gently to prevent injury.
And when the blisters begin to heal, if it is convenient that one narrows the vein causing large swelling, or viscosity, if accompanied by itching and redness, sores, pain, fever, and pus discharge, and in the fish flesh, and boils, and similar things occur When a part swells up very quickly, it may indicate that there is an infection present.
And it should be noted that broken veins and capillaries are unable to heal properly after the fact due to their nature as soft tissues. Additionally, if they are too tender themselves.
"And it will come undone when the bone is broken or dislocated. "It should be left to heal naturally and not forced with large amounts of force as mentioned earlier.
And that blisters come in many forms.
The first sentence does not translate directly into English but rather gives a clue as to the meaning of future sentences. There was a dislocation that had gone too far and caused great pain when trying to straighten it as the joint size made it difficult to do so
There was a dislocation that had gone too far and caused great pain when trying to straighten it as the joint size made it difficult to do so If there is a dislocation accompanied by an injury, or if the dislocation is very small.
And that way the engine was repaired properly and its instrument cleaned according to what it had instructed.
"And when a bone is broken then the process of healing begins and if it is properly treated with force.
"And when there is no twisting or misalignment of the bones and the patient experiences little to no pain, then there will be no break.
"However, even though healing can still occur with slight twists or fractures but it may heal stronger than before. If only you move your arm now with the medicine that comes after, and then hold it gently now
"And if the fracture is in the shoulder area and involves both joints, it should now be treated with great care as the previous text suggested.
"And hold your arms steady if they prick at their base.
"Then, gently and slowly remove the bandage, as repairs are usually easier than those that come with scars.
"Hold steady if necessary afterward.
"If the joint is broken in two parts, hold tight with your hands or both wrists, and do not move the arm.
"And hold the member to its natural shape as much as possible when the broken parts of a joint are healed, by making sure that your actions in healing do not cause further harm.
"And gently and carefully align both joints back to their original positions.
"Hold tightly if it seems necessary:
"If there is too much swelling and the restraint cannot be maintained, do not press excessively as those who come from their wounds with heat and contraction in the limb, if we want to.
"And when the limbs are at rest and the pain is good and they do not move, nor watching nor sleeping, nor turning or any other way. "And be sure that the limbs feel no pain. "But when there is no more pain, and it's time to put in place the necessary arrangements so that no more pain occurs.
"And be sure that the limbs feel no pain. "But when there is no more pain, and it's time to put in place the necessary arrangements so that no more pain occurs. "And keep them properly positioned as you straighten out any twisting and turning as they come back into place.
"Qualify each broken member according to what I've said.
The dislocated limbs may vary in size, shape, and length.
"If there are many members such as the brain and two others like these: "And gently remove any loose or small ones. And if they are large enough to reach your wrist and thigh.
If you need to remove a very large and hard one, as the larger ones can pierce through all of your arm or leg, and hold it tight so that it cannot move at all.
Then loosen the smaller ones in three or four passes depending on which limb it is in, and tighten your hand around it after each pass until you reach its end, then release some of the tension as you go towards where the break occurs.
And gently loosen it a little at a time as you approach the greater part of its length, then release another one and repeat this process until you reach the end of the break.
Then return to the part above the break and hold it gently but not too tightly nor loosely as we said in our previous answer.
When you put pressure on the eyes of a cloth or linen as long and even as possible, hold them steady until they prick at their base.
If there is bleeding or bruising, do not press on the eye but rather leave it alone and allow any injury to heal naturally.
Then hold the eyes steady and ensure they are at least as wide as a finger's breadth if possible; or from which you may see threads of cloth or veins in them, so that it is clear.
But it is advisable to make the eye with which you are making the incision larger and more wide than others.
And so long as possible, just like when treating any other part of the body. Then hold them steady just like you did in the previous incision and tie a thread gently around it if possible. In the beginning of a dislocation
And it is desirable that the bones be soft and not too hard or too soft, but at an appropriate size.
If the bones are too large, if you want to make the wounds heal faster and it's a good thing because there will be no healing if it is too delicate, but it should have between two and two spans of space
After the dislocation has been reset and is properly aligned, if you apply heat to them after being cut or bruised, they will be still, unless there is some other cause for concern.
If the wound is with frostbite and the ears are torn off, I will tell you the treatment after that.
And if it's necessary to restrain those members from being separated immediately. Because when the limbs are large, it is not advisable to put them at a time of less than seven or eight days or more depending on their size.
And for the plastering of any fracture, dislocation, and torsion
And it is that you take from the flour which holds well to the millstone and mix with plenty of oil, and put this mixture so thin but not too thin or too thick, and use, as it is a common method for plastering fractures in different places, most especially women and children because there is neither too hot nor too cold.
Another way to correct dislocations, fractures, and twists is... ... apply ice packs, bandages, and adhesive tape. mirror and mirrors; until VIIII add powder to it and mix well with water. if the face is warm, then apply this ointment; as it has good composition and heals broken bones quickly, worth its price.
Another way to correct twists... apply ice packs; mirror and mirrors; until VI hours; with oil or water and apply it well, and mix it properly.
Another way to relieve sprains and bruises on the bones is... "Leave it as is,
"The arm cannot remain still, but it is good to put pressure on the base of the abscess, and then release slowly.
"Another way to splint the broken bones. Take dried figs and dry soil, grind them together, and make plaster bandages for wounds.
"Another way to splint an injured bone is to prevent further injury while the bone heals. Take the root of a medicinal herb, chamomile flowers, violet petals, flower of violets, flour of wheat and chickweed together:
grind it up, mix with wine, and apply to the affected parts with moist ginger paste or similar things, and apply often.
"Another way to splint more than once is when an abscess comes back during bone restoration. Take the root of a medicinal herb, flaxseed, balm, mallow and chickweed, and violet flowers and chamomile together: grind it up, mix with salt water or honey water as needed based on the condition of the member and rest period,
"Here is the translation
"And it seems strange that one must put the joint back in place for restoring; use heat gently as you would with oil and incense, and similar things, if we have mentioned.
Another way to heal is by removing the pain break the flesh into pieces, or pierce the eye, and blindfold oneself, and so on, and it is inflamed, and he bleeds easily, and it causes damage, and there is no cure for this
After a little while, and you take care to keep the eye from causing any pain, do not move the eyelids. Do not remove it by hand. The pain comes back to the place where the itching was, or from a scratch that itches, if you itch, and remove it now, heal with this.
And apply something wet to soothe the itchiness and cleanse it gently, and plunge in cold water until the itching stops, then stop the pain. Then leave the limb to rest for an hour, then apply a dry cloth, wet it in cold water or oil and tie around tightly until you're sure of the bandage.
"The swelling of a limb occurs, bringing pain with it. Gradually increase the heat and compress gently, without restraining too much because you are afraid to cause more harm. "Gradually decrease the warmth until it is just right.
And if you see that the arm is heavy and painful, swelling occurs when it comes back to its place again, so make sure everything is in order, whether you have done it right or wrong, once only.
"And if nothing of what we have said comes to mind in the next three or four days or seven days. "After every twenty days, as long as the patient is improving and getting closer to recovery.
"Don't hold it back more than before, increase its strength. As I mentioned earlier.
"If you see the joint becomes worse and still not improving then seek help immediately. "Always gently heat up the dressing whenever you dress it and every time it becomes sore or burns a bit.
Because of this injury to the member, it is painful for the patient when they move it in any way, and they suffer greatly from restoring the limb.
It is bad, and if there are many wounds then it causes great pain, and I will do nothing else but remove the limb directly.
There are various types of injuries with different causes,
because there are fractures caused by blows from a sword, and collarbones that break through the bone to where it is below the shoulder, if they have done much or few; And for this injury of breaking the "collarbone
Or they may have broken the bone from an external blow to the shoulder, and it is called a complete break;
There are large and small injuries with this type of fracture
"And if there is a blow from the side, or from behind, against the heel of the foot, or in any other manner.
"And if there is a fracture that occurs in the skin over the bone or under it, and the resulting wound can be large or small.
And if there is a fracture that has been put into the bone in such a small place as to be called "clavicular,
and if the injury was made by a blow to the bone or by a sharp object, or in any similar way, and it enters into the bone, and you hold onto them as tightly as when you put on your gloves. If between the bones
and if they have more swelling in their arms or legs compared to when as an infant.
and the bone breaks into pieces, which heal quickly as soon as they are separated. And I will speak to him in his native language.
And we know all the ways of fractures by dragging them back to their place, and through the questioning that is there; and through the cutting that is done with it.
Capillary fracture occurs when one uncovers the bone, and feels for any break inside of it, if there is one black one.
In the treatment of a fracture: be cautious when handling any broken bone; if you see a serious accident such as vomiting or loss of consciousness, immediately seek medical attention and call for help; the eyes should stay still until the healing is complete and the wounds are healed.
And if you do not see a serious accident happen, but seek immediate medical attention anyway as treatment begins.
And when the limb is first dislocated and continues to be so after repositioning it as necessary, you should hold the bone firmly in place while applying the fourth splint.
And if you apply the seventh splint but it is displaced again, be sure to hold it firmly in place while seeking medical attention as there could still be an accident that we mentioned earlier.
And if the bone fractures come out when you pull off their clothes; if it is convenient for you to hold onto the separated part.
And when you find the cause of the swelling in all its forms that you know, put ice to it, and dress the wound more gently than usual, and be careful not to damage any other part as a result. And keep applying ice until the pain subsides, and then you can move on with treating it Then start to open up the wound in any of these ways
One way is to make a narrow slit directly before it, which would be this form
And then comes another thing more great than this one
The second way is to cut out a number of pieces, some narrow and some broad, with points if you have them, so they are made of iron.
Gently applying ice, make sure not to damage the wound.
"And the joints are stiff and painful. If you gently press on them with your fingers, make sure not to cross over their center, otherwise they will not move.
"It's important to have more than one way of testing the joint, for example if you apply pressure on it from different sides.
"One method is pressing gently from both sides; another method is applying pressure with your fingers. The third method involves tapping or striking against something hard.
"The quality of testing the joint is that you hold it and then release your fingers. The joint should move when released.
"After releasing the joint for a moment and then hold it again gently. Do this until you see the space between your fingers where the joint is located, and do it more subtly if possible, smoothly.
"And remember to avoid touching either the forehead or the side of the face.
"When the arm is dislocated and twisted, it should be reset gently using an instrument similar to one used for cutting but with more gentle and subtle movements.
"If nothing comes out of the wrist bones or fingers, gently remove any surrounding tissue if it is necessary to do so. After treating and cleansing wounds as we have previously described.
"Another way to perform surgery is when a patient becomes sicker, which is more dangerous. "And the last method of treatment is very harsh and not recommended by anyone. "It is first advisable to cut off a portion of the bone and let it heal if the fracture appears immediately. If after discovering that part you find the need for a longitudinal incision in addition.
"Do not bend either side or arm at a sharp angle if it causes the dislocation to occur in the shoulder.
"After applying gentle pressure on a small area of skin where the bone is exposed, you must gently hold onto it so that it does not move.
"The pain will lessen over time if applied gently because the bone is held in place and prevents movement, causing less discomfort.
"The bone cracks should only be treated externally and through gentle pressure, allowing the fracture to heal naturally over time as much as possible, considering its location and the shape of the fracture.
"If you have a large fracture or one that is more delicate, do not stop applying gentle pressure as long as it remains comfortable.
"For other hairstyles and subtle breaks, make sure you adjust their direction accordingly;
"And this is the advice of one who has mastered his craft.
"And if the abscess is opened, make sure you apply a dressing soaked in oil and gently press it against the wound; "Then apply another bandage with two or three layers, moistened in vinegar and oil, and place it over the first dressing; And do this more gently than before, so that you don't hurt the patient as much as possible.
And let it heal for as long as the abscess is open, and then gently remove it, and administer medicines if necessary.
And from these things make powder, and put on the wound, and apply other medicines for killing the infection.
And keep the wound clean, do not let it open up again, and don't leave it exposed to flies, because when flies gather on the cloth around the heart, they spread disease and cause great harm.
Because when you put on a bitter substance, be prepared for pain. When a wound occurs on any part of the body, whether it is small or large, if it seems doubtful, there will be doubt and fear.
And the pain will lessen only by the medication put on, and its value has decreased if you add a part of honey, and three parts of oil, spread it all over the wound. "The method of treatment is such that it may vary depending on various factors.
"The veins are not easily broken when only one of them is cut, since they are two parts;
"Their walls are thin and do not break easily, unless they are torn or bent.
"If one of the two parts is broken, if it's convenient to cut both or straighten them out so that they are aligned with their natural shape according to their figure; "And do this lightly and carefully as the pain will not come from here.
"And [the patient's] arms become powerless to move it if it is in the part below his eyes and cannot come out of place, as long as you gently touch its head with a little bit of force.
"If both parts are broken, if you cannot fix it right away and need to restore the first joint, then do so.
"After the ninth or tenth incision, when the abscess is healed and the wounds are dressed, then cut through both of them with a knife.
"Or you break another bone, And the fractures will be so large that they fill both ends of your body
"No recovery could be expected; and one joint would die. I believe this is best done with wet bandages and a mixture of flour powder. And leave the bandage in place as long as they are fresh, until the bruising subsides.
And do not ever remove the bandage in place of fresh ones, and if they burn your skin instead, hold tight to it, cover your face with it. If you make a mistake
And when you take the pulse or put cold water on it to cool down, or in case of a burn, do not touch it with your hands unless necessary
And after that bind with small stitches lightly, and do not tie the corners too tight.
And the fractures will be small and broken into smaller pieces if they are to heal properly, then mend it with bandages or glue, and when you finish stitching things together, let it dry.
And if he has no such pain, then let him take the cure and hold tight to his nails, as long as they are healthy.
When the mouth is opened without any injury occurring inside, and it does not cause a tear in two halves only, but instead it breaks as easily if one applies force gently.
If there is a fracture in the right arm, you should bite your thumb with your left hand. If the fracture is in the front of the jaw, bite your right thumb with your left hand and hold it lightly while you use the other hand to straighten it out gently, and then apply ice to the other hand for relief.
And if the tear in the jaw occurs twice, then it is advisable to stretch two parts as long as possible until they are well healed.
And if it is moving or rolling due to a broken tooth or wire of gold, silver, or silk, place the broken bone in a double bandage and put on the affected jaw. And place the bandage securely in one piece or with some leather long and wide along the jawline, keeping it tight so he rests on it, commanding him to lay off any heavy foods and light meals only.
And if you notice that the limb changes shape as it is dislocated, then reset to its original position. and apply plaster soaked in flour or bran meal after you have heated the cautery.
and apply a light plaster to hold the eye steady, and leave it in place as long as possible. It is done every third time.
"And if you have already tried what we've mentioned many times before.
And if there is a broken bone or wound, take one small piece of the bone and treat it immediately. If subtlety of the illness is common to this ailment
"If the wound is severe, burn off any remaining flesh as necessary.
"When you have treated all these pieces and there is no more bleeding, if the wound is severe, apply some conventional remedies as necessary to stop any further bleeding.
The fracture often occurs in the shoulder and can happen three times.
Or if it is broken and severe enough to require surgery, then it requires more serious treatment
"It has a fracture with an injury.
When there is a fracture combined with an injury, you must take more measures, as the broken arm may require additional support. and spread it towards the affected part
Then place the fracture on your back if necessary, so that its shape is as straight as possible and does not appear bent.
If you need to treat it further, wrap the shoulder in a bandage tightly enough that when extended, it makes contact with the wall or floor and is large enough according to your needs. And gently press against the affected part while keeping it steady in your hand if you place the fracture there and as necessary.
And if you are unable to reduce the swelling on your own due to its severity, it is recommended that a healthcare professional applies pressure at both ends of the shoulder blade area and wraps them securely with bandages so as to immobilize the shoulder blade in order to prevent further injury from occurring.
Then fix the fracture to both sides, so that when loose, it stays in its position;
"Keep them loose and they won't come together. If one of the incisions is bleeding, stop using it. "If you drop the tool while using it, use a towel to soak up any blood:
"Use the size of a spoon and don't forget to wipe it clean, using as much cloth as you need depending on the size of your wound and how much blood there is.
"If the dislocation occurs like you see it and is large or small depending on how deep your wound was when you treated the bone.
"When you're resetting the dislocation and it is small or if there are doubts about the dislocation, apply a bandage and try to stabilize it, depending on its size.
"After you have stitched him up, if he is still in pain after applying oil and ice, and it feels hot when touched, make sure to put a bandage on.
"When resetting the bone, when there are wounds and how large they are, you put a powder mill in it and any other type of powder, then put light bandages on top, and place one or two sheets over that to make sure nothing else touches it. After applying a very wide strip of adhesive tape over their mouth, you gently place it over their nose as well. Then take a very thin strip of adhesive tape that is three inches wide and long, and gently apply it over the mouth. And place the strip over their nose, turn it under their chin and gently hold both ends tight. And release the other end of the strip when you see that their lips are loose and can no longer hold it, at which point you will clearly see that the strip is not moving off of the bone if released.
And hold tightly to their side as they lie down on a small pillow placed under the shoulder, to raise and support their arm. When the biceps is strained through the shoulder's joint or if you tie it tightly around the arm, and then release your grip without causing any harm to yourself, that should prevent a sprain from occurring.
Next, hold the elbow and release it gently as long as it is healed.
It should be restored in about 28 days, or less than that depending on the situation.
dislocation of the shoulder
When the shoulder breaks or becomes dislocated, and not by any other means
If you follow the shape of the dislocation and align it with its natural form in all ways that you can do.
Then apply some powder from a mill mixed with a bit of water, gently and in layers, covering the affected area double. "Then stretch the arm as far as possible along and above the shoulder, hold it in that position for a moment longer,
"Then firmly hold the arm still as can be done, so that it does not move from its place and look at your wrist.
"Repeat as many times as needed, firmly holding it and placing the arm at a spot just above its shoulder, feeling for the wrist.
The shoulder is rested after 20 or 25 repetitions.
"And when the exercise is completed, slowly release and allow it to move again.
"And when the arm bone protrudes forward and touches one of its ends against a wall or surface,
"from both sides
"The shoulder will not dislocate in a relaxed state but may slightly separate with movement. It breaks easily when it is forced to move.
"And when it is broken into two parts,
And after you have restored the dislocation as it is between its two bones, place your hands gently on both sides of the joint and carefully apply pressure evenly until the bone alignment is correct.
Then apply an ice pack and wrap it tightly with a bandage to immobilize the joint if necessary. Then firmly put your hand back on the joint again and hold it still until you are ready to release.
And if it is advisable to further drain the pus or urine that has come from wounds, or pain or abscess, as you may need, and drain this whatever came from methods of treatment.
Then release it gently holding still until the joint is stable again.
of the costal ribs
The patient's veins will not be pricked at their base and instead of piercing the vein, you should aim for areas that are hollowed out after the shoulder. And remember to inspect it carefully.
And if someone breaks a rib when performing the procedure as described, then that would be appropriate. Then place it on fire and hold tightly with an eyelid closed until you are done
If the veins are declining and the patient experiences severe pain and discomfort as a result of this, then they should lose consciousness. They will be experiencing pain and suffering, and it can lead to great injury
And if someone says that the procedure involves administering foods which will burn fat and release the rib; it should be performed after warming up.
"We are not afraid of this, as long as we have no doubts or fears. If there is doubt and fear, many die.
They won't have any use for the veins because they become infected and similar things. In all cases, there is doubt that the vein will not be able to withstand the strength of the infection.
And they say that no one should cover the vein with oil or any other liquid substance; rather, you must apply cold compresses between the hands to numb them and then treat for swelling of the veins, meat, and other injuries.
And if the patient experiences great pain that they cannot bear through their own strength and there is doubt in breaking into the vein from beneath it, then you should use external instruments to prevent this.
"And when the bone must be cut and treated gently if it is large, and then apply plasters as long as it's healthy.
"And when the arrow hits the skin, if you wrap in oiled linen and put a bandage on top.
"And when it comes to the treatment of this arrow wound, do so as long as it is healthy.
"And also for dislocations of this type.
And if there is no fracture and you are unsure whether it will be fatal or not, then gently touch them with a needle to see
The patient is very likely to die from this situation and if the wounds are not treated quickly it can lead to death
"And for dislocations of this type, you will know whether it is healthy or not. If the limbs are paralyzed and the accident occurs in both hands, and the dislocation is causing pain or injury, then try to hold them steady with support.
And when one has fallen from its place within the belly, if it suddenly goes out, "And when he moves his legs and wants to sit up It is fatal If they do not work in their treatment.
And if an accident occurs and it is a light matter
And if the cure is to apply it to the abscess and pierce or burn fat or oil of vinegar on the eyelid until it is healed.
Then put on soothing unguents and lotions, bind with lint, and command to the patient to rest And do not sleep in that part where it feels pain until it is healed.
If any of the eyes turn aside, then cover them with gauze. And tie the eyelid and put on a stitch if it is large, then treat it with a hot compress until it is healed.
"The shoulder dislocation occurs when the joint moves out of place, and it is called 'shoulder dislocation.' To treat this injury, hold onto your hand with the injured arm in front, put the other arm around to support you, then cross over them both.
"You must hold it in place, and if it is dislocated by injury or surgery, fix it, and then treat the wound while it heals.
The break of the arm bone
"When the arm is dislocated, there may be some pain at first. "And then hold it firmly and gently, to reduce the pain in the arm, swelling, and prevent further injury.
"The reset is done when you have your hand supporting yourself while holding it in place through a brace. "Identify the dislocation and its location.
"The dislocation occurs at its primary site when the bones of the joint are moved significantly.
If the bone breaks twice and declines towards the belly if you press on it with your abdomen; until the healing of these breaks is complete. "When you have reset the dislocation back into its proper place and hold it tightly with a splint or brace to prevent further movement.
"Apply ice packs to the affected area while keeping it immobilized to reduce swelling. "And tell the patient to lie on their back or side.
"Hold tightly onto your arm or leg when dislocated so as not to cause further injury and immobilize it while you wait for medical assistance. "Then come back to restoration and hold tightly as necessary, without any further accidents occurring.
"The dislocation of the shoulder.
"The doctors' method is when the dislocation occurs in between the shoulder blade and the head of the shoulder, or if it is dislocated; then you must restore according to one of these two ways:
One is to take care of your knees, like this fashion:
And keep the second joint straight and bent upward, and if you prick it with a needle.
Then the patient should squeeze both fists tightly for as long as they ache, and hold back any movement or sensation in their fingertips.
Then the patient should open their eyes wide while holding both fists together as long as the headache returns.
And another way it is that one takes the arrow from its head and ties it to his hand, then commands two servants each to hold tight what is on fire with their hands, and others tightly at everything else as well, and stretches them all at once.
And if the extraction is more painful, it restrains them from moving when over the fire, and under the fire, and stretches all of the ministers to their parts.
And if the dislocation is caused by a blow to the shoulder, you should hold it down while moving your other arm downward.
And if it is toward the side, you should gently move the arm away from that direction while keeping your other hand still and holding onto the shoulder.
"Hold tight to any broken bone if necessary, and make sure it stays still.
"And hold it steady until the bone is properly aligned.
"Then hold it firmly while realigning the bone if necessary, and place your hand on the shoulder or chest.
"And hold it tightly while holding the shoulder and arms in place to ensure that nothing moves during this process.
"And if you doubt that nothing moves during this process, apply a larger and stronger bandage to the broken bone, between two other bones on either side of it, or one bone is enough if needed. And make sure not to cover any parts beyond the shoulder.
After restraining the eyelids as I instructed at the beginning of this chapter while exposing the patient to a strong breeze, firmer and less gently.
And if you see the eyelids moving and the closing of them as instructed earlier, in which case you should hold tightly to the arm while keeping your eyes steady until they are closed.
Then look at the other three joints linked together; if any of them loosen up and do not hold tight anymore to the arm or they stop coming closer to the limb because it is too stiff, If you have been given instructions to do something specific, like "Do this," or "Follow these steps.
And if no such accidents occur and they loosen up after the third joint or more, then let their eyelids rest on their back, and hold their hands on their stomach;
And if you see that the arm joint loosens up and the figure of the member moves or becomes stiffened,
"Having applied virtue of medicine, I shall order that the meat be made as tender as we have prepared it in such a way that it is well cooked through. And when he comes to remove (it), if it is large.
It is custom that the shoulder and arm should be taken out in one piece as a whole. And once it has been removed, you must suture (stitches) it and administer water and remedies for the affected area.
And if you have been given instructions to reset the dislocation only once or twice months:
of the arm's fracture
The arm is composed of two bones: one of which we call the humerus bone as it's at the top and the elbow.
The other bone is large, and that one is the radius bone on the lower arm.
Because only the humerus breaks alone or in two pieces, depending on where it breaks.
If the humerus bone breaks into smaller pieces, the restoration is light and healing occurs quickly.
And when large joints are dislocated, if it is a severe dislocation, then there will be more pain than when smaller joints were dislocated together.
When only the short bone breaks off, if it is convenient to stretch gently and put an ice pack on it.
And in case of a large fracture, if stronger traction should be applied
And the hands should be raised higher than others and pulled closer to the head, so that they do not lower themselves further down.
Then extend both arms outward from the body toward their sides or to one another and other ministers towards others in that way.
And then place a bandage on each of the eyes gently
If the break occurs in half, if it is to the left side of the body and causes pain that makes you want to go and touch it with your finger, do not try to restore it back into place by force, but wait until it has healed over time as we have advised before.
And I heard about this cure mentioned by the single practitioner. Take the cure.
And when starting the restoration method is applied by the practitioner with a cotton bandage soaked in rose oil and beeswax wax that is neither too soft nor too hard. "And if you gently pull on it while keeping them steady, as long as they are still able to stay.
And then apply the fire cautery with a powder mill mixed with some oil, put on the eyelids and let it dry until it is stiff, so that the eyelashes are bigger than before, slightly larger than others.
And if he has six eyes or arms in greater numbers whether the eyelid is on one of the bones, or two.
and hold it steady more than in another place, and less when gently applied as I stated at the beginning of this chapter. And make sure the eyelids are soft and wet, and not too dry or too tight.
And make sure the eyelids are soft and wet, and not too dry or too tight. and those hairs that are restrained should be neither too thick nor too thin as we have said.
After removing any loose member after a certain period of time. And if any swelling occurs on the limb, whether due to itching or otherwise, you should warm up that limb as much as possible until the swelling subsides.
Let the limb rest in a comfortable position.
After the extraction, hold tightly onto the member and support its alignment as much as possible; and similar things if necessary.
And if the member cannot come out of place due to its stiffness, then you must gently stretch it and let it go back into place, and hold onto it tightly once more after that.
And of these things we have mentioned do not come to harm the member, unless they are applied at certain times.
If he is restless or wriggles his arms and legs, put both hands on the chest (sternum), hold them steady and try to calm him down.
The remedy is restored every 3 days or every 5 days depending on the composition and complexion of the virtues being treated.
"The break of the arm
The hand is swollen on both sides and if you try to straighten it again, there will be no relief but rather more frequent breaks.
And if a finger breaks or swells, make sure to hold it steady and treat it immediately in front of the patient.
Then place your hand on a flat surface (table or board) and extend both fingers out.
And then apply the plaster and straps, put on a bandage accordingly to how much of your body is affected by it. "And if you prick it with a needle.
"And if it breaks through to the belly of the body, when you prick it with a needle, and command the patient to grip tightly on his broken part. "Then bind it with a long bandage, and if the blood flow is severe like that of an arm, and hold tightly until necessary.
And tie the right hand to his left
"And if it comes out through any or both of the wounds, tie it securely when you put it in to stop it. "And hold tight with your hand, and if you see a small bandage right away to cover the wound, don't let it move.
"And if there are two wounds, if you put the bandage over one or the other, and tie with both hands that come after. "And hold it steady there, or if you put a strap on it as needed.
And fix the dislocation and reposition the arm bone as needed, and care for whatever comes next, just as I have said.
The ears of the hawk often break off, and well it shows when they turn in front or back.
And the restoration is done by removing the bandage if necessary, and another way as needed. The arrows go through his arm, extending close to their base on each side;
It is when the fracture occurs in the bone.
And if they prick at their base, hold the eye steady so it does not move until it grows.
And if it comes from within the bone itself, and whether it comes directly from inside or outside of it, then its extension is downward.
Then hold the arm bone steady with both hands as much as it is naturally shaped and then attach the bandage, tying securely so that nothing moves.
"And if it is on an abscess, if you let it heal first, then come back to your treatment. The loosening must be done in one manner.
It is recommended that you loosen the strap and knee brace in one or two turns of three to four, then repeat this process for as long as the toes wiggle at the base of the nail.
Then loosen the leg and knee brace, then put on a splint on the shin bone.
Then use the gauze to wrap around from the knee to the ankle to put on the splint, then start tightening it with three or four turns on the brace. And as you tighten the brace further and further, loosen its tightness.
When the dislocation of the upper arm occurs between the elbow and shoulder joint, proceed to isolate the affected area by checking it separately.
If he does not move from its place after restraint, then let it be alone, do not disturb him with any other movement except for medical examination. If he occurs as mentioned before, if the dislocation takes place and you follow what has been previously said:
And if it causes pain in the bones when necessary, then do so. If you cannot do otherwise, and consider breaking or cutting into bone as needed. And treat it with what has been previously said, regardless of its severity.
Never let the dislocation occur in a way that causes damage to the elbow or shoulder joint.
In restoration of dislocation, all movements cease immediately.
And joints that have been restored will vary in their recovery depending on how much or little they have moved before the restoration is made.
If there are fractures in the road to birth, it often happens frequently.
And if she is broken, just as in the case of a fracture, or torn, and has many wounds, all wounds, with much pain.
The restoration must be done with utmost care and attention while ensuring the patient's two limbs remain still until it is complete.
Then apply the plaster and secure it well with bandages so that you hold tightly while ensuring all precautions we have taken are still in place, as stated previously. If an injury occurs which requires attention, continue holding the patient's limb until necessary.
"Broken leg
The right leg has two bones called the tibia and fibula;
When the right leg has two bones broken like those in the arm and throughout the rest of the body; or when both lower leg bones are broken simultaneously on one side.
"If the smaller bones are also broken, then you should pay attention to them first.
"And if their big bone is broken, there will be great pain, and they see it well. And then the end of
After treatment, straighten the joint while keeping them gently aligned;
but at all times, it is necessary to make sure there are no fractures or wounds, and the stretching should be gentler. And let it rest according to its nature.
And when you have completed your task, if there are two wounds that pain the leg from one side to the other and stretch right up to the bone itself.
Then straighten the joint as well and hold it so that it does not collapse to one side or the other, making sure the leg remains stable.
And no treatment should be administered to the end of the leg itself, and you must prevent any movement in it, making sure that when there is a fracture or wound.
And remove any broken limb from view to avoid further injury. until it is healed
"The breakage of both arms
The arm joint does not break, but the other two joints never break and rarely do so, unless there are more serious conditions present.
And if a bone breaks while doing the procedure and you see one of them moving on its own, stop immediately, press it back down to where they should be, then release their tension once their movements slow down.
Then apply the plaster and straps to prevent movement of the abdomen, with a little belt at waist level two fingers' width apart, then hold it in place tightly before removing any more dressings or other things you have applied.
And once three or four joints are passed, if one of them goes bad because it has already broken and is misaligned, then you will find the bones are broken, either by themselves breaking off or from being pulled out.
And if there are two broken bones, and they are restored but one is still moving, exactly like we said for both hands. Then apply an elbow support at the length of both bones and a little more width across it, then hold it in place tightly.
"If there are two or three, or more, breaks it off at the first sign of weakness, so that one part does not interfere with another. "If it is in the belly button area and it's very sensitive.
"And make sure you only break up other things that I mentioned before, just like what we have already said. "If there is an accident and it should be treated accordingly.
bone
"When the body of the female patient is dislocated due to the natural course, if she wants to straighten it out and align it with her back, hold it by the lower part.
"Then, place the body of the female patient on a board as flat as possible and make sure there is no movement at all.
"Then gently lower the female patient and support her back gently while supporting each other's arms until she returns to her natural position.
"And when it is sicker, if the blood flows strongly, and when it has sicked, she resets herself, and in every place there are seven joints or entrances: "If the stroke is restored, and you see it, take a vessel of medicine, apply it to the wound with a bandage, and put all the medicine into its natural state: "Then blow gently on the wound while the vessel is closed: "The nature will restore the stroke if it has been good enough:
"Then wrap in cotton and leave it undisturbed until its safe to remove:
"And if the arm or leg is dislocated, as it happens in the treatment of a sprain, then you know how to treat it:
"These dislocations are hidden from one who has not studied medicine and its practice, and does not know my book.
For dislocations to occur means there is a disturbance of the joint, which prevents it from returning to its normal position. And therefore
In a fall, when the arm is broken, take a strip of cloth and bind it around the break. Then wrap it with strips of cloth tightly, leaving enough room for movement in case there is any, and he will be saved from such an injury.
For breaks accompanied by wounds
It is advisable for those who have a break with wounds to be healthy now, if the remedies we have said prove effective.
And if the wound is healthy but there's nothing else to treat it, then resume treating the dislocation in the same way as before, or at any other time
And if the joint is corrected gently with care as soon as it becomes calm and still, so that no further injury occurs or damage to the limb, for fear of a bad accident occurring
And if you break it gently and carefully when you feel that the joint is loose but not yet detached from its surroundings, then you should gently remove it using short extensions.
And do not leave the extensions to move around when putting it in your hands if the instrument that is used for fire has seven or eight holes and its length is proportional to the size of the wound; but for this one it is better to apply three or four times according to the size of the wound, depending on which one has been applied in the treatment.
And if there is not enough, he will not be able to compress the limb against its place, and may fall forward or backward depending on that.
And the dislocation is called "Palinch," because when it occurs, there should be a fracture at or near the end of the affected bone. Once the dislocation occurs, it will continue to happen repeatedly and affect both sides. And if it is a slight dislocation and the bone cannot be easily taken hold of as you try to grip the joint, then until the muscle strength has returned that should suffice.
And if the bone cannot be restored as we have stated, then you may incision or traction to correct it.
Then proceed with a procedure that involves breaking and closing of the bone.
Once the joint has been re-aligned and there is no more pain afterwards it is back to its normal state of operation.
If it is in its place, then soak it in black vinegar solution for a while and properly clean the area. And do not apply anything other than vinegar or oil to the wound as it will only bring contamination and damage.
After you have restored the bone and expose the wound, cover it completely with a layer of gauze based on its size, making sure there is no restriction due to the fracture.
And many times have this occurred, and they brought death or harm to others on several occasions. And so the injuries of others may also be more severe.
And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that an accident has occurred as we have said, and you feel pain at your site where it should be treated; But to prevent this, instead of the above, use a hard bandage and bind them tightly.
And when you see after the first or second attempt to stop bleeding has not been successful if everything else that you have tried is exhausted and it's time for tetanus treatment; if it's time to start tetanuses treatment and similar things.
And you should massage the limb twice a day morning and evening as long as it is swollen and healthy.
And make sure to apply the limb in such a way that the bandage fits tightly but not too tight, allowing for comfortable movement of the limbs.
And after each swelling continues and it cannot hold but relaxes in and out with the bandage if there are small stones causing pain as you want to treat the wound all these pieces need to be cleaned so that they do not bring more pain
And a fistula comes to light, or another manner of corruption, if you treat it according to what you did in your previous chapter
And when the bone is broken and opened up to the limb or shoulder, as with the elbow joint or other large joints, if it does not heal itself, because many times comes death, but leave it as long as it resists.
By chance this may happen after 20 days or more, then treat the wound if you can;
And you must leave if it lets go
After experiencing pain due to frostbite, especially close to the joints, and damage is visible on one or both limbs. And as a result they are unable to move their extremities normally.
If you know what it means If the patient is prescribed specific medications, such as ointments containing camphor, incense, and myrrh, or sarcoline, aloe vera, or similar substances, if you do not have any of these substances, or all together, mix them with a small amount of alcohol or oil. And put it on the nose in drops, and hold steady, do not let go until you see improvement.
And put it on the nose in drops, and hold steady, do not let go until you see improvement. And repeat this process as needed, until the symptoms subside.
"You must hold tightly to a well-made piece of rope. "If you let go of the rope, it will cause all the joints in your body to dislocate.
"And if one dislocation occurs more severely than the others, it is best to seek medical attention. "You should hold on tightly until relief comes, whether from a sharp pain or a dull one.
after the dislocation
"Once the bone is reset and after treating any fragile and sensitive parts of your body, if necessary: "If one joint is held too tightly or not properly, it may cause damage to the joint. "Or if there were too many people trying to touch your body parts and they couldn't come back together. "Or for excessive friction. "Or if too much movement occurs, do not let him move at all. "And for when the patient has little strength in their arm/hand, they are weak.
"Treat them so that you gently massage the affected area and make the body relax as much as possible. "Give them a bath to soften the skin and remove impurities.
"Then apply cold compress on the affected area if there is much swelling and the pain worsens until the swelling recedes to the member. "Then return to their natural position.
After a torn muscle "After the restoration of a joint and you break the ice with fresh water to massage it gently, but be sure that no part moves.
"Don't believe everything you hear about breaking the member in new ways and many people do this everywhere.
And its effects are severe, and from there on come great harm.
Wherever there is a burning pain or soft herbs are cooked, if the veins and roots of the body are done with, then all the tortures cease.
And the soothing salve is beneficial if well done, and you take the bruising from veins, and cook with bacon fat or oil of sesame, and make a salve then.
Or if you use figs, and grind them with fine flour, and some medicines that calm the inflammation quickly.
And never let the dislocation continue and repeat for an extended period with wet hands. And if you observe that it is moving again, stop immediately.
And the tortures are relieved and eased, as with stones, and needs to be treated with fire if it is necessary to cut through very finely. And apply a soothing ointment, and study in treatment.
"... are caused by the dislocation of a joint that prevents it from moving and causes misalignment in the limb.
"When there is no solution for this type of dislocation, you should try to realign its position gently.
"When tied, if it gets loose, then when they try to loosen it up, there will be some pain at the joint.
"Because of this, you should avoid moving your arm while it is bound: "It often brings on pain and other injuries;
"In every case where this happens, when you make a wound by the abscess, then let it rest while the pain subsides;
"Then gently move your arm back into place and apply a compress to the wound when it arrives in its place.
"I ordered the physicians to check for any dislocations, including those of the shoulder.
"Occasionally the jaw may be dislocated as well, with similar treatment: "Or if they are somewhat loose in their joints, and softens a little; "Or if they are completely dislocated and pressed against their palate, then the saliva cannot hold them closed, they cannot close their mouth, and lift their tongue with speech.
When a dislocation is small, there are repeated attempts to correct or reset it.
And if it is complete and perfect, you must reset its position gently without causing any harm.
And in this manner you can gently touch the base of the dislocated jawbone with one hand near its root while pulling on the other side to dislocate it. The other two hands should be free for support and balance.
Instruct the patient to gently stretch his jaw muscles, and move them around in all directions. "And he shall make his limbs equal to what they lose
And while holding it tightly, make sure the two jaw muscles are aligned well if there is enough heat and oil to lubricate them gently.
Do not cause any harm when removing or resetting it as we have advised.
And when the jaw is reset gently and securely, if you lubricate the lips with honey, oil, or candle wax then wrap it loosely to make sure it does not move.
"Let the hairs on his arms grow long and even. If he pricks at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
"Continue to instruct him gently and do not force his mouth open with a needle or thread, as long as his jaw is well closed.
"And the two lower jawbones cannot be reset to their original position within an hour, and they are bent towards each other's lower jaws if there is a feverish state or accustomedness, and through adventure vomiting and purging.
"When you see this, know that it is a mistake. Many times will die those who have this misfortune, in eight days
Chains cannot be released due to the density of its contents and difficulty in doing so; it is never released by fire, but one can feel how strong it is.
The restoration is when the hairs on his arms grow smooth and extend his arms. Press down firmly with your hand at its base, and it will return to normal position.
Then put on the bandage and hold tight.
And when the dislocation occurs from below downward, it cannot be reduced. No, and if it dislocates repeatedly even after resetting in its original place as we have said earlier.
After the splint and bandage are applied, hold steady so that they stay in place.
And then you must reset the shoulder dislocation when it has been pulled from its socket.
"The dislocation of the shoulder.
It will not be dislocated if done in three ways
One way is to dislocate it from the upper part of the arm downward. The second way is at the lower part. And if it dislocates to this last part and there is still movement,
you may not recline your head or neck.
And every time it dislocates, immediately goes towards the shoulder.
When there is enough strength, it pops straight back to its place.
"And sometimes there may be a concussion or fracture of the shoulder blade, and it becomes dislocated due to this.
It's important that you reset as often as necessary until you are certain. And when the treatment is complete.
It indicates that the dislocation occurred when it moves towards the shoulder and contrasts with a healthy one. And you will find the dislocation at the head of the shoulder and sometimes in the arm opposite it. The dislocated part cannot bring its hand back to where it should be, or make any movement.
And if it is dislocated high up but not hidden, you will notice immediately at the shoulder.
"This manner of dislocation cannot be restored once it occurs, unless there is an immediate relief from pain.
"The method involves gently massaging the sore area with your hand first, and then applying ice packs to reduce swelling in the affected area. "Afterwards, they massage their hand lightly, and then wrap it in a cloth for warmth or support. "If there is any improvement, continue with the method as prescribed.
"However, if no improvement occurs after several attempts and you wish to try a warm compress instead of ice packs. "Gentle and soothing massages can be performed with warm compresses made from herbs like chamomile or mallow.
"After massaging the sore area gently and soothingly, hold an ice pack to it for about ten minutes each time, not too hard or too soft, then wrap your hand around it and gently massage the shoulder joint.
And another minister of the same vein if it does not move away Now the arm returns completely and you will find yourself in this manner
And if you do it properly, make sure that the arm is larger than the hairs; And throw it away from the edge, and bring down the arm above the shoulder of the patient, and lightly lift at the top as the hairs begin to come off in that area. And another minister takes hold of the arm below the belly downward towards the belly "And if it is too rigid to move at all, then the dislocation returns now.
And you can reset it in a different manner:
And if you do this properly, the joint should remain loose but not too soft or too stiff. Then put it away from the arm as much as possible while still holding onto the skin and making sure the hairs are attached to the base of the shaft.
The hand will stretch to another point, then return to its original position.
If this treatment does not succeed as we have described it To straighten the arms of a great width and four inches in length, which have been bent at their ends towards each other as described in this way.
First hold the hand of one fist with the other fist so that the fist does not grasp around the bandage, then place it on the arm where the wound is.
Extend one arm to the other fist and hold the elbow with it, then place the hand on top of the forearm. Place both arms on a board-like surface so they are extended away from each other. The joint will be reset now.
In case the dislocation occurs on the right shoulder, first apply gentle pressure from below to try and reset it back into place; then gently massage the area with powder of molin (a type of coarse flour), along with incense and saffron, all over the shoulder and arm; repeat this process until the joint is repositioned correctly.
It is advisable to hold it gently as long as the limbs are comfortable because he will heal faster.
And then move after three or seven days, it moves again; If the veins are firm and not relaxed, if there is swelling.
If the dislocation is caused by moisture or any other reason, it may be necessary to apply heat using cautery at three points: where the joint is about to come loose (if moist), and on either side of the surgeon performing the cautery.
If you do all this and it doesn't stay in place after seven days, the joint cannot be held up by the arms alone, because the nerve at the top of the shoulder is stretched or pulled tight. And you will never see a dislocated joint go back into place on its own.
The dislocation that occurs in the hip, and the arms or back if it is forced by pushing down with both hands, and only another physician may assist.
And treat until swelling subsides.
After the healing process comes gentle stretching of the limb to prevent further dislocations as long as it is healed and returns to its original position
The treatment for a dislocation can be painful
You will see that the dislocation is damaged in some way and there are repeated dislocations.
And it will be torn apart from all sides, most commonly at the front and back, but they never go back together because you see them clearly and feel them. The arm/limb becomes misaligned causing great pain and injury to the patient. And when you join the fire with water, if it is seen immediately The injury is severe and cannot be repaired; no damage was done to the shoulder.
It is important that you reset it as soon as possible because if it continues to dislocate frequently, the patient may face additional pain and injury.
And eventually if nothing can be done quickly enough at all times when it occurs behind somewhere else If there are other dislocations as well and they cause even greater pain, then in some cases the patient may die.
And if it is successful when done correctly you should hold onto its arm with both hands to ensure proper reattachment And the arms should be spread wide and both hands pressed tightly against it towards its head or back, or holding onto its base or root until it regains its place.
The dislocation is in front of you when it doubles its own hand and reaches for the palm's base which is inflamed.
If it does not return to its place after a strong stretch.
And if you lift up your arm, and it doesn't move when extending.
Then turn the arm in such a way that one sleeve is pulled over to cover the other shoulder.
And when you see that one side of the joint is stuck with oil preventing movement, then apply pressure to release it.
And when you are at the top and apply a wet cloth on both sides of the wound, hold it in place, and put your arm over the affected area, and release gently.
And if the joint is firm at its top, you let go of it, and it releases on its own.
And if you see that the joint is not working well, repeat the cloth and link it securely while holding firmly. Then remove
After the removal of a joint and it stops moving, if the bone and muscle are very tight and pressing hard against each other. Or you can apply a poultice of greasy wool over the joint and leave it on for one night then wash off the poultice after bathing. And when you use it, tightly bind the joint with the poultice and leave it on, then wash off the poultice after bathing. You may apply it two or three times as long as they stay healthy.
If you see swelling with moist, smelly pus oozing out and the limb is becoming inflamed then tightly bind it immediately.
It will return to its normal position.
"Dislocation of the arm
The hand's joint is weaker and the recovery is light compared to other joints. "In any case, it's advisable to return the patient to their previous condition as soon as possible, either they are inflamed or if there is a wound.
"And if you put your hand on an abscess and extend it to the ministers of its length and make sure that you look for a vein beneath; until you see the appearance of a joint, then stop there.
"In any case, make sure they are well to their previous state; "Take the abscess with two fingers and stretch it out while pulling; as you reach for its length. The dislocation occurs at the back of the hand if they dislocate their shoulder blade, and puts their arm on the table and looks at its appearance from the joint.
"Now that it's done correctly, it is well. "If not, if the vein ruptures and you feel pain when pressing on the artery, release your grip immediately.
"And if they cannot suffer it or do not let go of their previous state after a short time, then the dislocation is done.
"And do not move or touch the patient's hands while they are bound so that no harm can come to any part. "If it is broken and the artery is severed,
"if there's no other remedy than fire cautery, then nothing else remains.
When the hands are loose and if you put it on as we have instructed, then stretch it out gently for a while, loosen it up and let go of it afterwards.
And if it cannot move properly, but has no pain, and the skin is torn as soon as it becomes cold, and frostbite begins to form.
The dislocation of both arms
"Do not ever bind the patient's hands to any part of their body,
"until the joint is set properly and held in place, then hold it tightly with both hands towards where it should be aligned.
"then let go of one hand and put the other on,
"and bind it gently as instructed, tying it securely with both hands.
"and do this until it is stable and safe to release the hand from around it.
"And so on, when it is dislocated from another place.
The dislocation of both shoulders
When the left and right shoulder or collarbones are dislocated, if there is no treatment available, then many die prematurely.
"And the signs show that it has become loose and cannot be held still, many times causing damage to one or more members (limbs) including the arms or legs.
"Many times, they are unable to straighten themselves back out.
"the one that becomes loose at the back is called 'girbrosoise'.
"The treatment consists in reattaching it, which must be done as soon as possible. "There is no cure or healing for this.
"And those that come from beating, blows, or similar things, the old ways of treatment are given in great words, or there is no benefit at all.
"But I have explained it according to my intention, and formed the understanding through various ways.
I say that when there is blood flow to the penis before it becomes erect, no one can sustain life.
And such things that come directly from the second rib and cannot be cured unless they are properly treated at the back as I say.
And that the veins should remain stiff on its left side and be restrained from moving when it is injured.
Then fix the shoulder in place by tying it to something else and holding its base securely, and another one tightly, and anchor both of them well together with a rope or string.
And the minister should bind the right arm to the shoulder and the left arm tightly, among the two sleeves.
And be well fixed as we have said and keep its hands stretched out with palms facing the sky until it is erect.
And if it does not come back by this cure, bind three long ropes around the arm and tie them off so they are even with each other, then place a board over the shoulder. And hold tight to the other end of the board as it pulls back towards you.
If that happens when turning the handle, let go and turn the handle again with your free hand. And bind the other end of one arm's strap to another strap and keep them equal in length with a long finger.
And make sure the other end of that strap is firmly on the ground so it does not move.
And between the two straps tie a strap from one hand to another with a long finger so you can turn it.
And then take the link that is among the axles towards one direction and the other towards the opposite direction, and each of these members takes their own turn around this link, as we have explained before
And when it is healed, the incision will be made with a great deal of fire and then the ulcers, and then the extraction of a tablet of three days in length that purges the liver from its bile and the part of the healthy spine, and the link of one vein as we have explained before, until he stops moving;
And if nothing happens at the end of the healing, then it is necessary to administer soothing and stimulating medicines as we have mentioned before; And if nothing happens when a portion of flesh is cut off and no appearance appears behind the spine or in both places, then it should be checked for dislocations. "And this is what happens when one opens it without thinking: This would inevitably result in death.
Only dislocations of the arm and shoulder occur when someone opens them without thinking.
And the dislocation of the arm is caused by two things. Dense and diffuse, in front and behind
The denser the dislocation, the more severe it is in front or behind it.
And the knowledge of its dislocation is that when one combines a bad leg with a good arm, it is longer and more painful than the good limb alone. And it is the eye that is inflamed from above which causes the dislocation to occur.
"The sign of such an injury is that it usually happens unexpectedly.
And the sign of this person in front is that their leg is perfect according to completion. "In all cases where pain is severe and cannot be endured, he must hold still until the bleeding stops.
"The sign of such an injury is that it will not be able to extend its limb properly and can only move the arm opposite; the leg becomes more stiff than the other, and its muscles relax, and there are tears in the back from where the muscle was cut.
"The limbs of a dislocated shoulder can be reduced when they are correctly realigned and the joints return to their normal position without treatment. "It is not advisable that there should be any doubt.
"And in the case of a recent dislocation and such cases as these, if you promptly realign the joint, bind it securely with lint, and have it treated by a surgeon. "But otherwise there is no other treatment available.
"And if it does not come back this way, it is advisable to set the leg in two parts and hold them together with strong adhesive. "And then he performs a slight twist on the fingers near his wrist. He then takes hold of the patient's forefinger.
They extend upwards and downwards once until the finger is raised from the ground again, and then let go while it remains up in the air.
"This method of traction is commonly used if the dislocation has been repositioned already; that's correct.
If not, if there are no other treatments available for this condition.
Once the dislocation is corrected, if possible, you should fix it so that the shoulder blade comes back into alignment with the arm, then straighten the joint towards the force.
Then perform other treatments on his arms and bind the larger part of the dislocated arm to stretch it out in this way. If he returns to its place now;
This manner of dislocation is less severe than others.
If you do not press in this manner as we have advised, if it is advisable that you lock the big toe and little toes together, and also lock the big finger and small fingers together.
And hold the head of a fist in place while holding both arms down for long
Then command one minister to grasp the wrist of the hand, and hold another minister's arm down with it while grasping his fist; this binds them together in place as they were before.
And when the dislocation is complete if you grasp the toes, as we advised in one who has gilibots and strange limbs, and straighten his leg as well;
then put the thumb and other finger together, place the thumb in between the fists of both hands so that they are joined in position. "And let him put his arm around her, and then extend one of the arms towards her, and hold onto it with both hands.
"If it happens again, it's okay.
If not, place on the affected limb as we have seen in those who experienced it before and apply firm pressure until you feel everything is back in place.
"When a dislocation occurs, you should straighten out the affected limb as quickly as possible, according to what I said earlier. "Hold onto the affected limb tightly with one hand, and extend your other arm towards it.
"If it's dislocated at the end, if straightening out the limb isn't possible, don't attempt to lift up the limb or put it on the ground. Instead, leave it as is and take care of the injury elsewhere. "Place it flat against something like you said earlier. Then press down on the joint as I suggested before and hold onto that. And will be when the legs extend themselves, they will be even. unless he holds tightly with both hands and pulls on a tendon, if it does not move and rests in three joints or four joints then releases, and applies the remedy.
And you see that they are even if the tendon is released, as long as it is seen clearly, and then he lets them rest in three joints.
Then releases him, and lightly stimulates him, while ensuring that his limbs are comfortable.
The arm is misaligned due to a dislocation.
The eyes will be treated in three ways. This is to know, darken and light, and back.
And no treatment should ever follow up from it.
And if you command the patient to bend his leg towards his shoulder, and it does not straighten out with its own force, then he is treated.
And when you restore the limb in its right position and extend it if possible, and put your back against its face, and put your chest against its feet.
Then take the string in your hands, pull it between your fingers, then fold both edges over towards each other And when the limb is extended, as long as it remains in its place and signs show that it's firmly attached to the socket.
And put on an splint, and fix the limb into place securely, and tie it with strong cords, then release it.
Do not force the dislocated joint to move, as long as the limbs are comfortable.
"And as for limbs that are unable to move due to severe treatment in healing the ache, until they become whole.
of the shoulder
The arms cannot move at all or fully extend and straighten out completely.
And if it is suspected that the bone is displaced, try first at the part where there has been damage.
Here is the translation: "The man should gently extend his hands when he is sitting alone.
And when standing upright, if it's convenient that you sit with your right side forward and the elbow touches the knee.
Then press it to one of your hands and then switch to the other hand, repeat this three times, and hold it high for a moment.
And do that two more times as we have said, removing and stretching the shoulder.
If it comes back, you're good to go.
But if not, repeat the process as we have said, for it may come back.
And if it does not come back after that process, sit on the ground with your elbow between your knees and hold the shoulder down firmly until it stops.
Here is the first sentence to translate. After that, these ministers are gently applied all over, and should be pressed between the two sides of the wound to hold it in place while the wound is being treated.
Then apply ice packs gently all over and press them between the two sides of the dislocation to hold it in place until it settles down.
And when it reaches the point of needing staples and stitches, press them in place, form the wound and hold the arm to the leg, while firm but not too tight.
Then let it rest for two or three days, be gentle with the patient if stitches are required.
After that, remove them after one day to four days and treat the wound for another two or three days. And if he stands at this end, it is still necessary to straighten him as well.
"And the patient should avoid doing this, as we've said before, until it is healed.
"The second one does not "When the two are loosened, if it's convenient to stretch gently while working on them.
And if dislocations occur in no less than two joints, make sure to straighten the affected limb at its point of origin or attachment, and keep your finger on that joint while pressing down firmly until it straightens.
And when the dislocations are gone and no longer cause any pain, if you have identified two joints as the source of the problem, then straighten them out and let go after three tries. And keep it at rest until it is healed completely.
Of injury and dislocation combined
When there are dislocations along with wounds and injuries that come and go many times,
if you are not skillful in the art and you do not apply it properly for a long time, nor show mercy or compassion to others.
"And begin with gentle care, leave the patient's hand free of pain. Do you not see hope for recovery? And when you do see hope, gently stretch the limb back to its place.
And when the limbs are in place, administer gentle care as needed to heal wounds.
"And with dislocation and fractures, attend medical attention if necessary, and follow the instructions given in simple injuries.
"And be cautious of entering into a state of fear, as I have mentioned, for it is not good according to your Creator, and for the safety of you and your body.
