After having completed this book for you, which is the last of the sciences in medicine with its supplement, and having reached the end of it through its expositions and its declarations, it seemed to me that I should complete it for you with this Treatise, which is a part of operation, namely, surgery with the hand.
Since surgery with the hand has been laid low in our region and in our time, and has been entirely privatized: perhaps the knowledge of it has perished, and its trace has been lost: and there remained from it only small descriptions in the books of the ancients, which were changed by hand: and they suffered error and hesitation, until their intentions were closed, and the vision of it was lengthened: It seemed to me that I should revive it with the order of this Treatise in it according to the way of its exposition, and declaration, and abbreviation: and that I should come with the forms of Cauterii's tools, and of the other instruments of work: since it is made from its declaration addition, and from its operation which is necessary.
However, the reason why a good artisan of it with his own hand does not exist in our time is this: because the art of medicine is long, and it is necessary for its author to be exercised before that in the science of anatomy, which Galen narrated, until he knows the joints of the limbs, and their forms, and their connection and separation, and has knowledge of the bones, and of the nerves, and of the tendons, and of their number, and of their exits, and of the pulsatilae of the veins, and of the quiet places, and of the outlets of them.
And on account of this Hippocrates said that the name with the name is much, and with work is little, and especially in the art of the hand.
We have indeed already spoken of that in the introduction of this book.
Since those who are not knowledgeable about what we have said about anatomy are not spared from falling into error, in which men perish: as I have seen many of those who are formed from this science, and boast about it without knowledge, and without experience.
Which is, because I have seen a foolish doctor to lance a scrophulous abscess on the neck of a woman, and he happened to cut some arteries in the neck: therefore the woman's blood flowed, until she died between her hands.
And I have seen another doctor who presumed to remove a stone from a man who had grown old, and the stone was large. Therefore he reached him, and removed it with a fragment of the bladder. Therefore the man died on the third day.
And indeed I had already been called to remove it: and I saw from the size of the stone, and the weakness of the sick man, that he would die.
And I have seen another doctor who received a bribe from a certain duke of our land for medicine: and it happened to an eunuch black man who was with him, a fracture near the calcaneum in his leg: and the doctor rushed with ignorance, and he bound the fracture over the wound with bandages, and a strong binding, and did not let out the wound's expiration.
Then he cured him according to his own desires. Then he sent him away for several days, and commanded him not to untie the bandage: and it remained thus until his leg became an abscess, and his foot, and it reached its destruction.
I was called to him, and I hurried to untie the bandage: and peace followed, and he was freed from his pains.
However, corruption had already been confirmed in the member: and I could not restrain it.
Therefore, corruption ceased to walk in the member, until it died.
And I saw another physician who pierced the cancerous abscess: and it became inflamed after days, until its evil was revealed to its master.
That is, because when the cancer is pure from humor melancholico, then it is not necessary to approach it with a knife at all, unless there is in the member that can bear, so that the whole of it be cut off.
And for that reason, my son, it is necessary for you to know that the operation with hand is divided into two divisions: namely, the operation to which safety is associated, and the operation with which there is danger in many positions.
And I have already awakened in every place of this book, in which the operation comes where there is fear and fear.
Therefore it is necessary for you to beware of that and dismiss it, so that the fool does not find a way to speak and disgrace himself.
Take therefore the measure with solicitude and protection, and the sick of yours with facility and firmness, and use them the better way leading to grace of God for salvation and praiseworthy succession: and dismiss terrible afflictions difficult of healing: and take away your souls from that which makes you afraid, so that hesitancy may enter upon you in your faith and your advantage.
For it is rather remaining to your glory, and more exalted in this world, and finally to your quantities.
Galen already mentioned this in some of his own admonitions. You shall not treat bad illness: lest you be called a bad doctor.
However, this treatise has now been divided into three chapters.
Chapter one.
Of cauterizing with fire and of cauterizing with sharp medicine, chapters are arranged and ordered from the beginning to the end, including the forms of instruments and tools for cauterization, and everything necessary for the operation.
Chapter two.
Of cutting and piercing, bloodletting and venting, and wounds: and extracting arrows, and similar things: and the whole chapter is arranged according to the forms of instruments.
Chapter three.
Of restoration, and dislocation, and curing of twisting, and similar things: the chapter is arranged from the beginning to the end, and according to the forms of instruments.
But before I mention the operation with it, it is necessary to say the quality of its benefit and harm, and in which constitution it is displayed.
I say therefore, that the speech about the quality of the benefit and harm of cauterization is a long and subtle, knowledge, and secret hidden.
Also a multitude of wise men spoke about it, and they disagreed in it; and to me indeed it is enough little from their speeches, fearing the prolongation.
I say therefore, that the cauterizer universally combines with every composition, which is with matter and without matter: excepting two compositions, which are a hot composition without matter, and a dry composition without matter.
However, in the hot and dry composition with matter they have disagreed. For some have said that the cauterizer is useful in it. And others said the opposite of that, namely that the cauterizer is not suitable for an illness, which is from heat and dryness: because the nature of fire is heat: and it is unsuitable, that one should be healed from a sickness of hot and dry, with hot and dry.
And he who says the opposite of that said: that by cauterizing, a remedy is made for every sickness of hot and dry, which happens in the bodies of men: because when you compare the body of man, and its humors, to the composition of fire, you find the body of man cold.
And I indeed say by his word: because from experiment he has extracted that from me many times.
However, it is not necessary, that he should come to that, unless who already tested, and trained in the chapter of cauterization exercise last, and knew the diversity of compositions of men, and disposition of sicknesses in themselves, and causes of them, and accidents of them, and time of them.
From the other compositions however there is not upon you fear: and especially in sicknesses of cold and wet. For now all doctors have gathered upon them: and they have not disagreed in remedy with cauterization in them.
And know children, that from the secret of healing by cauterization with fire, and its goodness upon cauterization with burning medicine is: because fire is simple, whose action does not reach, except to the member which is cauterized: and it does not hurt another member joined with it, unless little harm.
The action of burning medicine reaches to what is protruded from the limbs: and perhaps it causes to happen in the limb difficulty of healing, and perhaps it kills.
Fire however, on account of its subtlety and goodness of its substance, does not do that, unless it overflows.
Now indeed it has become known to us by experiment, because of the length of service and study with the art, and position above truth of things: and on account of that I excuse myself from length of speech.
And if not, because it is not allowed to this my book, I would bring to you a secret hidden in fire, and quality of its operation in bodies of its expulsion, which expels difficulties by philosophical demonstrative speech, which would be remembered by your minds.
And know, sons, that they themselves disagree in the time, in which it becomes to be done cauterization, and they put a better time for true.
And I say, that cauterization becomes in every time: because harm accidentally happening because of time is submerged in advantage, which is drawn with cauterization. And especially if cauterization is because of pains from necessary pains, strong, urgent, who do not tolerate slowness: therefore because it is feared from them, that something evil happens which is greater, than small harm happening because of time.
And it does not fall in your minds, sons, that which they do not fear, except the crowd and stupid doctors, namely that to that difficulty which is healed by cauterization, there is not always return: and they put that following, and thing is not as they think: because cauterization is not, except in place of medicine, which changes complexion, and dries wetnesses which are cause, why pains happen.
However, the cauterizing instrument exceeds medicine by its speed of health recovery, its effectiveness in operation, and its power of dominance: and it is possible for the illness to return at some time according to the infirmity's constitution, location, and nature, and what is prepared in his body from the accumulation of superfluities in him: and what reaches him in acquisition of his own from foods, and similar causes, unless illness occurs, in which cauterizing is administered.
Subtle illness in a member of few superfluities and moistures, such as tooth cauterizing due to pain, and similar causes, is possible for that pain not to return in it. But that happens in few.
Indeed, the common talk again, that cauterizing is the last of medicine, is correct speech: not to what they intend in it: because they believe that there is no cure that confers with medicine, nor with another after the fall of cauterizing.
But the matter is contrary to that, and intention, that cauterizing is the last of medicine, is not, unless when we administer modes of cure in some illness, and those medicines do not conform: then we administer at the end of the matter cauterizing, and it conforms: then it falls, that cauterizing is the last of medicine, not according to the intention which the common people and many stupid physicians understand.
The ancients said, that cauterizing with gold is better than cauterizing with iron: and they did not say this, unless because of the equality of gold, and sublimity of its substance: and they said, that it does not make pus a place of cauterizing. However, it is not absolutely true that it does not do that in certain bodies without other things.
And the cauterizing iron itself is good, and better than with iron, as they said. However, when you heat the cauterizing iron in fire from gold, it is not indicated to you when it burns according to the amount you wish, because of the redness of gold: and when it approaches the heat, and if you add more fire to it, it melts in the fire, and turns into sheets.
Therefore, the craftsman falls from that into his trade: and for that reason, the cauterizing iron with iron is made by us faster and closer, from rightness to the operation.
And indeed, I have already arranged this Chapter on Cauterizing, according to chapters: and I arranged them from head to foot: so that those seeking something from it might be helped.
Chapter 2.
This cauterizing applies to the dominion of moisture and cold over the brain: which are two causes of sweat, and multitude of humors flowing from the head to the parts of the eyes and ears, and multitude of sleeps, and pain of the teeth, and pain of the throat: and universally all kinds of distress, which occur from cold, such as paralysis, and sweats, epilepsy, and apoplexy, and similar to those distresses.
The manner of cauterizing is, that you command the sick one: so that he may be emptied in the first place with the cleansing solution of the head three nights, or four, according to what requires the virtue of the sick one, and his age, and his custom.
Then instruct him to shave his head with a razor. Then make him sit between your hands in a square position, so that he has already placed his hands on his chest.
Then place the root of your thumb on the root of his nose between his eyes. Whenever your middle finger reaches that spot, mark it with a pen.
Then heat the cautery iron, which has this form.
Then place it on the marked spot with the pen, with a descending motion, by which your hand is gradually tightened, and you turn it. Then quickly withdraw your hand, and look at the spot.
If you see that the amount of bone from his head is equal to the amount of alquille or zeveherb, then withdraw your hand. And if not, repeat your hand with the same iron, or with another one if it is cooled: until you see the bones that I told you.
Then take some salt and dissolve it in water, and drink it with the wound, and place it on the spot: and leave it for three days.
Then place the salted drink on top of it in butter, and leave it on the spot until the scab of the fire is destroyed. Then care for it with the four-ingredient ointment until it heals.
Now they have said that the more the wound remains open, the more it emits pus: therefore it is better and more beneficial.
And some of them said that the skin should be cauterized up to the bone: and the cautery iron should be held until something of the density of bone is burned.
Then it should be scraped after that which was burned from the bone, then care for it.
Some say that it is necessary for the cauterio to reach the deepest point, until an impression of a fork is made in the jaw, so that the jaw falls out, as if by a kirate: or an instrument like that which women place under their infants when they are learning to write: and they claim that from this place vapors escape from the head, and the wound remains open for a long time.
Then it should be treated until it is healed.
To me, however, these two types of cauterio do not appear at all in most people, except according to the way of fear.
And it is better for me to let go of it with its own health.
For the head is weakened from the solution of its natural continuity: as we have shown in other members: and especially when the head of an infirm person is weak by nature: and indeed the first type of cauterio is more saving and better for me, and I use it: therefore I operate with it in health.
Head III.
When there is chronic pain in the whole head: and it is prolonged in an infirm person, and he uses herbs, and cochlis, and caputpurgis, and oils, and emplastrums. And especially if he has already been cauterized with one cauterio, which we have mentioned, and does not give him anything from those: then consider. For if the head of an infirm person is strong by nature, and is not weak, and has found a strong cold: then cauterize with another cauterio under it a little. Then cauterize it on top of all the horn of its own head with a cauterio, so that it does not penetrate the skin, and expose a quantity of bone, as we have mentioned. And cauterize it with a single cauterizing instrument at the back of its head, in the place called the "neck": and it is the place where the windpipe is located. And elevate your mat with this, and do not expose its mouth. For indeed, it found itself in pain due to that very intense pain, and different from the pain of all other head cauterizations.
And I will call this Cauterium in its place: and it must be a cauterizing instrument, by which the horns of the head are cauterized, and the back of its head is cauterized more delicately with a cauterizing instrument, by which the middle of the head is cauterized.
Chapter IV.
When pain and swelling occur in a part of the head, or the pain extends to the eye, and is evacuated with cleansing medicines for the head, and the remaining cure is administered, as I said in the divisions of ailments, and it is not all together: then cauterization in that place is done in two ways: either cauterization with a sharp burning medicine: or with iron.
But the cauterizing instrument with a burning medicine is, as you take one tooth of garlic, and scrape it, and cut off its extremities from both sides. Then cut the place of pain at the time with a wide leech, until it becomes a place under the skin, in which the tooth is caught.
Then introduce it into that place under the skin, until it is hidden: then bind it over it with a soft cloth, and let it go for fifteen hours, then dissolve it, and take out the garlic, and let it lie for two or three days: afterwards put on it a poultice soaked in butter, until the place becomes pus: then care for it with ointment until it is healed.
And if you wish to do this with certain caustic medicines, which I have written about in my twelfth book on Burning Medicaments.
However, the cauterization of it with iron is done in this manner. The cautery, which has this shape.
And it is called a Claw: because the shape of its head is like the shape of a claw, in which there is something of sharpness, and in the middle of it is a small elevation.
Then place it on the spot, and hold your hand: and you will turn the iron gradually with speed: and the amount that is burned from the thickness of the skin, is like the middle of it. And raise your hand, so that the artery, which is below, does not burn, and blood flow does not occur.
Then immerse the wound in salt water, and place it on the spot, and leave it for three days: then place the wound with butter: afterwards care with ointment until it is healed.
And if you wish, cauterize this hemicrania with the second edge of the knife of the cautery. And beware of the incision of the artery in this hemicrania, not anciently proper.
¶ On the method of cauterizing in an ancient hemicrania.
When you are curing a hemicrania, since what we said from the previous cure, and what we said in the divisions of pains, and that cure does not help: and you see from the pain, that what we said first with medicine, or with the knife of the cautery with fire, then it is necessary to burn the knife of the cautery, until it becomes white after the signs on the spot with a line, whose length is the middle of a finger, or something like that: and place your hand twice, and tighten it until you cut the artery, and reach up to the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuity of the jawbone, which moves during chewing, lest it be burned or a nerve that moves it be affected, from which spasms may arise.
And this is above guardianship and precaution against the flow of blood from the severed artery. For in its severing there is fear, and especially for him who does not know what it does, and is not diligent or experienced: and he leaves the operation with it first.
And I will come with the remembrance of the management of the flow of blood from the artery according to its own mode and in its place in this book.
If you see from the pain that this cauterizer does not suffice for him, and you see the weak body bearing the cauterizer in the middle of the head, as we have narrated, care for the wound until it is healed.
And if you wish, administer the cauterizer which we said in the chapter of extracting the artery with a cauterizer having two knives. For this cauterization is better and more fitting.
¶ On the method of cauterizing in pain of the Ear.
When it happens to the ear that there is pain from cold, and it is cured with ointments, and the rest of the cure which we said in division, and the pain is not removed, then cauterize with fire: and this is called a puncture, whose form is thus.
Then the punctures with it after its ignition in the circumference of the ear entirely, as it is turned around: or in the circumference of both, if the pain is at the same time in both. And draw yourself away from the root of the ear a little, after you have marked the spots with the cauterizer: and let the quantity of the cauterizer be ten punctures in every ear, and about thus.
Then take care of the affected areas until they are healed.
On how to cauterize in torture.
Chapter 7.
The torture that is cured with cauterization is only from certain types that occur from phlegm, as we mentioned in the divisions of ailments.
And the type of torture that lacks cauterization due to dryness and spasm of the nerve.
When you treat this type of torture with honey, and head purgatives, and gargarisms, and your cure does not help, then it is necessary for you to cauterize the sick person with three cauterizations: one at the root of the ear, and the second a little lower from its time, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
And place your cauterization on the opposite side of the weak part. Because softening does not occur except in the part that appears healthy.
And the form of cauterization is, that you cauterize the sick person directly at the tip of the upper ear under the horn of the head a little: and another in the time: whose length is according to the length of the thumb. And place your hand with the cauterization until half the thickness of the skin is burned.
And this is the form of the cauterization, and it is a species from a knife, of which the form mentioned above is: however it is not too sharp like that: and it is necessary that the knife be a little without excessive coarseness.
Then take care of the affected areas with what preceded until he is healed.
On how to cauterize in ancient apoplexy.
When ancient apoplexy is cured, and you treat it with what we said, and your medication does not help, and the sick person does not have a fever, then cauterize him with four cauterizations on all the horn of his head, and with the cauterization in the middle of his head, as we said, and with the cauterization in the back of his head, according to what preceded: and the method of cauterization should be according to what preceded.
Even the cauterization with a cauterizer on the mouth of the stomach is done: and it is more final.
Then it is treated, with that which preceded it.
Chapter 9.
It is necessary that in the drink first of all weak people be given great hira and cleaning pills for the brain.
Then shave the head of the sick person all over, and place on his occiput the plaster of synapi described in the treatise on plasters: and place it several times.
For this is indeed the method of cauterization: and do it according to order, as I said there.
If therefore he is healed by that, it is good. If not: then do to him three cauterizations in the posterior part of his head, which are descending from the superior part of his head down to the lower part of his eye: and place between every cauterization the thickness of a finger.
Then treat the cauterization, with that which preceded it.
If however you wish an addition, and the sick person is able to bear that: then do to him a cauterization in the middle. If however you wish an addition: then cauterize him over two horns.
Then treat him, until he is healed: and let the cauterization be oily according to the form which was previously given.
On the method of cauterizing in paralysis, and softening.
Chapter 10.
It is necessary that you proceed in the cleaning of the head with hira, and with that which we said.
Then shave the head of the sick person: afterwards cauterize him in the middle of his head, and with a cauterizer over every horn of his head, and with a cauterizer on his back, and with three on his spines of his neck.
If you lack the ability to tolerate many of these mollifications for the body and are weak, and the illness is strong: then cauterize him with four cauterizations on the spines of his back, and with the last one, until the skin is burned off as much as possible, and raise your hand. Then care for him until he is healed: and thus use the cauterizing iron.
On the method of cauterization in epilepsy.
An epileptic should not be cauterized unless he whose epilepsy is from phlegm.
Therefore, you should cleanse his brain first with heirba, and with the rest of the cure that we mentioned in the division, when he is weak and large, or is unable to bear the medicines.
But if he is a child who does not bear the medicines, then a gargle is administered, and cleansing mastications of the brain are given before many days with good nourishment.
Then shave his head, then cauterize him with a cauterizing iron in the middle of his head, according to what preceded in the method: and with another cauterizing iron in the back of his head, and on every horn of his head with the cauterizing iron. But if he is weak and strong, and is able to bear it, then cauterize him with the cauterizations that I said in having paralysis, and mollification of the body on the spines of his neck, and the spines of his back: and the cauterizing iron should be olive according to the mode that preceded.
But if he is a weak child, then place the thin cauterizing iron in this way.
On the method of cauterization in melancholy.
When the cause of melancholy is corrupted humors and thick phlegm, then cauterize it with the cauteries which we mentioned in having paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is excessive flow downward towards melancholy, and is a weak humid body, then give him to drink what cleanses his brain, according to what preceded in division: then shave the head of the weak one, and make afterward a well-made tortellini from linen, like a circle.
Then place it in the middle of his head: and the weak one sitting squarely should be held from every part.
Then present the liniment. And it is more fitting with butter of ancient olive oil. And heat it over a fire with temperate heat measure, which the finger could tolerate when inserted into it. Then evacuate it in the middle of his head in a circle, and let him go until he is cooled.
Do this for the weak one once a week, with the rest of his good regimen, until he is healed.
Or if you wish, cauterize it by making small points as much as possible, except that you hold the hand with the cauterizer: indeed it should be smoking.
For this kind of cauterization humidifies the brain with quality.
Then place on it a soaked cloth in butter, or chicken fat.
¶ On the method of cauterizing in descending water to the eye.
Chapter XIII.
When the beginning of water in the eye is declared to you by signs which I mentioned in division, then begin and give the weak one to drink, with him what cleanses his head.
And guard it from all moisture, and make it sit in the bath for several days while fasting.
Then order him to rub his head and cauterize it in the middle of his head. Then cauterize him over two temples with two cauteries, if there is the beginning of descent of water in both eyes at once: or from one side, if there is the beginning of water in one eye: and cut off with the cauterizer all veins and arteries that are under the skin: and let the cauterization be long in the width of the temples: and beware of bleeding.
If you see anything from it, then cut it off immediately with any medicine that is possible: and I will come with wisdom, which is in the extraction of arteries, and cutting them off, and caution against bleeding.
And sometimes cauterize it on the back, under two bones, with two last cauterizations.
¶ On the method of cauterizing in tears anciently.
When the tears of the eyes are ancient, constant: and they are on veins, and arteries that are in the manifest exterior of the head, it is verified that it is from superfluities cold, phlegmatic: then cauterize with the same cauterizer that I mentioned in the beginning of water descending, cauterizer in the middle of the head, and two cauterizations over two temples, and two cauterizations in the back under two bones. And if you need addition, then cauterize it on every side of the eye carefully, over the extreme of the eyebrow with a small cauterizer.
¶ On the method of cauterizing in the discharge from the nose.
When you are treating that, when what we mentioned in the division, and the medication does not work: then hurry, and give to the sick person three nights of infirmocochias: afterwards shave his head, and cauterize it with a medium cauterizer, with an oil cauterizer. Then cauterize it with a claw cauterizer with two cauterizers, on two eyebrows under the hair a little.
And guard from the artery, that you do not cut it.
And this is the shape of the claw cauterizer.
About the method of cauterizing in the softening of the eyelid.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened from pain or moisture: then cauterize the eyelid with a cauterizer one, with this cauterizer lunar.
And if you want, cauterize it above two eyebrows a little with two cauterizers in every part: and they will be lengthened from two temples: and the length of all cauterizer is according to the lengths of the eyebrow: and do not extend your hand with the cauterizer, but according to the quantity that burns the third eyelid.
About the method of cauterizing the eyelid when hairs turn against the sharp eye.
The cauterizer in that is according to two methods: either the cauterizer with fire: or the cauterizer with burning medicine.
In the cauterizer however with fire, order the sick person before that, so that he may let go his hairs, if it is from those who cover them, until they are lengthened and equalized. If they prick him at the time of his birth: then bind his eyes with a cloth, so that they do not move, until they are born.
When they are born and have grown equal, then place the sick person's head in your lap: then mark the eyelids with a hot iron, mark it as it is according to the shape of the myrtle leaf: and let it be the beginning of the sign near the hairs.
Then place a wet cloth soaked in albumin on the eye: or in the mucilage of psyllium on the eye.
Then with a hot iron, whose shape is this.
Then cauterize over the shape that you marked gradually on the eyelids, until the surface of the skin is burned, which is like the shape of the myrtle leaf, entirely visible.
And the sign of the health of your work is: that if you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted, and the hairs raised at the point of the eye.
So raise your hand then: and let him go for three days.
Then place a cloth with butter on him until the eschar is removed. Then care for him with ointment until he is healed.
If any hair returns after an hour, and the eyelid becomes soft: then repeat the cauterizing iron on that place, as you did in the first time.
If however the hairs are in the lower part: then cauterize that, until it is raised to its natural place: and equal it so that they do not prick the eye with the hairs.
It is that you order the sick person, to let go the hairs, until they lengthen and become equal. Prepare a form of a leaf from cloth using the pattern of a myrtle leaf.
Then take known soap and unsoaked lime from one ounce of each weight, or about that amount, and mix them well with good friction, and make it quickly, so that it does not cool down. Then take a piece of cloth from the one you made into the shape of a myrtle leaf, and place it on the eyelid of one or two eyes. And place under the eye a wet compress soaked in egg white, and the sick person will be in your lap.
And place your finger on the medicine and press it slightly. And you should move it as often as the sick person feels the bite of the medicine, because its bite is like fire.
Therefore, while he persisted in what he found the bite to be, then remove the medicine and move it with your finger. Therefore, when the bite stops, then remove the medicine and wash the eye with water.
And consider then, if you see the eyelid swelling, as it does with contraction with fire, or with incision, it is good: and if not, then repeat over it from the medicine on the place where it does not press the medicine and does not stain, until your operation equals and the eye closes.
Then place a wet compress with butter on it until the burning of the skin is removed. Then care for it with a diaphenic ointment or other, until it heals.
And it is necessary for you during the operation to keep the last guard, so that nothing falls into the eye from the medicine.
If the eyelid becomes soft after days, and something fights from the hair in the eye, then repeat the medicine on that place which is softened from the eyelid properly, as you did at first. Then take care of yourself until you are healed.
And this is the shape of a myrtle leaf.
And you should know that human eyes differ in size and shape. Therefore, according to that, your consideration should be: and the path of righteousness is not hidden from him who has a desire for this art.
On the method of cauterizing in a lacrimal fistula.
When you are treating a fistula, since we mentioned in the divisions of diseases that your cure does not work, then you should cauterize it according to this method.
Tell the patient to place his head in your lap, and let him hold his head between your hands in this way, so that he does not move, nor move his head with his own.
Then place a poultice of warm water on the eyeball, or in a mucilage of psyllium over his eye: then heat the cauterizing iron, whose form is this.
Let it be concave, like the form of a penfeather of a turkey from one end, with which the cauterizing iron is made: and if you wish it to penetrate up to the other end, and if you wish it to go upwards, thus try.
But this concave is better for your work.
Then express the fistula, if it is open, and remove the pus from it, and dry it: and if it is not open, then open it, and remove the pus from it.
Then place then on it the cauterizing iron, which is made very hot.
And hold with it your hand for a short time near the cauterizing iron, next to the eye, so that your hand does not wander, or disturb the patient: and place the cauterizing iron in the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
If you reach the beginning of your cauterizing tool up to your mouth, it will be good. And if not: then repeat the cauterizing tool once or twice, depending on what you need from it: and let it rest for three days.
Then place a bandage with butter, and take care of it with drying ointment until it is healed.
But if forty days have passed and it has not healed: then place a sharp corrosive medicine on top of it until the mouth is detached: and shave it according to how it came in its chapter.
And there is another method of cauterizing a fistula, which some first said. Bend to the location of the fistula, and find it: then place in the wound a thin tube, that is, a thin cannula, whose form is as follows. And pour into it an amount of a liquid lead drachma, and hold your hand with the cannula retention good, and not move at all weakly, so that it does not run, or the liquid lead does not reach his eye.
And you should place on the weak eye's bandage an infusion of egg white or in water.
For lead burns the location of the fistula, and heals it with a marvelous cure.
But if the fistula is healed, with what we said from cauterizing and cure, it is good. And if not, then it is necessary to administer the nostril opening, and reduce the fistula to the course of the nose, according to how it comes to its own place.
¶ On the method of cauterizing in lip wounds.
Often wounds occur in the lip that are called pimples, and especially in the lips of children.
When therefore you are caring for these fissures, since as we said in the division of diseases, it does not bring about a cure, then apply a small cauterizing knife with fire, according to this form.
And its concavity should be according to the thinness of the knife.
Then place the burning knife quickly in the very fissures, until the cauterizing knife reaches the depth of the fissures.
Then care for it with a bandage, until it is healed.
Concerning the method of cauterizing in a mouth ulcer.
When an abscess occurs at the root of the gingiva, or in the palate, or in the roots of the teeth: then it discharges pus, and it is torn open: afterwards it is opened up, and pus runs out, and a fistula forms: then you should care for it, and it does not bring about a cure, then it is necessary that you apply a burning knife with fire, according to the amount that it can take in the fistula. Then insert the burning knife into the opening of the fistula, and hold your hand there, until the burning knife reaches the depth and end of it: do this once, or twice.
Then care for it after that, with what we said about curing until it is healed.
If therefore the pus is cut away, and it is healed, it will be good. And if not, then it is necessary to uncover the place, and remove the bone of the rotten part according to what comes in its head.
Concerning the method of cauterizing in gums, and molten teeth.
When the gum is molten due to moisture, and the teeth move, and you care for it with medicines, and it does not bring about a cure: then place the head of the sick person in your lap.
Then place the cauterizing instrument, which will be shown later, on top of the tooth, and quickly insert the hot cauterizing tool into it: and hold your hand there for a short while until you feel that the weak heat of the fire has reached the root of the tooth.
And then lift your hand: and then repeat the cauterizing tool several times, according to what you wish.
Then the weak one will fill his mouth with salt water, and hold it for an hour, and then spit it out.
For the tooth is strengthened by movement, and the jaw becomes softened and contracted, and the corrupted moisture is dried up.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in tooth pain.
When the tooth pain is due to coldness, or there is frost in it, or worms, and no cure is found with medicines: then the cauterizing tool is used in two ways: either with butter, or with fire.
But the cauterizing tool with butter is as follows: you take some liquid butter and boil it in an iron spoon or in a vessel. Then take a piece of cloth, and wrap it around the tip of the spoon. Then dip it into the boiling butter: and place it on the painful tooth quickly, and hold it until it cools: then repeat it several times, until the power of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, dip a piece of cloth or a rag into the cold butter, and place it on the painful tooth: and place a burning iron on top of it until the fire reaches the depth of the tooth's concavity.
But cauterization with fire is as follows: you direct it towards the nozzle of air, or the nozzle of iron. And let there be something of a thickness in his body, so that the sharpness of the fire does not reach the mouth of the sick person.
Then place the cauterizing iron, whose form will come: and put it on that tooth: and hold your hand, until the cauterizing iron is cooled.
Do this several times, for the pain will be removed, either on that same day, or on another day.
And it is necessary that in the impression of that cauterizing iron, the sick person fill his mouth with good borax, and hold it for one hour: then spit it out.
This is the form of the cauterizing iron.
Cauterize with whatever end you can, according to what is possible: and this is the form of the needle.
¶ On the method of cauterizing in strophuli.
When strophuli are from phlegm, and from cold humidities, and they are not obedient to digestion by medicines, and you want to quickly digest them: then place the cauterizing iron, whose form is this.
Having two open ends, so that smoke comes out from the cauterizing iron from the other end: and put it on fire over the abscess once, and second, if you need it, until it reaches the depth of the abscess.
If the abscess is small: then put the cauterizing iron according to the quantity of the abscess.
Then let it go for three days, and put on it a compress soaked in an infusion of marshmallow, until what the fire burned is removed.
Then care for it with tooth ointment, until the form of the needle is healed.
¶ On the method of cauterizing in rauco voice and constriction of breathing.
When moisture accumulates over the bronchial channel, and especially when it is accompanied by a cold constitutional state, then it is necessary for the sick person to be evacuated first with dissolved medicines.
Then cauterize the affected area at the root of the throat in a depressed location: and be careful not to let the cauterizer reach the throat, nor in the skin, except for a small part of it.
Then cauterize the affected area at the junction of the neck in the last spine of the back: and let the cauterizer be a narrow one according to the mode that preceded it.
Then care for it with what preceded it until it is healed.
On the method of cauterizing in illnesses of the lungs and coughs.
When the cough and illness of the lungs are due to cold moistures, and the sick person does not have a fever, nor phthisis, and the illness is chronic: then cauterize it with two cauterizers above the backbone in depressed, loose, empty locations. And with another cauterizer in the middle of the chest between two breasts: and let the cauterizer be a needle according to the form that preceded it.
And if your cauterization is by pricking with the cauterizer called the Puncture, whose form preceded it in the pricking of ear pain: and let there be punctures from thirty punctures almost to another.
Then care for it with what preceded it until it is healed.
And now the cauterizer has three branches: according to this form. Therefore it is alleviated with that cauterization when you do it with one triple cauterizer.
Chapter 27.
When the head of the humerus is dislocated due to moisture and is not fixed at the time of its return from dislocation until it becomes a habit for him to return to its place, then when it happens as we have already testified, it should be reduced to its original position. Then the patient should lie on his back, or on the healthy side. Then lift the cloth that is on the inside of the tilt-up to the upper part with your left hand fingers, and if the joint is dislocated to the inside.
Then take a cauterizing iron with two holes. Whose shape is this.
Then cauterize the cloth until it penetrates to the other side, and the figure of cauterization with four cauterizations will come.
And sometimes cauterization is done with a cauterizing iron having three holes, so the figure of cauterization then becomes six cauterizations: and they are holes according to the thinness of the thread.
And this is the shape of a cauterizing iron having three holes.
And sometimes one is added to this mode, so there are eight cauterizations.
Then place salt-crushed onions on the cauterizing iron. Then make the patient stick to the quietness, so that the limb does not move during any time until he is strengthened.
And if the dislocation is to the upper part, and this rarely happens, then cauterize it on the arm with a claw iron, or with many puncturing cauterizations.
For the joint is strengthened, and the moisture is removed: and the patient is healed.
On the Method of Cauterizing the Stomach.
When cold and excessive moisture occur in the stomach, until it is removed from its surroundings, and many catarrhs are multiplied to it, and continuous modes of treatment do not help: then it is necessary for the sick person to lie on his back, and extend his legs, and his hands. Then cauterize with three cauteries, the cautery under the collarbone in the amount of one finger's breadth with the cautery hook, and two cauteries below from both sides of the cautery of one, until the figure of the cauteries triangular comes. And lengthen between each one so that they do not touch when they make pus.
And the depth of the cautery should be the amount of two-thirds of the thickness of the skin.
And the shape of the cauteries should be according to this form without addition: and if you wish to cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form: and the cautery should be one according to the shape of a circle according to this form.
And the stomach should be cauterized by pricking it with the one that is farthest from this cautery: and there are signs on the stomach of a prick according to the amount, which you wish with the encaustic: then cauterize it with the cautery of the prick: then treat it with the treatment that preceded until it is healed.
On the Method of Cauterizing a Cold Ear.
When pain occurs in the ear from cold and moisture, or from excessive thickening, until it exits its natural exit excessively, and the sick person is cured, with what we said, and does not improve in that: then it is necessary for the sick person to lie on his back, and signs with the encaustic three cauteries according to this form, and the same amount of cauteries below the clavicle, where the arm of man reaches: and there should be space that is the thickness of one finger between each cauterium: and the cautery should be according to the straight length of the body: and do not press your hand with the cautery too much.
And let the quantity of that which is burned be from the thickness of the skin, and the quantity of its middle not added: and let it be an invalid standing on its feet.
But if it is not standing, then it is lying, who has already extended its legs and raised its arms.
This is the form of the cautery.
And indeed it is possible for you to cauterize this cautery with a scalpel, when you are skilled and prudent in the art.
And guard yourself, so that you do not proceed to cauterization to the end, and the thickness of the skin is completely burned, why the whole body is burned, and it reaches the intestines: for the skin there is thin, so you know that.
¶ On the method of cauterizing abscesses in the liver.
When it happens, and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the liver, or in its tunic: then if it is in the flesh of the liver, the sick one suffers a sharp pain, and there is gravity without sharpness: and if it is in the tunic of the liver, with pain there is very sharp intensity: and you already see that its treatment has exhausted the doctors.
Therefore it is necessary for the invalid to lie on his back. Then the shape of the abscess with the cautery: then burn the scalpel which is similar to a ray. And this is its shape. And cauterize with that cautery one, until the whole skin is burned, and it reaches the intestines, until all the pus comes out: then care for him with the treatment of the sick, until he is healed.
And it is not necessary to use this cautery species, unless whose study in the art of medicine is prolonged: and through whose hand these ailments with some experiments often come: then he dares to do this operation.
In fact, it is better for you to leave it with me.
On the method of cauterizing in pleurisy.
The ancients said that a cautery with the roots of Aristolochia should be applied to pleurisy in this way: And it is that you should take from the dry roots of Aristolochia a long one, as long as a finger, and it should be as thick as the size of a finger. Then dip it in oil: and burn it in the fire. Then cauterize it with one cautery in that which is between the connection of the wings with the neck, and two small cauteries under the guides a little inclined to the part which is under the chin.
And two cauteries also in that which is between the fifth and sixth ribs a little inclined to the backs: and with one cautery in the middle of the chest, and with another above the stomach. And three cauteries from the backs: one in that which is between two spatulas: and two cauteries from both sides of the chest, lower with the cautery which is between two spatulas.
And it is not necessary to press your hand with the cautery, rather it should be in plain sight on the skin smoking.
And some ancients have said that there are people who use a cautery from iron like a ray: and they burn, and they put it inside in that which is between the ribs, until it reaches with it to the swelling, and the pus comes out: as we said in the abscess of the eye.
But in this puncture with the cautery there is fear that either the sick person dies immediately, or it happens a fistula in the place which has no healing.
32nd Chapter on the Method of Cautery for the Spleen.
When you are treating the affliction of the spleen, since as we mentioned earlier, the cure lies in the division of afflictions, and your treatment does not bring relief, then cauterization is necessary in it according to three methods, all of which are correct.
One of these methods is to perform three or four cauterizations along the length of the spleen according to the shape of the liver cauterizations, preceding in the same figure.
And there should be a certain amount of thickness between each cauterization, about the size of a finger, or slightly more or less.
And the method of cauterization should be equal to that which we mentioned for the liver cauterization.
And do not press your hand against the cauterizer: and let the patient be weak and lying on his back.
Another method of cauterization is: to ignite the cauterizer having two wounds, as we mentioned in the chapter on dislocation of the shoulder: and raise the skin which is directly over the spleen where the arm of the weak left side reaches: and your elevation should be according to the width of the body, so that the cauterizations fall according to the length of the body.
Then insert two burning wounds until you penetrate the skin from the other side: then remove the cauterizer: thus four cauterizations are made.
And if you wish to cauterize with another cauterizer having three wounds.
Then care for the cauterizer after you have released it: to emit pus for many days, for it is more beneficial than all the other things that preceded from the cure.
33rd Chapter on the Method of Cautery in Hydropsy.
The cauterizer does not fall into hydrocephalus unless properly anointed.
When you treat hydrocephalus with the methods of cure mentioned in the division, and do not find a cure, then it is necessary to cauterize it with four cauterizations around the navel, and one cauterization on the stomach, and one on the spleen, and two cauterizations after the back between the vertebrae, and one in direct pectoris, and one in direct stomach: and let the depth of the cauterization be close to the thickness of the skin.
Then let the cauterizer leave the wound open, so that it can emit pus over time.
And do not remove the patient from treatment after cauterization with him, for it is necessary that two intentions gather to him: and he will quickly come to him with the help of God.
Indeed, the form of the cauterizer with which the belly is cauterized should be closed, according to its previous form: and the form of the one with which the back is cauterized should be oily, according to its previous form.
¶ On the method of cauterizing feet and legs.
When boils form in hydrocephalus and are filled with yellow water, it is necessary to cauterize on the back of the foot in the nocrati, which is between the auricular and anular: and lift your hand with the cauterizer, and do not twist it: then lift your hand: and do not rub it at all.
For yellow water does flow out, and the cauterizer should be in this form.
Then do two cauterizations on both legs in every leg, and let the cauterizer be made with the extreme end of the cauterizer: and let the cauterizer be made according to the length of the leg, one under the knee, and the other below it, around the middle of the leg: and two cauterizations on every hip: and let the cauterizer be left open without treatment for a long time, so that some water flows out from it: then cure it with the rest of what we said.
Translation: "On the Method of Cauterizing in the Treatment of the Belly.
Chapter 35.
When there is a solution of the belly due to cold and moisture, until it weakens the retentive and digestive powers that are in the stomach and intestines: and it is cured with this method of cure, but not healed: and you see an infirm person tolerating a cauterizing instrument of excessive power, then cauterize him with a great cauterizing instrument above his belly, according to what preceded in the cauterization of the stomach with the cauterizing circle, and four cauterizing instruments in the circumference of the umbilicus, with the fine cauterizing hook: and cauterize him with a great cauterizing instrument above the alhosos, or with two cauterizing instruments.
And if you see excessive moisture and he is tolerating that, then cauterize him with a cauterizing instrument above the comb, and cauterize him on every side: and perhaps add two small cauterizing instruments near the great one on his belly.
For it is a cure that is advancing, whose momentum does not err.
Translation: "On the Method of Cauterizing Hemorrhoids.
Chapter 36.
When in the anus there are many old hemorrhoids, or one, and they are from thick humors, cold, or corrupt moisture, and they are cured with what we said in division, and not by cure: then cauterize them with three cauterizing instruments on the lower spondyle of the back under the almeidati a little triangularly, and cauterize under the umbilicus almost two fingers.
And if you think that his stomach is cooled and his food is not digested, and you see his face swelling, then cauterize him on his belly with a great cauterizing instrument, according to what preceded: and cauterize above his spleen, and another above his splenius muscle, with the fine cauterizing hook: and leave the cauterizing instrument open for some time: then cure him, until he is healed.
Chapter 37.
When you have incised the ulcer, then apply the cauterizing iron which resembles a needle. Then insert the burning iron into the incised ulcer: and with your last hand, until the cauterizing iron reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood flowed, do it once or twice.
If therefore the ulcers are many, then cauterize each one according to what we have related. Then care for them, with that which heals them from the ointments, until they are healed.
And if you cauterize him with a large cauterizing iron above the skin, it is more painful.
On the method of cauterizing a fistula in the anus.
Chapter 38.
When a weak patient does not obey the incision and operation which we have related in its place, and is frightened by it, perhaps he may be healed with the cauterizing iron.
Therefore when a fistula occurs and is old, pus flows from it, and corrupted moistures. Therefore it is more appropriate that you probe it with a thin probe. Then know the quantity of its depth with the probe.
Then apply the burning iron which is like a needle. Then insert the burning iron into the fistula and the quantity in which it entered the closure.
And repeat the burning iron over it, until those corrupted bodies are consumed, once or twice or three times, according to the quantity of your need.
And guard yourself from burning the nerve, if it is there, or the great vein: or if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder, or to the body of the intestine, then guard yourself from all these places.
And you shall not do this, unless when there is a fistula in a fleshy place: and you think that it is not penetrating.
Then take care of the place until it heals.
But if the place is sealed and the materials are removed from it, and it remains like this for a long time: then you will know that it has healed completely.
And if the materials are not removed from it, then you will know that it is penetrating, or there is a rotten bone in its depth, or something like that from them: whose memory will come back to its place.
About the method of cauterizing the kidneys.
When pain occurs in the kidneys due to cold, or heavy dampness, and it is weakened because of this: then you should cauterize the same above the almethenum on the kidneys, with a cauterizing iron over all the kidney with a claw, whose memory has been mentioned.
And perhaps we should cauterize it again in the same place. Therefore, three lines will come. Therefore, they will be more effective in the bandage.
About the method of cauterizing the bladder.
When weakness occurs in the bladder, and softening from cold and moisture, until it does not retain infirm urine, then cauterize it in the lower part of the inguinal on the bladder, where the pili pectinis begin, and with a cauterizing iron from the right inguinal, and another from the left of that: and the length of that cauterization should be according to the width of the little finger: and cauterize it with a cauterizing iron on the lower back, or with two cauterizing irons if you need them: and it should be according to what has been mentioned about the claw.
On the method of cauterizing the uterus.
When fever and moisture occur in the womb and prevent pregnancy, destroy its menstruation, delay its call, and cause pain upon its arrival, then it is necessary to cauterize the womb with three cauteries around the navel, as we mentioned in the cauterization of the bladder, and with a cauterizing iron on the lower back, or with two cauteries: and let the cauterizing iron be tight.
On the method of cauterizing the anus in dislocation.
When moisture is poured into the anus and becomes a cause of its exit from its place, and the sign of this is that the leg is stretched out over the other when compared together: and the place of dislocation is found to be empty in it.
Therefore it is necessary to cauterize the affected person on the anus of its own with a similar cauterizing iron in a circle: after you sign with the encaustic in the circumference of the anus, as it rolls: and so that the cauterizing iron falls in the middle of the circle.
If this cauterizing iron is not present to you, then cauterize it with three cauteries, with a large olive-oil cauterizing iron: and let the depth of the cauterizing iron be according to the thickness of the skin of the whole.
Then take care of it until it is healed.
On the method of cauterizing in sciatica.
When pain occurs in the anus and the causes are fever and moisture: and the affected person is cured with it, as we mentioned in the division, and does not recover, and it returns: then it is necessary to dissolve the affected person from thick humors with fetid pills, or with artificial pills, and similar. Then cauterize him.
And the method of cauterization in it is according to two methods: either a cauterizer with burning medicines, or a cauterizer with fire.
A cauterizer with fire is according to many ways.
One of which is, to cauterize on the anchor's pitch above three triangular cauterizations, in this form. And make them a good or bad depth. And let the space be as much as the quantity of the thickness of a finger: and let the cauterizer be oily.
Sometimes however the cauterization is made in the middle above the anchor's head. Therefore there are four cauterizations.
And if you want to cauterize with a circle, whose form precedes in the cauterization of anchor's dislocation, one: so that it contains the whole anchor.
And burn the thickness of the skin throughout.
This is the method of cauterization in Sciatica, when the pain adheres to the anchor itself, and does not extend up to the hip and leg.
If however it extends up to the hip and leg, then cauterize him with two cauterizations on the hip, on the place where the weak one indicates, in which is the pain, and with your cauterizer on the thigh four fingers towards the silvester part: and let the cauterizer be a knife.
And let the depth of the cauterization be according to the thickness of the skin.
If the weak one indicates that the pain extends up to near the toes of the foot, then cauterize him there where he indicates with your cauterizer, three, or four, or more, if it needs it.
And if he indicates that the pain is under the knee towards the leg, then cauterize him there with your cauterizer one knife.
And beware in all your cauterizations, so that you do not burn the nerves or a large artery, and pull through it over an injured person, causing more harm or contraction.
And indeed I have seen one and another of those who cauterized above the ankle, and they perished in the cauterization, and the leg became inflamed, until a tumor formed at the foot, and it was completely pierced through, and the entire foot rotted: then dissolution of the belly followed, and death after that.
If the pain is in both parts at once, cauterize each according to this method.
And some wise men said about the cauterization of the ankle, which is this method of cauterization. Make a similar sponge from iron, whose diameter is the middle of the palm: and let it be at its opening according to the thickness of the nucleus of the finger, or a little less: and inside that sponge let there be another sponge.
And let there be space between each sponge that is the thickness of a finger joint: and let the sponges be open from both parts: and let their height be like a knot, or two knots: and make them handles from iron fitly adapted in the sponges.
Then let it be heated in the fire until it reddens, and let it throw sparks: then let it be placed on the poultice of the ankle of the weak person lying on their healthy side. Then cauterize him with three round cauteries in one stroke.
Then let him rest for three days. Then apply plasters with butter: and let the wound open be left for many days. Then care for the wound with ointment until it heals.
Albucasis says, "In this manner of cauterization, my son, we have been very little used, due to the terror of its appearance; and therefore, because few people find it bearable to endure over it.
Nevertheless, it is from good cauterizations that one who undergoes it finds and discovers with it a place for it.
The cauterizing instrument with medicines adhering to it is made by you, who make two smears having a perforated ring, into which the card of its gate descends from the air or iron, length of the wall: whose height they are two knots, or as if they were themselves.
And let there be space that is the amount of thickness of a finger between both quantities of thickness, and be open below and above: and let it contain themselves adjacent to each other, according to this form.
Then lay it on the pepper box anchor, leaning on the sound side. And press your hand on the pepper box anchor much. Then pour between the two circles from hot water, which is heated with fire for a little while, and hold it for a temporal amount of time: and the sick person tolerates its bite and its burning, because he found the bite like fire, until the bite is quiet.
Then wash your hand with the instrument, and remove the hot water from the anchor entirely with sweet water: then let it go for three days.
And put on it butter, until the blackness of burning is removed: and let it go for several days, and drain out pus from it. For it is the last in the bandage.
Then care for it with ointments until it heals.
If the pain extends to the hip or leg, make a stance in what contains water, according to what you did in the equal anchorage.
And this is the method of hot water: and I have already written it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines. Take alkali and unextinguished lime, each one part of the same: grind both, and place them in a new pot, whose lower part is perforated with a small hole according to the quantity that enters itself radius: and place under the bottom of the pot another glass pot: and throw on top of the alkali and lime from sweet water, which submerges both through a finger: after which you press it with your hand good compression: and leave the pot until the sharp water descends lower part of the glass pot.
Then gather that water all, and throw it on top of another lime: and cook, until it is renewed.
For it will then be very strong acidity, which is administered in many medical operations, and in the cauterization of the remaining limbs. Because it performs the operation of its fire.
And from the medicines with which the anchorage are cauterized, also as tisis, and honey of cashew, and lime with soap, so that both are mixed.
And indeed Galen himself reported, of a certain man from ancient cure, by which he was cured of the pain of the anchorage and sciatic vein: and magnified it to be very good. And he said, because it did not require other cure, and because he was healed from one vice, until he reported, because perhaps himself entered the bath carried, and exited from it already healed.
And it is also taken from the fresh sedategrass: and if it is not found green, a dry recent one is taken, and it is pounded much with some fat, and it is placed on the splint where there is pain, or in the leg, or in the hip: and it is bound, and it is let go for the quantity of three hours, or for the quantity that the sick person feels sedation of the burning. Then introduce him into the bath.
And when his body becomes moist, introduce him into a bed. For the pain retreats, and he is healed.
And you should know that it is not necessary for someone to use a cautery with these medicines, unless after the evacuation of the body.
And Dioscorides who said that, when the droppings of a goat are applied with it to the sciatic nerve, they bring him: and the cautery is made in this way. Take wool, and it is poured with old oil, and it is placed on the deep place which is between the thumb of the foot, and between the toes, and it is near the toe.
Then take the dry droppings of a goat, and burn it in fire, until it becomes coal.
Then place it on the wool, and let it go, until it is extinguished. Then repeat that. And do not stop doing that, until you reach the sense above the splint, and the pain is quiet.
And this method of cautery is called the cautery of the goat.
About the cauterization of the back pain.
Sometimes pain occurs in the back from many causes, or from an accident, or from a blow, or from an excessive evacuation, and from similar things, from the infusion of cold and wet matter: and the cautery does not fall, except in this species alone, which is made from the infusion of cold matter.
After the evacuation of the sick person with fetid pills, and similar ones, it is necessary to place three lines across the back, where the pain is located, according to the width of his ribs, after marking them with a hot iron in every line, five or more cauterizations according to the amount that comes from the tolerance of the sick person due to its virtue: and let the cauterization be made with a cauterizing needle.
And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cauterizations, with a middle cauterizing needle, in this form.
On the method of cauterizing in the beginning of gibbosities.
This illness often occurs in small children.
And the sign of its beginning in children is: that a stricture occurs on him during breathing and movement, and it is found in the last rib and its nodes, which has already begun to rise above the other ribs.
When therefore you see this, and wish to do it, then cauterize that with a cauterizing needle which is a circle in this form.
And let him take the cauterizing needle over all part of the rib equally: and if you wish to cauterize around the rib with a cauterizing needle two lines, or three: and they should be close to each other.
Then take care of the place, until he is cured with that which we said.
And beware, do not administer the cauterizing needle in gibbosities, which is made in a spasm of the nerve.
On the method of cauterizing in gout, and pains of the joints.
When pains of the joints are from humidities cold, which are poured out to each limb of the body, then when they occur in the feet, it is the custom of physicians to call that gout properly.
When therefore treating Gout of the cold cause and with methods of cure, and the pains do not subside, then the cauterizer will remove them.
And it is, that the cauterizer him after evacuation in the circumference of the joints of the feet, with many cautery: and let the cauterizer be olive oil.
And if you lack to points on the face of the foot, then make with cauterizer point. But if the pains ascend up to the knees, or other joints, and this often happens, then cauterize him above all the knee with three cautery, or four from every part, with this same cauterizer Clavi.
But if you need more of this cauterizer, then cauterize him. And do not submerge your hand with cauterizer, but rather it is about the thickness of the skin only.
But if the pains ascend up to the knees, and back: then administer what we said from cauterizer in his chapter.
But if the pains are only in the hands: then points in the circumference of the wrist, as two lines turn.
But if there remains from the pains in the fingers: then points them, over all the node point, and over the comb of the hand.
But if the pains ascend up to the elbows, or shoulders, then cauterize both from every part.
And do not evacuate the sick person from good diet, from reception of medicines. For if good diet is made, and the phlegm is evacuated, he will be cured with the help of God with this cauterizer.
¶ Of the manner of cauterizing in Hernia.
When a rupture occurs in the groin, and the intestine or bladder descends to the testicle, and it is close to the beginning: then you should advise the weak patient to abstain from food on his day of fasting. And let him use laxatives to facilitate the descent of feces from his intestine.
Then let him sit between your hands on his back: and advise him to hold his breath until the bladder or intestine appears.
Then reduce it with your fingers, and mark with a red-hot iron under the rupture on the tongue with a sign indicating which end is similar to the middle of a circle towards the upper part of the body.
Then heat the iron, which has this form, until it turns white, and throw sparks. Then reduce the intestine or bladder to its natural shape. Then let him place his hand on the spot where the intestine should not exit: and you have already opened between the legs of the weak patient, and placed under it a pillow, and another servant on his legs, and another on his chest who holds his hand.
Then place the iron on the sign over him, with your hand holding the iron straight. And hold him until you reach the mouth with it: or repeat with it another time if you have not reached the mouth with it in the first attempt up to the mouth.
And carefully observe the exit of the intestine during your burning, lest you burn it and cause death or great harm to the weak patient.
And know that when you do not reach the mouth with the iron, your operation is incomplete.
And it is necessary that the cauterizing instrument for children be thin, according to their size.
Then care with the other ointments, until healing occurs.
And let him be weak lying on his back for forty days, until the wound is sealed.
And it is necessary to give his food in the length of time for his healing, which soothes his stomach: so that the intestine does not go out during defecation and excretion.
Then when he wants to rise after forty days, then give him a well-made bandage, and let him hold it for another forty days.
And reduce his labor, and from the filling of food and drink, and from loud voices.
For when he uses this regimen, thus he is healed with complete healing.
And I will say the cure for hernias with incision in his chapter.
When however the hernia occurs in the remaining belly, and they are beginning, and you want them not to be added, then cauterize his hernia with a round cauterizing instrument according to its quantity: and let that which is burned from then be as the third of it. Then care for him, with what we said: and not added.
And now some of the first have said: to cauterize the hernia with a triangular cauterizing instrument, according to this form.
After it is signed with the cauterizing iron, and a line which is through the width in the upper side of the hernia, and another line below. And place your hand in the middle with the closed cauterizing iron.
But the first cauterizing instrument is easier and better.
About the method of cauterizing for pain due to a fall, or blow.
Chapter XLVIII.
When it happens to some members by accident or from a blow, and the pain persists for a long time and does not improve with medication, then it is necessary to cauterize with the point of a needle.
And the cauterizing instrument should be of the same size and strength as the member, its weakness, its virtue, its twisting location, and the pain it causes.
If therefore it is cured from the first cauterization, it is well. If not: then repeat the cauterization over it.
Because of the habit of these pains, it is customary for them to change from the member to that which approaches it. Therefore it is necessary to follow them with the cauterizing instrument until the sick member is healed.
§ On how to cauterize in leprosy.
However, sometimes the leprosy is healed by the greatest cauterization. And especially the species of leprosy that is caused by the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy, therefore when you want to cauterize it, consider.
If therefore the leprosy is incurable, and you have treated it with what we said in the division, and it has not descended nor stood still, and you fear that corruption will spread over the whole of its complexion: then cauterize it on the head with five cauterizations: one in the middle of the head, and the second below it towards the front at the end of the hair, and two on the two horns, and one behind on the nape of the neck.
And finally your hand with the cauterizing instrument for a short time, until it makes an impression in the mouth, and the bones are dislocated from it: so that the expiration of thick vapors is relieved from it, and also cauterize the spleen with the cauterizing instrument according to what preceded.
If the leprosy has already spread over the sick person and is clearly visible, then it is necessary to cauterize with these cauterants, which we mentioned at the head, and a cauterant on the tip of the nose, and two cauterants on the two maxillae, and two cauterants on the spines of the neck, and six on the spines of the back, and one large one on the buttocks and one above it, in the same place: and two on the ankles: that is, on every ankle, and one on each knee, and two on the shoulders, and two on the elbows, and two on the chest, and two on the tendons of his chest. And cauterize him over all the joints, from the joints of his fingers and toes: and cauterize over all the heels of his feet, and the palms of his hands.
And spare you the nerves that are above the last calcaneus, so as not to burn them.
And sometimes he is cauterized with a cauterant on the tooth, and another on the stomach, and another on the ear.
And know that the more you add a cauterant, the more it is a remedy and the more it benefits.
And know that the sick person does not find pain in the cauterant, like healthy people do: because his body is already numb.
And it is necessary that the cauterants be of a size and proportion according to his limbs and joints: according to what preceded from the kinds of tools.
Then care for the cauterant with flour of herb and honey, and the rest of the cure, until he is healed.
¶ On the method of cauterizing in a stupor.
When a certain limb is numb and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, but does not heal, then cauterize the numb limb with cauteries, according to the size or soundness of the limb.
And let your cauterizing tool penetrate slightly into the thickness of the skin. Then care for it with ointment until it heals.
And sometimes cauterize for a certain numbness that occurs in the hand and foot, at the spine's exit of the nerves that move that limb: and the numbness will be removed.
But do not presume over it, unless he is wise in the knowledge of limbs and the exit of nerves that move the body.
Chapter L.
When Albaras is discolored and does not bring anything from the skills of medicine: then cauterize it with a deep cauterizing tool slightly, according to the thickness of the skin, until the whiteness is removed, and its color changes.
Then care for it with flour of herb, and lentils with rose oil, and leaves of arnoglossa, and blood of dove, and blood of goose: each one is a part of one: mix all these, and apply them to cloth, and stick to the place, until it heals.
§ On the method of cauterizing in Cancer.
When Cancer is beginning and you want to stop it: then cauterize it with a cauterizing tool of a circle around it, as it turns.
But the wise say, that it should be cauterized with the last cauterizing tool in the middle.
To me, however, it does not seem that way: because I fear that it would become inflamed, and I have already seen this thing several times.
And it is more correct to cauterize around its circumference with a circle, as we said, or with multiple cautery.
¶ On the method of cauterizing in Adubelati.
When someone has an Adubelati and it is delayed in maturation, either due to excessive moisture causing it, or due to the age of an infirm person, when he is old and has little blood, or due to time, and you wish to hasten in the maturation of Adubelati, then cauterize around its circumference with small cautery needles by pricking. Then let it go. For it will hasten with the maturation.
But if you wish to make a hole in it with a cautery, then use a cautery iron of this form.
And place it in the middle of Adubelati until it penetrates the skin: and let the cautery iron be from that which follows the infirm person, to relieve the course of purges.
Then care for it until it is healed.
¶ On the method of cauterizing in a corroding ulcer.
Chapter 38.
A corroding ulcer is not other than a corruption in a moving member, and it corrodes it: just as fire consumes dry wood.
If therefore you see a corroding ulcer in a place that can bear cautery with fire, then use many cautery irons, small and large, according to what is suitable for that place where the corroding ulcer is.
Then cauterize it from all sides until the whole root of the corruption is removed, and nothing remains of it entirely.
Then leave it for three days, and place on the cauterized areas ground sulfur with oil until all the scabs are removed and all corruption is eliminated.
Then care for it with flesh-generating ointments.
If therefore you see that after three days the flesh is born with healthy birth, in which there is no corruption, it is good.
And if not: then repeat the cauterization on what remains from the corrupted areas.
And abrading, heal sometimes with sharp medicine. For it arises in the place of the cauterization.
However, the cauterization with fire is faster of healing: and indeed I have already said about its cauterization with sharp medicine in division: take it therefore there when you need it.
§ On the method of cauterizing in warts, and verucae.
Chapter 50.
Frequently it happens in the lower parts of the feet this sickness: and it is a rough, seeping thing which harms the foot.
And indeed the cauterization in them is according to two modes: cauterization with fire, and cauterization with hot water.
However much with fire is, so that you ignite the cauterization concave like a penfeather: which is made of iron, according to the quantity it contains the claw from every part: and it is thin of the edge.
Then place it burning on the claw. Then turn your hand with the cauterization around the claw, until the cauterization reaches the depth of the claw: and leave it for three days, until it begins to emit pus. Then apply plasters to it with soft sulfur, crushed with salt: and leave the plaster on it at night. He will be uprooted from his roots.
Then care for the wound with a generative flesh ointment until it heals.
If they are not converted and often occur on the surface of the body, especially on the hands and feet: then apply heat to them with hot water: and take a needle from the air, or iron, or from the feather of a bird: and place it on the wound, or althelul. Then throw in the needle from hot water with a small amount of quantity: hold your hand and turn it with compression of your hand for a moment, so that the edge of the needle is pressed into the root of the wound, and the hot water finds a way to the depth, to the root of the wound: and wait for the weak one for a moment on the stinging of hot water for an hour.
Then let him go, for the wound is healed with its roots.
So do with them one after another, until you come upon all who are in the body.
Then care for them after they are uprooted, with what generates flesh from ointments.
On the method of cauterizing in Tremor.
When it happens to someone Tremor from cold in the nerve, or from quartan fever, or from another: then it is necessary to cauterize him with four or five cauteries on the spinous processes of the back, and between every spinal process cauterize, and in his chest cauterize, and over his stomach cauterize.
For Tremor is quiet with the cauterization of oil, and hastens the health of the cold sickness.
On the method of cauterizing Albathir.
Chapter LVII.
Sometimes foul-smelling boils, known as abscesses, form in the body from corrupted coarse matter.
Therefore, when they first appear, they must be cauterized over the entire head of the boil with a fine cautery and a stick of myrtle, whose end is burned with fire. Or with the root of a long-stemmed Aristolochia. Or with a round cautery.
And sometimes they are cauterized a little at the beginning of their expulsion in this way: and they do not increase: and the excess is broken, which causes them, and they are healed from them.
However, it must be done after evacuation with venesection.
About the method of cauterizing in the flow of blood from an artery into a wound.
Many times it happens that the flow of blood from an artery cut at a wound, which occurs outside, or at the incision of an abscess, or a cauterized member, and similar to them, is difficult to remove.
Therefore, when it happens to someone, then hurry with your hand to the opening of the artery, and put your finger on top of it: and press it much, until the blood is held back under your finger, and nothing comes out of it.
Then put in the fire a small and many cautery irons: and blow on them, until they are heated greatly.
Then take from them one, or a few, or many, according to the wound and the place where the artery is broken, and put the cautery on the vein after you remove your finger quickly: and hold the cautery until the blood is cut off.
If the thorn is expelled from the opening of the artery and the hot iron is extinguished, then take another hot iron quickly, prepared from the irons that are in the fire.
Therefore do not cease to do this with one after another, until the blood stops flowing.
And beware, lest you burn the nerves which are there, and a new evil falls upon the weak one.
And know that when blood flows from the artery, then it is not possible to remove it: especially when the artery is large, unless with one of four methods. Or with a hot iron, as we have said. Or with extraction when it is not extracted. For when it is extracted, the ends of it contract, and the blood is cut off. Or it is tied with a strong ligature. Or they place on it remedies of its property, which is to cut off the blood and bind it with a decent compression.
But whoever administers its division with a ligature and binding with a cloth, and position of things that burn and similar, does not give it completely, unless rarely.
But if this happens to someone and there is no physician present nor medicine: then begin with the position of the index finger over the opening of the vein itself, as we have told, and bind it greatly, until the blood is stopped from the upper part of the wound and above the artery. And the finger is not removed, above it with cold water of great cold always, until the blood freezes, and swells, and is cut off.
And meanwhile he considers in it what is needed from the hot iron, or from the medicine.
On Incision, Puncture, and Phlebotomy in Wounds, and Similar Matters.
As we have said in the first chapter, all pain that is suitable for the use of a cauterizer and burning medicine, its causes, reasons, and instruments, and forms of cauterization.
And I placed chapters from head to toe.
And I proceed in this chapter the same way: that it may bring relief to the one seeking what has been sought.
And before I begin that, you must learn, my son, what is in this chapter from the terror that is in the first chapter on cauterization.
And for that reason, there must be greater caution in it, because in the operation that is in this chapter, very often fainting occurs with blood, with which life stands at the opening of the vein, or incision over an abscess, or opening of the exit, or cure of the wound, or extraction of the arrow, or incision on a stone, and those similar: from all of which, trembling, fear, and death often fall in many of them.
And I advise you, not to fall upon you that in which there is hesitation, for sometimes such men with their ways of weaknesses come to you in this art. For from them is one who is angry with his pain, and is light in him for death: because of the vehemence of which he found from his weakness and length of his malice. And with pain is from fear that means death.
And from them is he who gives his flute to you, and gives you with it, hoping for health, and his illness is destructive.
Therefore it is not necessary to agree with him who comes to you from them, whose manner is such. And let your caution be more urgent than his desire and your greed. And do not presume upon anything from him unless after a certain knowledge that confirms to you that the succession of that to which he arrives is praiseworthy.
And use them in the treatment of all your sick, for diagnosis and indication of that to which it is properly healthful.
For in him you have help for the acquisition of fame and glory, and memory and praise.
May God inspire you, O son, his understanding, and not take from you direction and inspiration: for that is in his hand.
And I indeed ordained this Chapter by distinguishing it into chapters, according to what preceded in the chapter of cauterization, from the forehead to the feet: so that you may be relieved of what you seek from him, and what you need.
¶ On the treatment of water that gathers in the heads of children.
Chapter 1.
You should know that this weakness often occurs to children at birth: or when the midwife compresses the head of the child without gentleness.
And also it happens even from a hidden cause which is not known.
And I indeed have not seen this weakness in other than in children: and to all whom I saw from them it was urgent for death: therefore it seemed to me to leave the operation in that.
I myself have seen a child whose head was filled with water, and his head was celebrated every day until he could not sit on himself due to the size of his head, and the moisture increased until he died.
This moisture, however, either accumulates between the skin and the bone, or under the bones above the skull.
And the operation in that case, if the moisture is between the skin and the bone and it is a small abscess, then it is necessary to make a cut in the middle of the head, one in width, and the length of the cut should be about two knots, until the moisture runs out.
This is the shape of the lancet.
If however the moisture is more increased and the abscess is larger, then place these two cuts according to this form.
And if the moisture is under the bone, and the sign of it is that you see the edges of the head open from all sides, and the water is pressed when you press it with your hand to the insides, and does not hide itself from you, then it is necessary to make three cuts in the middle of the head, according to this method.
And after the incision, extract all the moisture. Then bind the cuts with cloth and cotton. Then poultice it from above with wine and oil until the fifth day.
Then dissolve the ligament, and care for the wound with bandages, ointment.
And do not dismiss binding the head with equality. And feed the sick person with every dry food of little moisture, until the limb is strengthened and healed.
And another method of incision is to consider where the size of the abscess appears and the collection of water.
For sometimes there is more in the back, or on the forehead, or on the right side, or on the left side.
Therefore approach with an incision where you see the abscess and its filling with water, and cut it according to what is possible for you.
And observe, so that you do not cut the artery, and the blood flows out, and the sick person dies from that flow with the evacuation of moisture.
¶ On the incision of the arteries which are after the ears.
Chapter 2.
When catarrh occurs to someone's eyes, or chest, and it is not cured by medical treatment: then the last cure in that case is the incision of these two arteries.
Therefore when you want to incise them, so that the sick person may recover his head. Then rub the place with a rough cloth, so that the arteries appear. Then the sick person ties his neck with any of his cloths. Then consider where the pulse is. And the locations of both are locations which are after the ears depressed: and it is rarely hidden, unless in some men.
Then signs with the cautery on both: and cut both with a narrow knife on either side, with the incision going to the bone: and let that be done through the width of the head.
And if you want, insert a narrow knife under the artery, and cut it to the upper part with the incision.
And let the length of the incision be as two fingers joined together.
For when the pulse is cut, the blood flows out in a small amount, which jumps to the insides frequently.
If, however, the artery does not appear to the senses, then it is necessary to measure from the ear the distance of three fingers. Then mark with the cautery and probe until you reach the bone.
And that which should be expelled from the blood is six unciae and perhaps you may expel more or less from it. All of that according to the quantity which appears to you from the weakness and fullness of its artery.
Then consider the wound. Then if there remains from the bone any flesh, then cut that, so that it does not become a hot abscess: then bind the wound with lint from cloth.
Then care for it with ointment until it is healed.
¶ On the extraction of arteries which are in the temples.
Chapter 3.
When it happens to a man that he has ancient hemicrania, or sharp cataracts due to acrimonious humors, and heat in the temples, or old bile, strong, and similar to those: and he is treated with the methods of medical cure, and does not bear it: then we have experienced these pains in extraction of arteries from the temples, or cauterization of them, as we have narrated.
And the method of operation in their extraction is, that the weak hair which are in the temples be shaved, and he stretch to the artery appearing in the temple. For indeed it is shown to you from its pulse, and rarely is hidden except in a few men, or by great cold.
But if it is hidden from you, then he bind his weak head with any of his cloths: then rub the place with a rough cloth. Or apply warm water to the wound until it appears manifest to you. Then take a small needle, which I previously shaped. Then scrape away the skin with it, with ease, until you reach the artery. Then push the hook into it, and pull it out towards the top, until you have removed it from the skin, and make it recede from the garments that are underneath it from all sides.
If however the artery is delicate: then cover it with the tip of the hook. Then cut from that part according to the quantity by which their ends lengthen and contract, and do not let any blood flow. For if it is not cut, and if it is not severed, the blood will not rise at all.
Then wash out from the blood six ounces, up to three.
But if the artery is large: then it is necessary to ligate it in two places with double silk thread, strong silk thread, or with catgut, so that it does not rush towards putrefaction before the consolidation of the wound, and let any blood flow.
Then cut away the excess, which is between the two ligatures. Do this at that hour, or after another hour.
And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery up to the bone, with a cautery knife: until their ends are cut off, and it remains in the place of that work.
And it is better work, unless if he is weak and has a fever, or a heated constitution. Because the cautery is from those things which help to end moisture. Therefore it is a better bandage.
And after the extraction of the arteries, it is necessary to fill the place with old dough: and they should be placed on top of it, well-made felt.
And after the solution, it should be treated with dry medicines, which make flesh grow, and with liniments, until it heals.
If, however, while you are working, bleeding occurs from the artery, then hurry to cut it off with a cauterizer, or fill the place with zeugit: and tighten your hand until the blood is cut off. If there is nothing present for you, then place your finger on the place until the blood congeals. And rub the place with hot water, until the sharpness subsides, and it is tied as it should be.
Because it is lighter and easier to extract the artery, it is that with a cauterizer having two knives: let the sharpness of the two knives be like alum. However, they are much less sharp than two knives. Because if they are as sharp as two knives, each frost hurries: and they do not cut the flesh with speed. Since there is a little thickness in them, the heat of the fire is held in them, and the flesh is cut quickly: therefore this work is better for all operations, lighter, and easier.
And this is the shape of the cauterizing instrument.
And there should be a space that is the thickness of a finger between the two knives, after you mark two places with encaustic: and place both hot ones very near, until they reach the bone, and cut the vein in two places: so that it is lengthened between its ends. They are not solidified completely with this cauterizing agent.
Chapter 4.
About the care of the course of frequent, sharp tears from the eyes.
When tears are frequent and their course is from the eyes, which are above the outside of the skull: and no remedy of medicine is applied to them with other medicines, and you see the face of the sick already red, and feels walking in front of him, like the walk of ants: and his eyes are thinned, wet, so that already the hair on their pores is worn out with wear: and his eyelids are heated by the sharpness of the tears: then the ancients were in need of this cure, and called it a remedy, with the Sword.
And you should order the sick to shave the hairs that are on his forehead. Then cut three fissures evenly spaced according to the length of the forehead: and the length of the fissure is about two fingers, and the fissure one is evenly spaced from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of the arm slightly, and the third on the other side: and beware of the incision of the arteries that are on both sides: and extend your hand away from the continuity of the two jaws, and all the quantity of the incision is three fingers together: and it should be a piece of sponge prepared, or dry cloth with which you dry the blood.
Then insert a small spatula of two sharp ends, whose following is this form. From the incision that is from the temporal side, to the second incision: and scrape with it all the skin that is between two incisions, with the scar, which is on the bone. Then also do that from the middle incision up to the second incision. Then extract this space, and insert again the second incision another tool, which is called a sharp knife, smooth on one side, not sharp on the other. And this is its shape.
And place its sharp side towards the flesh with the skin, and its smooth side towards the mouth: and push it until it reaches the middle cut: and cut off with it all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes: except that the incision continues until what appears of the skin.
Then do that in the middle cut up to another cut.
And after it has flowed out an equal amount of blood, press the places from clots of coagulated blood.
Then place on every cut a piece of old cooked linen, and place above them cloths soaked in wine, or oil, or vinegar. And see that no hot abscess occur.
And on the third day dissolve the ligament, and administer a lot of infusion with warm water. Then care for it with basilicon ointment, and with the other things by which wounds are cured: until it is healed.
Head V.
¶ On the care of sharp tears and catarrh from the eyes from inside the head.
When catarrh occurs to someone sharp, acute, and frequent: and you see his eyes weakened, small, and already weakened is their aspect: and the eyelids are ulcerated, and they fall off from them, and in the deep of the head is sharp pain, wounding, and following sneezing: then take from these accidents that those matters, and catarrh do not come, unless from many vines.
The best cure for them is this. And you should command the sick person to shave their forehead. Then make one incision in the middle of their forehead, or another slightly longer across its width, and begin from the left temple to the right temple: and the incision should reach the bone: and keep your hand away from the moving temples during chewing: until the bone is exposed: and dry all the blood with a sponge.
Then separate between the two lips of the incision with an old knife, or with linen strips. Then tie above with swabs: and soak the swabs with wine and oil, so that no heat abscess forms.
And when you cure it, and see that the heat abscess is beginning to diminish: then you must scrape the bone, until flesh begins to grow in it.
Then care for it with a dry diet that promotes the growth of flesh: as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of pitch: and prepare an ointment from them, and administer it to the birth of flesh in these wounds.
Chapter 6.
§ On the care of what falls into the Ear.
Everything that falls into the ear is one of four kinds: either a mineral stone, or a similar stone, such as iron and lead: or it is a plant, such as peas and beans: or it is a fluid, such as water, and vinegar, and similar things: or some animal.
When therefore a stone, or kind of stone, falls into the ear from those which do not add or grow in the ear, expose the ear alone: if you then see the stone, then pour something from broken oil, or saffron, into the ear. Then administer extraction of it, and make him sneeze with the conditioned powder, and wipe the nose upon the approach of sneezing, after you have placed in the circumference of the ear fragments of cloth or wool, and extend the ear towards the upper part.
For often it exits with this care.
But if it does not exit, then administer extraction of it with Gesti, that is, Subtle Powder: whose form is this.
Therefore if it exits with Gesti, it is good.
And if not, then administer extraction of it with a blind hook of few duplicates.
Therefore if it does not exit through that, then make a cannula from air, and insert the end of the cannula into the ear canal far, and wipe what is in the circumference of the cannula with softened cera and oil, so that there is no wind way except through the cannula: then extract with your strong attraction.
For often it exits with what we have mentioned. But if it does not exit this way: then take from helkalimbat, or from uisco, that is, prepared glue with which birds are caught, a small amount: and place it at the end of the radius after you have wrapped it properly over it: then insert it into the ear canal with ease, after you have dried the ear from moisture.
Therefore if it does not exit with all that we have mentioned, then hasten to cut it before an abscess of hot pus, or spasm occurs.
And the method of cutting is, that you use a lancet on the weak one in the first in the cefalica: and extract from him according to the measure of its power from blood. Then make the weak one sit between your hands, and turn his ear towards the upper part, and cut a small fissure in the root of the ear at the fat of him in the place depressed by himself: and let the fissure be of lunar shape, until you reach the stone: then remove it with what is possible from your instruments.
Then quickly cut a wound from your hour with diligence, and care for it until it heals.
If something falling into your ear is from one of the grains that grow and swell: then administer its removal.
But if it does not obey you at the end, then take a thin, delicate lance in this shape.
And administer with it the cutting of that kind from the grains that fall into the ear, and do not do it when you think that that grain is already moistened by the steam of the ear, until you put many fragments: then extract them with hooks, or with a delicate forceps, or with suction, as we said, for its removal is relieved.
But in the water that enters the ear, it is necessary to use a weak sneeze with it first: and now it has filled its own ear with a little old boil: and it is lying on that ear, in which is the water. If therefore it goes out through that, it is good.
And if not: then take many stones, according to the length of the finger, thin, gentle, and heat them with fire for a while, and let the weak one insert one of them into the hole of his ear: and salt on one foot of it, and strike with another stone on the stone that is in the ear. Therefore do not stop doing it with the stone and the stone, until all the water goes out.
And now the water goes out so that you take one from the parpyro, or from the junco, and insert one end of it into the ear: and light the other end with fire, until it is burned very much. Then repeat the junco another, and do it many times, until all the water goes out: and extract it with a cannula according to what was prescribed in the stone.
In the extraction of animals that enter into it, if it is small, like a flea or something similar, care for it as I mentioned in division.
But if it is a large body that appears to the senses: then administer its extraction with forceps and hooks, and its matter is easier than all that are held in the ear.
In the extraction of worms generated in the ear, when you care for it with what we mentioned in division and in the treatment of distillations, and your cure does not join: then you must look at the ear in the sunlight. Therefore if something appears there from the worms, then extract it with forceps or with fine hooks.
But if nothing appears there, then take a cannula, of which this is its form, narrow at the bottom, wide at the top: and insert its thin end into the ear according to the amount that an infirm person can tolerate: then suck with it strong suction. Do this many times, until all the worms come out.
But if they do not obey you to the end, then wrap a bandage around the cannula with clay, as I said in the stone.
If they do not come out with it, then administer the distillations that the ancients have already known in the infestation of worms: and you will find it in the treatment of distillations.
And let your outpouring be like the one you pour out oil and medicines into the ear with this instrument, of which its form is depicted here. Just as you see make it from silver, or from brass, narrow at the bottom, in which there is a small hole, wide at the top.
Therefore let the pushing part that is in the hollow of the cannula be made from brass properly. If you wish, take the needle and wrap it in a piece of cotton, wrapping it properly: then apply oil, or honey, or whatever you wish from these remedies into the needle: let it be in the ear: then insert the needle with the cotton on top, and express it gently by your hand compression until the oil is pushed into the concavity of the ear, and he feels it inside: and what is poured into the ear should already be warmed slightly with fire: and beware that there is nothing that distills into it very cold, for remedies do not tolerate this.
Chapter VII.
On the care of the accidental affection of the Ear.
Sometimes certain children come out from the wombs of their mothers not perforated.
And now it also happens to some people that the affection of the ear occurs in the opening of the ear from a wound, or flesh born in it.
And this affection of the ear sometimes occurs in the deep opening of the ear, which does not follow sight: and sometimes it happens to the outer openings a little, and follows sight.
Therefore those which happen in the deep ear, and which does not include sight, is difficult to cure in many positions.
And in that which follows sight, it is necessary to place the ear of the sick person in the sun, and look at it: then if you see the affection appearing, open it with a narrow sharp needle, whose form is as follows, which follows, its end is in which there is a small width, whose part is sharp: and the rest of the needle is two-edged: so that it does not hurt the ear.
If therefore the affection is born from flesh in the opening of the ear: then hold it with a narrow sharp knife, and cut it with great force, until all the flesh is removed.
If the wax is deep in the ear, then take a thin, soft, and warm radulum, heat it slightly with fire, and then put it into the ear canal.
If you feel the wax with it that is found in the ear of an unhealthy person with severity, try to open it with ease: and beware, do not wound the nerves of the ear.
Then put linum in the ear according to the quantity of the width of the hole you cleaned with Egyptian ointment: do this for several days until you are secure about the consolidation of the wound.
Or take linum, and pour it into rosewater, and sprinkle powdered zeig on top of it, and use it.
If you see the ear is already abscessing, then it is necessary to remove the linum, and let it be with another linen cloth that you cleaned with a cerate made with rose oil, until the abscess becomes warm: then care for it until it heals.
But if bloodletting occurs, then soak a sponge or cloth in cold water, and put it on the ear: and use the rest of the cure that stops the predicted bleeding in the treatment of distillations.
On the care of the eyelids of Althelia.
Chapter 8.
These Althelia who occur in the eyelids of the eye, sometimes are moist, and sometimes are dry.
Therefore it is necessary to hold them with tweezers: or with an uncinus, and cut them with a small knife from their roots. Then put powdered zeig on the places.
But if blood flows from them, then cauterize them with a thin lens-shaped cauterizer.
And it is better to cauterize them after the incision. For often they return when something remains from their roots. And when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
About the care of the eyelids of the eye.
Chapter 9.
Often something similar to chilblain occurs in the eyelids due to its strength and hardness, and because of this it is called Grando: and it is an aggregation of thick moisture on the upper eyelid and lower eyelid.
Therefore the operation in them is that you should consider whether it is chilblain proceeding from that which appears on the eyelid, and move to every part, and its matter is easy.
Therefore find a cut above it in width. Then scrape it off from every part with ease until it becomes soft. Then suspend it with a needle, and cut it off.
But if the cut of it is not prepared for you unless after you penetrate the eyelid with the incision a little, then it harms the weak one in some place.
But if the cut is large: then gather it with suture and care for it until it becomes healthy.
And if it is small, harm will not come to you from it. For ointment restores it and covers it.
And if chilblain is declining towards the inside of the ear against the inner surface, then turn the eyelid and suspend the chilblain with a needle: besides which you need incision and press it from every part.
But if the eyelid is stretched by incision, it does not harm it in some place.
Then wash the eye after the incision of the granite, with salty water: and care for the place with it that fleshs, until the sick one heals.
On the care of Axiromath eyelids.
Chapter X.
Axirnath is a fat that is generated in the upper eyelid skins: and indeed it often happens to children: and this one does indeed blind their eyes, and they are affected with cataracts in the morning, and they cannot see the sunlight, because their tears rush to them, and because of this you see them always lying on their faces, and they sleep on them, and their eyelids are under wet arches, which have already been covered by inflation: indeed the eminence of Axirnath appears to the eye, and when you press the place with your fingers, you feel Axirnath between them.
And the method of its operation is, that the sick one puts his head on your lap.
Then take a linen cloth and prepare linseed in it, and make from it a circle according to the amount that contains Axirnath from all parts. Then put him on it, and press with your fingers from all parts, so that Axirnath is gathered in the middle of the circle.
Then find in the middle of its moisture with a sharp needle making incisions along the width, and let there not be an incision greater than that which is made in bloodletting in the deep.
Or it is necessary to make an incision in the whole skin, until you reach Axirnath, for indeed Axirnath proceeds from many arrangements through the incision according to the shape of a slice of white fat.
Then extract it with the cloth that you have placed between your fingers to the outsides: and you turn your hand to the right and left, until it is spread: and beware, do not add in the incision, so that it does not reach with the sharp needle to the eye, and you harm him.
If, however, Achirnath does not appear to you at the beginning of the incision, you will add a little with ease into the incision until Achirnath proceeds. Then extract it, as we said.
Then dip the cloths in vinegar and water, and place them on the spot, and bind it with bandages.
And there are some who apply salt to it, and place it in the hollow of the incision, so that what remains from that moisture is melted.
Then care for it until it heals.
But if an abscess occurs in that hot spot, then care for it with soothing plasters until it heals.
¶ On the ways of Ataxmir's eye, that is, when the eyelid becomes soft and the eye becomes loosed, so that it weeps as it should not.
Chapter 11.
When additional hairs are born in the eyelids beyond their natural course under the hairs, and they become ancient: then they harm the eye, and cause afflictions, such as frequent tears, and softening of the eyelids, and the white of the eye, until that becomes the cause of destruction of the eye.
And indeed, Ataxmir's eye is cured according to four ways. Or by cauterization with fire. Or with sharp medicine, as was previously mentioned in the chapter on cauterization. Or it is cured by incision and sutures. Or by cannula, as I will say.
It is necessary to place the head of the sick person in your lap. Then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand.
If he turns over, it is good. And if not: insert the needle into the one where there is a thread from the lower part of the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate with the thread above, and let it be near the hairs, that is, near the margin of the eyelid where the hairs grow: and pull the thread upwards with the eyelid, and turn it with a spoon.
Then find in the inner part of the eyelid under the added hairs with a small spatula reaching from the larger lacrimal canal up to the smaller lacrimal canal.
Then extract the thread, and place under the eyelid a small piece of charcoal or cloth: then mark on the eyelid with a hot iron, which is like the shape of a myrtle leaf.
However, it must be made into a shape according to the size and elevation of the eyelid: for it is already varied among men.
For there are those who need that a large amount of it should be incised from the eyelid according to the amount which is softened from the eyelid.
Then with a small spatula find above two lines which you marked, and begin from the larger lacrimal canal up to the smaller lacrimal canal, and let there be a fissure near the natural hairs, like the size of a ray.
Then insert a hook into one of the two angles of the skin. Then scrape it all off. Then gather with a stitch two lips, with a needle and fine woolen thread: and wipe off the blood, and make that which superfluously flows from the threads on top of two eyebrows, with some things concealing it, if you want to make that: and if not, do not care.
Then let go of the suture and thread for three days, or four; afterwards care for that.
And if you wish, let go of the wound without suture, and care for it along with that which dries and constricts. For the eyelid is raised at the marking of the wound and its congregation, but a better one is to come.
This method of healing was taught by the ancients Ataxmir.
However, there is worry over the weak one, and it is from good operation, and there is not in it fear.
And another method is in Ataxmir also: and it is, to mark the signs above the eyelid, which is like the figure of a myrtle leaf, as we have narrated.
Then raise the eyelid with three separate or aggregated needles, according to this following form, then cut what is superfluous with small scissors, according to this form, with equality of cutting.
But if it is not possible for you to hold the needle, and it is not equal: then take an awl in which there is thread, and insert it in the middle of the figure: and insert the thread another near the lacrimal greater, and the thread near the lacrimal less: and gather the thread with equality between your fingers.
Then raise your hand evenly: and raise the skin above which is marked cloth, as we have narrated.
Then gather two wound lips with suture: and care for it, until it heals.
But if indeed abscess happens at your incision, or your wound: squeeze the abscess with charred, and with such like, from ointments suppressing.
And sometimes it happens to the eyelids also, that their hairs turn.
Therefore, you should use what we mentioned in the incision, but the suture on both sides is more artificial. About the care of Ataxmir with dogs.
And it is, to turn back the eyelid and cut open the incision that is inside, as I have mentioned. Then make two splints, or two thin pieces of wood: their length should be according to the length of the eyelid, and their width should be less than the width of a fingernail: and you have already cut at the ends of each from both sides where you hold the threads.
Then gather each of them with thinness on top of what is excessive from the eyelid of the eye, and tie two splints from both sides with a strong knot, and let it be for several days. For the skin will die, and blacken, and rot, until it falls off by itself.
If therefore it is delayed, then cut it with forceps. Then care for it until it heals.
When therefore it is consolidated, elevate the eyelid: and do not prick the hairs.
And this is the shape of two splints, which you will make according to this figure, and in length and width.
Chapter 12.
About raising hairs that prick in the eye with a needle.
The operation in that is, to take a thin needle, and insert it into the hair with a thin silk thread, gentle. Then gather its ends, and tie both with a thin knot very tightly: and the length of the threads should be one finger.
Then make another thin thread under it in a short, and tie its ends if you wish.
Then place the patient's head in your lap, and let it be near the sun so that the operation can be clearly seen: for this is a delicate or minor operation.
Then introduce the probe with a curved needle into the root of the eyelid, and make it penetrate the eyelid quickly until you remove it from above with a natural spica.
Then pull the needle up to the curved needle: and introduce the needle into the curved needle: if it is one, or two, or three, not more.
Then pull your hand with it until the needle exits the eyelid with the curved needle and the natural spica.
But if the curved needle is drawn out, and the needle does not exit with it: pull the curved needle downwards with the thread that you have made in it, until the curved needle exits from the upper opening, and see it with the sight of the eye: for then draw out the curved needle and the thread: and remove both, and close the eye: and let him be closed for two days or three, until the needle sticks in its place, and flesh grows over it.
But if the needle is short, then associate it with a long needle from the natural needles, and elevate it with it: or let him be left until it lengthens after some time, and then elevate it.
Chapter 13.
When this Alexander's disease happens to the eye, it is called Leprosy.
And this Alexander's disease is either natural or accidental.
Therefore it becomes accidental from the consolidation of the wound, or cutting, or cauterization, and similar to those.
The method of operation for this is as follows: you should find the consolidation and separate her lips, and place a linen cloth between them, and bind it up until she heals.
And you should not use things in her treatment that dry and constrict: for if you do this, the Alexander's plaster will return worse than before. Instead, use things that soften, such as fenugreek, and embrocate with water in which althea has been boiled, linseed oil, and Dyaquilon ointment, which has been melted with some oil: and wrap up the linen cloth with this, and take care of her.
Your treasure for healing is to try by all means to prevent it from becoming consolidated according to its original form.
Indeed, this operation that we mentioned is nothing but a certain correction of the Alexander's plaster, so that it does not return to its original form at all.
¶ About the care of the Alexander's plaster that is made on the lower eyelid, and there is a wrinkle or contraction upwards towards the right and left.
Chapter 14.
This Alexander's plaster that is made below is what is truly called the Alexander's plaster. And it is both natural and accidental.
And the accidental one is made from a wound, or a tear, or a cauterization, and similar things.
The method of operation for this is as follows: you should take an awl, in which there is a double thread, and stain it with flesh, and make it penetrate from the left lachrymal to the right, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
Then extend the flesh upwards with the awl, and cut it with a broad-bladed knife. If the figure of the eyelid returns as it should, it is good.
And if not, take the probe, and place it in the fissure, and turn the eyelid with it: and make two fissures on the inner side of the eyelid, and let the ends of the two fissures be from two angles of the incision, until they meet and form an angle: until when they gather, this figure is formed, and it is the Greek letter laud.
Then remove that flesh by the amount that is the sharp side of its width, from that which follows the eyelid. Then gather the separated parts: sew it with a wool thread.
Then care for them with that which we said, with softening medicines and liniments, until they are healed.
And if Alexander occurs from the fissure, and the suture, or with a cautery: then it is necessary to make the fissure flat under the eyelashes, even as it preceded. Then separate between two lips with liniment, as we said.
And the main word of speech on the care of Alexander, when it is above, or below, is that it should operate in it, according to how it is prepared from the form of Alexander.
For indeed it is of many diverse forms: and the skillful artist prepares his ingenuity with whatever way is possible to him, until he makes it return to the natural form, or near to it, and himself the sick man, according to what suits him from the operation and instruments in many dispositions.
Chapter XV.
¶ On the adherence of the eyelid of the eye with the conjunctiva, or the cornea.
Sometimes this consolidation happens to many people, so that the upper eyelid is consolidated with the whites of the eye and prevents it from performing its natural operations.
Therefore you must insert the tip of the radius under the eyelid and raise it up: or extend it with a blunt hook, then cut the adhesion with a thin, sharp spatula, which is not sharp with the incision of the spatula, but rather blunt for a moment: so that the weak one does not suffer from the operation, and the spatula is removed, and it does not injure the eye with its sharpness: and your incision is as if you were excoriating that adhesion with ease, until when the eyelid returns to its natural form, and the adhesion is completely healed.
Then pour salt water into the eye, with clean water washing it: or sprinkle it in the eye from a sharp-edged vessel made of tin, dissolved in water.
Then separate between the eyelid and the eye with a soft linen cloth: and place on the eye wool soaked with albumin: and after three days use the sharp-edged vessel, and with solidifying agents, until it is healed.
¶ On the incision of the nail and prominence of flesh of tears.
Chapter XVI.
Know that the nail is in two ways. Either it is nervous: and it is similar to a sharp-edged vessel, thin. Or it is not nervous, similar to frozen moisture of white: which when it touches the flesh of iron, or you try to take it with a hook, it is cut off, and does not stick in it the hook.
And both species do not begin, except from the greater tear duct, until it gradually approaches, until it covers the eye, and prevents light, and movement of the eye.
The method of operation for this incision is: place your infirm head in my lap. Then open his eyes and raise his eyelid with your hand. Then gather the claw with a small fold of skin and extend it to the upper part. Then take a needle and insert a small hair from a horse, or a goose, into it: let the thread be strong, and double the tip of the needle slightly, and fix it in the middle of the claw; and pierce it with the needle, and tie it with the thread, and extend it to the upper part: and scrape the side of the claw that follows the pupil, as if you were pulling it with the hair up to the end of its tail.
Then cut the remaining part at the root of the lacrimal duct with a fine saw, or with small forceps: and let out the natural flesh of the lacrimal duct, so that it does not happen from its incision that the course of tears is constant.
And sometimes the claw is extended with a single fold of skin: or with a thread, as we said. Then scrape it with a fine saw, whose shape is this.
And beware, lest the fine saw touch the horn-like skin of the coat, and a rupture occur in it, and pierce the pupil.
Then after the incision, put something finely ground salt into the eye: or some powder made from sewage, and let it out until another day. Then care for him with what is necessary until he is healed.
If the claw is not nervous, and you cannot insert a needle into it, nor fix it with a fold of skin, then often this kind of claw is cured with medicines, and heals as I described in the division.
If you wish to pierce it, then open the eye of the sick person, and take a thin, soft, weak, sharp spatula according to this form. And shave the hoof above the ridge with delicacy. If you see that it is rarefied and broken, then put a needle into it, and drop some water from your hourglass, or red wine, or finely ground salt, into the eye made from sieves: and let the patient keep their eye closed until the next day.
Then repeat the operation on it until all of it is removed. Unless the opposite is true for you in your eye, that is, a hot abscess: then let it go, and cure the abscess until it is healed.
Then repeat the operation on it with the needle, until it is healed.
However, if the prominence of the eyelid is causing harm to the eye with great damage, it should be suspended with a needle, and cut from that part: and do not complete the incision, so that the course of the tears does not run out.
Then drop some red wine from sieves, or finely ground salt, into the eyelid until it is healed.
¶ On making an incision in Alghardin and flesh born in the eye.
Chapter 17.
Flesh sometimes grows in certain human eyes, composed or placed on top, until it covers the pupil, or approaches, or stretches over the eyelids, and perhaps turns the eyelids outwards: and it resembles a rose of balm.
And the operation on it is also that he should place his head in your lap. Then open his eyes, and gather all that flesh with the appropriate needles: and hold it with one forceps, or grip.
Then cut the flesh at first, until it is all finished with the knife. And beware of the eye, so as not to wound it during the operation: and your incision should be with a small knife, which we mentioned in the incision of the hoof: or with small forceps, with which abscess is collected, according to the form it will have after this chapter.
When therefore your incision is completed, and the entire guardian [guard] has been removed, then fill the eye with crushed salt: or pour in powdered red earth, and similar things to it from corrosive medicines: and place on the eye a bandage with egg white: so that it may be securely protected from pus hot.
If however something remains of the guardian [guard], and hot blood dominates you, and you fear pus hot: then let go the eye, and care for it with that which calms the abscess.
Then repeat the operation on it, until it is healed.
And similarly do with the flesh added which happens to the eye from this kind.
But indeed, it is necessary that you operate on all weak eyes from the natural way, or from the accidental way, with iron: and do not put your hand into any of these operations, until you see that that member is able to bear that operation.
§ On collecting abscess from the eye.
Chapter 18.
Abscess are red veins which are woven over the eye, and prevent their own operation: and weaken the eye with the length of days.
Therefore it is necessary for you first to consider, whether the eye in which there is abscess, is strong, and there is no other ailment in it, except abscess: then collect the abscess from it.
It is also advised that you instruct the sick person to place their head in your lap.
Then suspend those needles with a single pin, or two according to your judgment: and let the pin be thin for doubling, in this form, or there should be two pins graduated in one body, in this form.
Then gather those needles with thin forceps with delicacy, and wipe away the blood hour by hour, until you see those needles being removed from the eye, and dissolve: and beware not to injure the eye with the tips of the forceps.
Let your operation be in the middle of the day in front of the sun, and be firm in your operation greatly: so that you do not cut except those needles.
And when you have filled, then pour into the eye some green or red wine: so that its sharpness corrodes what remains from the cataract.
But if it is not possible for you to gather all of it in that hour, then apply ointments to the eye with what soothes the pain of the eye: and leave it for several days, until the pain settles: and secure it from the boil with heat: then repeat over it according to the same method, until it is healed.
And this is the form of the forceps.
¶ On the reduction of Arissatus to the nose.
Chapter 19.
The doctors name Arissatus' fistula, which they cure with a cauterizing iron, or with a sharp burning medicine, according to what precedes its narrative.
And if it is not healed, then there is no skill in it: unless you find above the boil at his birthplace, and remove all the moisture that is in it and pus, until the bone is revealed.
When the bone is exposed and you see decay or discoloration in it, then scrape it with an instrument whose shape is as follows:
And it is called the "Asper of the Head.
Let it be made of iron and its head round like an azir, which is dotted with a needle or a fine needle puncture: and place it on the location of the decayed bone.
Then turn it between your fingers, and press your hand on it slightly until you know that that corruption is now scraped away: and do this several times.
Then restore the location with dry hemostatic remedies.
If therefore the location consolidates, and flesh grows in it, and the course of pus is cut off: and it remains for forty days, and does not reopen, and does not become a boil, and no evil happens to it: then you know that it is healed.
And if not, then there is no skill in it, except to reduce the fistula to the nostril opening according to this form.
And it is, that you scrape away from the bone second with iron, or with sharp medicine: and when the bone is exposed, then take a drill according to this form, its end be iron, triangular: and the wood of it be a flattened pyramid to the end, as you see.
Then place it on the bone itself: and it be near the lacrimal: and lengthen your hand away from the eye slightly. Then turn your hand with the drill, until it pierces the bone, and feels weak: because of this that it has found the wind coming out of it, when it holds its hand on its nose.
Therefore then restore the location with dry hemostatic remedies, as I taught you.
When flesh is born and the spot becomes hardened: then the matter that flowed to the outside returns to the nose: therefore it is lighter on the weak.
On the reduction of a protruding Eye.
Chapter 20.
When the eye protrudes with its entirety, and no harm or diminution occurs: then it is necessary to dissolve the weak one: afterwards give him a bloodletting: then place ventilating bandages on the forehead without scarification, but with suction.
Then place a liniment made of acacia, aloe, olibanum, and sarcocolla on the eye. Then bandage the eye above with a plaster with many woolen cloths.
And the method of the woolen cloths is: take many soft cloths, double each one over on top of four: make many from them: then place them one on top of another according to the amount that the eye needs: then bandage them with a hard cloth with a strong bandage.
And repeat the ventilating bandages with suction without scarification.
Then remove the ventilating bandages, and let the eye be loose during the day and night.
But if the bandage becomes soft again, then it is necessary to bandage it much: then remove the bandage during the day and night, as we said.
If therefore you see the eye now returning to its own skin, it is good: and if not, then repeat the plaster, woolen cloths, bandage, and ventilating bandages until it is healed.
On the incision of the eyeball skin.
Chapter 21.
When a rupture occurs in the eyeball skin, and it protrudes and extends outside the eyelids like a grain of the eye, and disfigures the form of the man because of that, and you want to cut it: then the operation in him is as follows: and it is, to insert a needle into the root of the eye from the lower part to the upper part.
Then introduce another needle through which a double thread is placed near the lacrimal canal, and make it pierce: and let it go out the first needle according to its arrangement.
Then cut the place of the double thread, and tie it with that part of the needle in a circle: and stretch it much.
Then withdraw the needle, and place a thread soaked in wool on the sclera of the eye: and let it go out until the thread with Vua falls.
Then take care of the eye with that which strengthens it, until the wound heals.
And sometimes Vua is stretched from all sides with a circle of cloth, until the eye gains great prominence.
Then pierce with a fine needle that reaches the depth of the eye, and drain the moisture from the sclera, and the eye descends, and enters immediately: then tie it, until it heals.
¶ On the treatment of Alcomnatus.
Chapter 22.
This disease which is called Alcomnatus is not, but is only pus that accumulates in the eye, similar to water descending, and it is not itself.
And the mode of operation in it is, that you make the sick person sit on a prepared seat, or directly.
Then take his head with your hands from both sides, and move it, until you see the health reach the lower parts of your eyes. Then shape it, and do not let it descend, and the light is cured: and the sick person sees as he saw: and if it does not descend below, you know that it is water.
But if the preparation of the descent of pus with what we said does not happen, then make the sick person sit between your hands. Then take a fine needle and prick it through the thin skin above the horny layer for a short distance at the point where it is joined to the corneal tissue in the horn of the finger, until the pus comes out.
When it comes out, then pour warm water into the eye in which you have mixed honey: or warm water in which you have already boiled fenugreek and honey; then treat it with the rest of the treatment until it is healed.
On the care of water that flows into the eye, or cataract.
Chapter 23.
We have already mentioned the appearance of water in division, and what is suitable for piercing according to speech declaring and explaining it, then take that same one according to health.
Then therefore you must do that sit the sick person between your hands squarely, opposite the light, near the sun: and bind the healthy eye, and tighten it very much: then open the eyelid of his eye with your right hand, if the eye in which is water, is the left eye: or with your left hand, if the eye is right.
Then take with your right hand alum if the eye is left: or with your left hand, if the eye is right.
Then place the end of the alum near the corona through the thickness of the radius in that whiteness of the eye appearing lachrymalis minoris: then push the alum with power: and you turn it back with your hand, until it penetrates into the sclera of the eye: and you feel, that the alum already reached the empty.
And it must be that the measure of the journey of the alum to the depth, is the measure of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the darkness: and is the corona of the eye. You will see these things in the very act of vision within the pupil of the eye, due to the clarity of the tunica corneae.
Then place an almagra up to the point where there is water. Then press it down with one hand after another.
If therefore the water immediately comes down, then the sick person sees that thing on which he opens his eye immediately, and the almagra is in his eye.
Then rest a little. If therefore the water comes down, then lay it down on the second, except that the almagra goes out.
When therefore it sticks, and does not rise: then take out the almagra with ease: and you turn your hand gradually.
Then dissolve something from clear salt crystals into water: and wash with it the eye inside. Then place outside the eye all the bandage, or dyed wool with rose oil, and with white of egg: and tie with it the healthy eye.
But we, and those who are of our time, put on top of him mold powder with white of egg.
If therefore the almagra does not obey you at the entrance into the eye because of its hardness, since from men is that whose eye is very hard: then you must take a small spatula, which is called Alberid, of which this is the form.
For therefore pierce with it that very joint together, and do not extend your hand in the hole: and there is only so that you make a way to the almagra subtle place.
Then introduce the almagda, as we said.
And at the completion of your work, prepare for the sick person a bed made properly, in which he may lie on his back in a dark room: and be prohibited from all movements, and from coughing: and place his food that which soothes his nature: and not move his head at all with his right, nor at all with his left.
And let the suture be according to its proper arrangement up to the third day.
Then dissolve it in that dark house, and test his sight; and make him see things. Then reduce the suture up to the seventh day.
And it is not proper to do it at the time of healing or immediately after the incision; rather, it should be done by others for that reason because water ascends quickly through a strong gaze.
But if a boil becomes hot: then it is necessary to dissolve the eye before the seventh day; and correct it with what calms the boil until it is calmed down; then cure his sight, and place on his face an ointment that regulates his sight for several days while he is still in that dark house.
Then he should gradually leave the house and return to his usual activities.
And know that the student is not excused from visioning several times in the zaita: then he dares to perform the operation.
Indeed, one of those from Alayrach has come to us, who said that something happened in Alayrach where a man was pierced through the magdan, through which water flows.
But indeed I have not seen anyone in your land who has done this; nor have I read it in any of the old books: and it is possible that it is new.
And these are the forms of species from the magdan, so that he stands on them who does not know them.
Let them be made of air properly; and their ends should be with the same subtlety of a triangle, and the sharp end.
Chapter XXIV.
¶ On the care of flesh born in the nose.
At times, flesh of various kinds is born in the nose, from which there is something that resembles a scorpion's many feet: and from this flesh there is cancerous flesh, stone-like, of a dark color: and from this flesh there is what is flesh that is gentle, not of a dark color.
Therefore, in that which is from those flesh that is gentle, not deceitful, nor cancerous, you should do that the infirm person is placed with his hands opposite to the sun, and open his nose, and thrust a hook into those flesh: then draw them out to the exterior, and cut what you have grasped from them with a thin, sharp knife from one side, until you know that all the flesh is removed.
If something remained from that from which its removal is not possible: then scrape it with one of the thin tools with ease, until there is nothing remaining from it. But if blood dominates you, or an abscess hot: then place on him what is necessary: or it is from malignant abscesses, then hurry to cauterize him, until the blood is cut off, and all flesh is removed.
Then thrust into the nose after incision vinegar, and water, or wine. But if the nose opens, and proceeds from it moisture up to the palate, then know that he is already healthy.
But if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then know that there is flesh born in the upper bones of the nose, to which the tool did not reach with the incision.
Then therefore you should insert a thread of linen in which there is something rough, and many knots in it: and place between every knot the quantity of a finger, or less: and the infirm person should thrust one end of the thread into his nose with a hook, or with what is possible for him after he has made it similar to an awl: and draw out his smell, until it reaches the throat, and goes out over his neck.
And often indeed they do something similar to this Attomi boy in schools: and it is an easy matter for those who want to.
Then place the two ends of the thread, one end which exits above the nose, and the other which remains in the nose. Then with a needle cut the flesh with the knots that are on the thread. Do this until you know that the flesh is now with the knots on the thread.
Then remove the thread: and place in the nose after cleaning the blood linen that you soaked in Egyptian ointment: do this for three days, or more, until the ointment has corroded all that remains of the flesh.
Then place at the end of the matter in the nose a lead tube, for several days, until it is healed.
But if it needs cure that has dried, use that.
For the purpose of head purging, with which the oil and other medicines distill into the nose, do this from silver, or from air: that it is like a small lamp, open like a shell: and its passage similarly.
And if you want to make a closed tube, like a reed.
And the shell of the instrument for head purging, be full, open: which has a handle at the end of it, with which you hold it, when you heat oil, or what you want to extract from the successes, and flexible things.
Chapter 25.
Often a Thelul is born at the end of the nose, and it becomes large and grows with the days, until it becomes ugly in appearance.
And for this reason, it is necessary to cut off that part at the beginning of its appearance and uproot the entirety of it. Then place over the place, a cauterizer or a burning medicine that remains in its place.
If therefore the incision of it delays until it becomes swollen, then consider if it is stony, hard, dark in color, and has few sensations: then do not touch it with iron: for it is a cancerous abscess.
For I have often seen that when a human abscess is incised, and evil results from it upon him who had it.
And if the abscess is gentle to the touch, not dark in color, and you see that incision is possible throughout it, then evacuate the weak part, and incise it without fear, without hesitation: and care for the place with what dries and contracts, until it becomes healthy.
Chapter 26.
On sutures of the nose, lips, and ears.
Know that when dissolution of continuity occurs in one of these cartilages, it does not much hinder the operation, except in certain men.
Therefore when something happens to someone from that, you should consider whether it is a recent wound with its own blood: and then gather the drainage of the wound with a suture: and then care for it until it becomes healthy.
And if the dissolution of continuity has already separated the lips, and each part is healthy: then it is necessary to scrape off all the part from its apparent skin, until it bleeds. Then gather two lips with a suture, and bind them, and powder over the blood of a dragon, and ground frankincense: and place above the powders a fragment of the plaster diafinicon, and some other from consolidating plasters: and leave it bound for two days or three. Then dissolve it and exchange the medicine: and let it go, until the threads are separated by themselves. Then care for it with ointment, until it is healed.
However, the method of stitching is to gather the solution of continuity, or with a needle, as we have told you about the ventral suture: or gather the solution with thread, as I have taught you.
Chapter 27.
¶ On the extraction of lip knots.
Many people indeed often have hard abscesses like grains of herbs in the inner parts of their lips: and some of them are smaller, and some larger.
Therefore it is necessary to turn the lip, and cut over every knot of it, and hang it with a needle, and cut it from all sides.
Then fill the place after the incision with ground zeig, until the blood is separated.
Then it is to be covered with vinegar, and the place is to be treated with it, where there is a styptic, until the wounds are healed.
Chapter 28.
¶ On the incision of flesh on the gum.
Frequently flesh is born on the gum, which the ancients call an abscess.
Therefore it is necessary to hang it with a needle: or hold it with forceps, and cut it at its root, and let the wound run, or blood.
Then place on the place ground zeig, or other styptic powders, drying.
If that flesh returns after healing, for it often returns, then cut it again, and cauterize it: for it does not return after cauterization.
Chapter 29.
On the ratio of teeth with a file.
Sometimes, the enamel of teeth can accumulate on their outer and inner surfaces, and between the gums, forming rough, discolored, and sometimes yellow or greenish spots, until that corruption reaches the gum line, causing the teeth to become foul.
Therefore, you should sit the patient with their head in your lap, and scrape off the enamel and the tooth where the roughness appears to you like sand: until nothing remains of it, and do the same for discoloration, greenishness, yellowness, and other corruptions until they are cleansed.
If, however, that which is at the beginning of their ratio is removed, it is good: and if not, then repeat the filing on them every other day, second day, and third day, until you reach the end of your desire in it.
And know that the tooth requires filing of various forms and many figures, according to how it is prepared for your operation: therefore, because the file with which the tooth is filed from the lower part is different from the file with which it is filed between the teeth, in other forms.
And those forms of files should be prepared by you, as you see.
Chapter 30.
On the extraction of tooth pain.
You should cure the tooth from its pain with all your skill, and delay its extraction. For it does not fill the space when it is extracted: because it is a substance that is elevated: until when there is no excuse for its extraction, then when the sick person must extract it himself, in order to strengthen and be certain of the tooth that is causing pain.
Many times indeed deceives the sick person the pain, and he thinks that it is in the tooth and will remove it: then the pain does not go away, until the weak tooth is removed.
For we have already seen this from the operation of bloodletters.
Therefore, when the tooth itself is examined by you, then it is necessary to make incisions around the tooth with a sharp spatula, in which there is some virtue, until the gum is loosened from all sides: then move it with your fingers, or with delicate forceps, gradually at first, until you shake it.
Then in that place use large forceps with good location, and the head of the weak one between your knees: which you have already held well, so that it does not move: then pull the tooth according to straightness, so that you do not break it.
If therefore it does not come out, then take some of those instruments, and insert it under it from all sides with ease, and try to move it, as you did in the first place.
But if the tooth is perforated, or corroded: then it is necessary to fill the hole with cloth: and tie it with the tip of a delicate needle, so that it does not break in the hour of your contraction above it with forceps.
And it is necessary to do carefully with incision around the gum from all sides much.
And guard your strength, so that you do not break it, and part of it remains, and return to the weak one from that malice which is greater than his first pain.
And beware, that you do not do what ignorant bloodletters do in their haste, and the audacity of them over its removal, besides which they administer that which we have mentioned.
Many times do people suffer from great ailments, which are difficult to treat and completely remove, or some of their causes remain, or they require the extraction of certain teeth along with them, as we have often witnessed.
Then it should be covered after its removal with wine, or with vinegar and salt.
If there is bleeding from the wound (for it often happens), then apply some zege and fill the wound with it, and if you do not have zege, cauterize the wound if it does not heal for you.
The forms of the delicate forceps by which the tooth is moved should be long at the tips, short at the handle, thick, so that they do not duplicate when pressed against the tooth: they should be like the handles of thick forceps, until when you squeeze them together, they do not bite themselves or duplicate: short at the tips, and made from straight iron, or from a well-made piece of wood, direct extremities: and in their tips there should be teeth, some of which enter into certain places and grip with a proper contraction, strongly.
And sometimes they are made like the tips of a bird's beak called a stork, and they are strong in contraction.
Chapter 31.
On the removal of teeth and the extraction of mandibular tooth fragments.
When something remains at the removal of a tooth that is broken, then you should place butter on the wound for one or two days until the wound becomes soft: then insert algasti or forceps: whose tips are similar to the tip of a bird's beak called a stork. However, this is the form of forceps.
Their extremities are made like a razor's edge: or like an axe's blade.
If therefore it does not obey you at the end with these forceps, then you must make an incision over the root, and tear away all the flesh, and insert the instrument called the small hook, whose form is this.
Let its length of the extremity be short, rather coarse: and not soaked, that it may not break.
If therefore the root goes out through that, it is good: and if not, you must squeeze with these other instruments whose forms are these.
The form of the first triangular extremity, in which there is a certain coarseness.
The form of the thin triangular extremity.
And with other instruments and tools that preceded in the ratio of teeth.
It is also a squeezer with this instrument that resembles a large hook, of this form, the twisted triangular extremity, in which there is a certain coarseness, so that it may not break: and it is not soaked.
And know that the teeth's instruments are many: and similarly the other instruments are not counted, and a wise craftsman, skillful in his art, has found for himself by himself the instrument, according to what signifies to him the operation and the pains of themselves.
Because from the pains to which they did not say the ancient instrument, because of the diversity of their kinds.
But if the bone of the jaw is broken from the jaw, or from other bones of the mouth, or putrefies: then to examine over it in its place with that which suits him from the instruments and forceps that I said in the extraction of the root, and squeeze with the one holding, whose form is this.
Sit in that place a certain thickness gradually, so that it is tightened or held with the mouth, and does not flee and flow until it exits the mouth: and restore the place with suitable medical remedies to it.
If, however, there is a small putrefaction in the bone, then scrape it from its putrefaction and cure it, until it is healed.
Chapter 32.
On the extraction of teeth that protrude over others.
When teeth that protrude do not follow their natural course, it becomes disfigured by that form: and especially when it happens to women, and girls, that is, virgins.
Therefore you should consider. For if the tooth is born after another tooth, and is not placed, or is not possible to extract it, or to cut it: then eradicate it: and if it is connected with another tooth, then cut it with this instrument, whose form is as follows.
It is similar to a small beak, and is made of iron, sharp at the end.
And let your cut be where you cut it into many days, and because of the hardness of the tooth, and so that another is not moved from the teeth.
If, however, it is exposed to being cut, then cut it with a file of iron, whose form is as follows.
It is all of iron, and the handle of its puncturing points is sharp, like a file with which needles are made: with which the tooth is cut gradually in many days with ease, so that the tooth does not move, and falls: then gently it, at the end scrape it with some rasors.
If it is a tooth from which a part breaks off and hurts the tongue: then it is necessary to cut it even, until the roughness of that fracture is removed, and it is flattened, and does not hurt the tongue, nor corrupt speech.
Chapter 33.
On the extraction of teeth with gold wires.
When the front teeth are shaken or dislodged by a blow or accident, and the weak person cannot hold them in place while eating so that they do not fall out, and you have treated them with hemostatic remedies but the cure has not improved: then it is wise to bind them with gold wire, because silver turns green and rots after a few days, but gold never changes.
And let the wire be of medium thickness in thinness and coarseness according to the quantity that it can hold between the teeth.
And the form of the binding is indeed to take the wire and insert a double amount of it between two healthy teeth: then weave the two ends of the wire between the moving teeth, whether one or more, until you reach with the thread up to the healthy tooth of the other part. Then repeat the weaving up to the part from which you began: and bind your hand with thinness and wisdom until it is not removed at all: and let your binding be where you bind the wire, at the roots of the teeth, so that they do not loosen.
Then cut off the excess ends of the wire with forceps: and gather each one, and fold them together with the hand: and hide them between the healthy tooth and the moving tooth, so that they do not hurt the tongue: then let it be left as tight as it remains.
But if it dissolves or breaks, bind them with another wire, and it will stand with it in that way for the whole time.
And this is the form of the teeth, and the shape of the binding of two healthy teeth and two moving teeth, as you see.
And sometimes it happens that one tooth or two return to their places after the accident and are held as we have described, and remain: and this is only done by a wise and skilled craftsman.
And sometimes a piece of bone from a cow is used: it is shaped like a tooth and placed in the spot where the tooth was, as we have said, and it remains and serves for a long time.
Chapter 34.
Sometimes this ligament under the tongue is natural, with which man is born, or accidental, due to a wound that has healed.
And the operation on it is to open the mouth of the sick person in your lap, and raise his tongue: then cut that nervous ligament across its width, until the tongue is released from its hold.
If there is something hard and knotted in it, and it is due to the healing of a wound: then push that hook into it, and saw through it across its width, until you cut the ligament and release the knot.
And beware, lest there be a deep cut in the flesh, and you cut an artery there, and blood flows out.
Then cover the wound with rosewater, or vinegar, or cold water.
Then place a linen bandage under the tongue, which holds it in place all night: so that it does not become solid again.
If however blood flows out, then put charcoal powder on the wound. If however the blood sticks to you, then cauterize the wound with a suitable cauterizing iron, and then care for it along with the rest of the cure, until it heals.
Chapter XXXV.
Sometimes an abscess occurs under the tongue that resembles a small frog, preventing the tongue from performing its natural function: and perhaps it is so enlarged that it fills the mouth.
And the operation in it is that you open the mouth of the sick person before the sun: and consider the abscess.
Therefore if you see it with a dark or black color, hard, which the sick person does not feel: then do not touch it, because it is cancer.
And if it is inclined to whiteness, in which there is moisture, then thrust the hook into it, and cut it with a thin sharp knife, and free it from all parts. But if the blood resists you in your hour of operation, then place on it zegi powder until the blood is removed: then return to your operation until you remove it with its supplement.
Then it should be covered with vinegar and salt: and care for the remaining cure according to the appropriate cure until it is healed.
¶ On the cure of two tonsil abscesses.
Chapter XXXVI.
Sometimes they occur between the throat, that is, the glands, which resemble algodad, which occur in a deformed way: and they are called two tonsils: which when you cure with what we said in division, and do not heal, then consider.
Therefore if it is an abscess with a dark or black color, little feeling: then do not touch it with iron.
And if it is red in color, and its root is thick: then do not touch it even with iron, fearing the flow of blood, indeed leave it until it ripens. And then either you will pierce it yourself: or it will burst on its own.
And if it is white in color, round, and its root is delicate: then it must be incised.
And the operation on it is as follows: you should consider before the operation whether the abscess of its heat has been completed quietly, or whether it is diminishing by some reduction: then therefore make the sick person sit in front of the sun, and his head in your lap: and open his mouth, and let a servant take between his hands, and press his tongue down with an instrument, of which this is the shape.
It should be made of silver, or of brass, which is as thin as a knife.
Then when you press his tongue, and the abscess is shown to you, and falls on it your gaze: then take a hook, and fix it in the socket, and draw it out as much as you can, except that you pull with it some from its clothing.
Then cut it with an instrument of which this is the shape that follows. It is shaped like forceps: however its extremities should be protected, so that the opening of each of them is directly opposite the other sharply: therefore care must be taken that it is from iron inlaid, or alloyed with lead.
But if this instrument is not present, then cut it with a narrow knife of which this is the shape. It should be sharp on one side, not sharp on the other.
And after you have cut one socket, cut the other according to this same shape of cutting.
Then after the cutting the sick person should gargle with cold water, or with vinegar and water.
But if blood flow occurs to him, he should gargle with water in which boiled are the kernels of pomegranates: or leaves of myrtle, and similar things from stiptics, until the flow of blood is stopped: then care must be taken for him, until he is healed.
And sometimes other pus-filled cysts are born in the throat, besides the two tonsils. Therefore, cut them as I said in the incision of the two tonsils equally.
Indeed, I myself have already treated a woman with a pus-filled cyst that was born between her throat, which was being dragged to the neck, with few senses, which had almost closed her throat: and the woman was breathing through a narrow opening, and had already prevented her from eating and drinking water: and she had reached the point of death if she had remained for one day or two days.
And the pus-filled cyst had risen so much that it had emitted two branches, until they had extended over two nostril openings.
Therefore, I acted quickly and fixed one of them with a hook. Then I drew it out, and a large portion was drawn from it.
Then I cut it off, where it had been grasped from the nostril opening.
Then I did the same to that which had protruded from the other nostril opening.
Then I opened her mouth, and pressed her tongue: and then I fixed the hook in the pus-filled cyst: then I cut from it a part of it, and only a little blood flowed from it: therefore the woman's throat was healed, and she immediately began to drink water, then she took food.
Therefore I did not stop cutting from that pus-filled cyst many times over a long period of time: and the pus would take its place where I was cutting, until it had become too long and with it.
Therefore, I thought, and cauterized the pus-filled cyst between her throat.
So I stood by her and added something, then I walked away from that part, and I did not know what God had done with her after me.
On the incision of the wound of the vulva.
Chapter 37.
When the catarrh descends to the vulva and becomes an abscess, and is long, then it is called a perpendicular abscess: and if it is in the lower part, thick, round, then it is called the womb.
When it is cured with what we said in the division, and no cure is joined to it: and you see that the abscess has become quiet from her, and is thin: then it is necessary for you to cut it.
And what is gathered from it is round, and there is no length to it, and it is bloody, or of a dark color, or black, and there is no sense in it: then it is necessary for you to follow the incision of it. For in it is fear for the weak.
Therefore when you see it according to the manner which I said from its whiteness, and its length, you should make the weak person sit in front of the sun: and press his tongue with the instrument of which there is a previous account: then fix a hook in the vulva, and pull it downwards: and cut it with one of the two instruments which I said in the incision of two tonsils.
And you should not cut from it, except that which is added above the natural limit without addition.
For if you cut from it more, you will damage voice and speech.
Then after the incision use what we said in the incision of two tonsils: and cure it until it is healed.
But if the weak person is frightened by the incision: then you should use your skill in cauterizing it without fear and trembling.
The method of cauterization in this case is not applicable, except when using sharp water (steam): and it is to place the head of the sick person in your lap. Then press his tongue with the instrument we mentioned. Then take from the water which I told you about in the chapter on cauterization, and mix it with unextinguished lime, and place it not thick nor fine, and fill the hollow of this instrument, whose shape is as follows:
Let the extremity of it which holds the medicine have a hollow, like the hollow of a spoon.
And place the instrument with the medicine on the same spoon: and let the sick person lie on his side, so that salt may run out from his mouth from the internal medicine, so that nothing may descend from it into his throat and injure him.
Then hold your hand with the medicine. And you from the first of it on the spoon a quantity of half an hour, until you see it already darkened and quieted the biting of the medicine.
And if you wish to take wool, and uncover it at the end of the spoon, and pour the wool with the medicine, and insert the spoon with the wool into a tube above, until the wool adheres to the spoon.
Do this many times, until you achieve what you wish from the cauterization of that. Then let it go: for it indeed dries up and falls off after three days, or four.
But if you need to repeat the medicine, repeat it: and after cauterization wipe around the wound with wool imbued in butter, and cleanse with it what is around it from the medicine: and moisten with cold water.
And it should be treated externally with a poultice, and internally with gargles, until it heals.
Therefore, this method of treatment is healthier than incision and farther from fear.
And sometimes it is cured even with that which is finer than cauterization and incision: it is cured with smoke, in this way. Take calamint, and hyssop, and origanum, and rue, and sea-holly, and chamomile, and wormwood, and similar herbs to these: and gather all of them, or some of them in a pot, and immerse them with vinegar, and boil: and the pot should be glazed properly, and there should be a hole in the middle of the pot, above which is placed a concave instrument according to this way.
Let it be made of silver, or of brass: and the extremity, in which is the garlic, is inserted into the mouth of the sick person, until the vapor ascends to the wound above the cannula, until the wound is darkened much.
Then repeat over it many times, until it dries up.
And beware, do not make this treatment at the beginning of the appearance of abscesses. For indeed it adds to the abscess: and it is not necessary that you should do this except at the decline of its hot abscess.
But if this instrument is not present to you, then take a cannula, and place in its extremity a piece of cork: so that the mouth of the sick person is not burned: for the cork prevents the vapor from burning the mouth: and this is from good treatment with health.
About the extraction of thorns, and bones from the mouth.
Chapter 38.
Many things stick in the throat, such as a fish bone, or another thing.
Therefore, you should remove what is visible on top of what falls under the view, after placing your tongue with the instrument facing the sun, and it is declared to you that it is in the throat.
And what does not appear to you and is hidden in the throat, you should make a weak emetic before the food is digested in the stomach. Perhaps the attached thing will come out through vomiting.
Or the weak person will swallow a piece of bread, or the root of lettuce, or a dry crust of bread: or he will receive a piece of sponge sea, and tie it with a thread, then swallow it. When therefore it has reached the place where the bones, or the bone, are, and is removed, then it comes out.
If therefore it does not come out with what we said: then use the tool from lead according to this form.
Let it be thicker than the Radius a little, and at the end of it there is a narrowness, which he can insert into his throat with ease: and he himself has his head raised up.
And beware of touching his epiglottis, so that it does not happen to him cough, and he pushes with it the bone, or the fish bone, or inserts it himself with his hand.
But what the weak person inserts, this is better: because of his knowledge of the place of the attached thing: and he pushes down, or he draws his hand with the instrument upwards, all that according to the quantity which is prepared for him, until it comes out.
¶ Of the extraction of a leech.
Chapter 39.
When treating a bleeding wound with the method I mentioned in the division of treatment with medicines, and it does not stop, then consider placing the injured person in front of the sun, or near the sun after applying the instrument I told you about to their tongue.
If therefore your sight falls upon the bleeding wound, remove it with a small spoon, or with a fine instrument gently.
If it is not possible with those, then take a hollow needle and insert it into the throat of the injured person until near the throat: then insert the heated iron into the hollow of the needle with fire. Do this frequently: and let the injured person avoid all water for the whole day.
Then let him receive a full glass of cold water and open his mouth in it: and cover his mouth with it, and not swallow any from it: and move the water one hour after another with his hand. For the bleeding wound immediately when it feels the water falls.
But if it does not leave with what we told you, then smoke the injured person with cimices, or with asafetida with the instrument I told you about in the smoking of the wound.
Do this frequently, for it will fall itself.
And the method of operation in smoking is, that you take a pot in which there are live prunes with fire: and the pot is covered with a cover, in which there is a hole: and the instrument is placed in this hole at its end.
Then throw the smoking, and let him place his mouth in the end of the needle, and close his mouth, so that the smoking does not escape, until you know that the smoking has reached the bleeding wound. For the bloodletting will immediately fall.
But if it does not fall, then repeat the fumigation many times.
And the weak one will bear thirst, and eat salted food, and ointments, and not drink water.
Therefore it is necessary that he go out with this regimen.
And this is the form of the instrument with which bloodletting is removed from the throat, when it falls on it.
It is similar to forceps, as you see: except that it has this curve which enters the throat. And its end is similar to the beak of a bird called a stork, which has a roughness of a file: when it grasps something, it does not let it go at all.
Concerning the opening of pustules, and their cutting, and care in general.
Chapter 40.
Pustules are of many species, of many modes, according to which the remembrance comes of them, namely one and one in this book: and they are diverse in their piercing, and cutting of them from two ways.
Of which one is from the species of pustules in itself, and because it contains from moistures.
And the second mode is because of the places, in which it happens from the body.
Because the pustule happening in the head, is other from the pustule happening in the anus: and the pustule happening in a fleshy place, is other from the pustule happening in the joints: and to each of them is its own judgment from the operation.
And from the pustules are those which it is not necessary that they be pierced, unless after the maturation of the pus in them, and its completion: and from them are those which it is necessary that they be pierced, while they are raw, and not mature according to the completion.
As abscesses which are near the joints.
Because an abscess, when it occurs near a joint, and is allowed to continue, may cause the surrounding tissue to putrefy, possibly corrupting the ligaments or nerves of that joint: therefore, this is a closer cause of contraction of that limb.
Or it is an abscess in a principal limb: for if you delay the incision of it until it ripens, it will harm either him or through that principal limb.
Or it is near the anus, so pierce it immaturely: and it is not necessary to pierce, a raw abscess, not complete digestion, unless it is near the anus, so that it does not putrefy deeply, and extend to the interior of the anus, and become a fistula, or become in the end that does not heal.
You should know the time of incision for abscesses that have ripened according to their completion: and it is at the cessation of pain, remission of fever, and diminution of redness, pulse, and sharpness of headache in abscesses: and other signs.
And you should do the same incision in the lower part of the abscesses, and more prominent swelling: and the incision should be longitudinal in the length of the body, if the abscesses are in the parts of the hands and feet, and the places of the backs, and chords, and nerves, and arteries, and finally in all equal places where there is no reflection.
But in those that reflect, go with the incision according to that limb.
But when the abscess is in fleshy places: then it is better to let go the incision of it until its digestion is confirmed, as we said according to completion.
For if you pierce it before that, the course of the virus will be prolonged from it, and there are many wounds and filthiness, and perhaps its lips become hardened and its depth.
And some abscesses are pierced according to the width of the body at need: or according to that where the member needs it.
And it is necessary for the administrator in small abscesses to make a small incision, and in large abscesses to make a wide incision: or many cuts according to the likeness of the size of the abscesses.
And there are from abscesses, in which it is necessary for the skin to be hollowed out: and it is incised when already it is like a piece of cloth, and it has been made at the end, which is already dead: such as that which happens in many, so that they doubt, and in buboes.
And from them are those which are cut with a cut having three angles. And from it is that which is incised as the figure of a myrtle leaf.
Such as an abscess in the groin.
And from them are those in which the administration of a round cut and a crescent-shaped cut is given: and similar to them from the cuts.
Indeed, that which has no head, such as are the mild abscesses on the surface, it is necessary for you to pierce it with a shallow incision, or a flat one only.
And it is necessary when the abscess is large, and has already collected much pus, and you pierce it, so that you do not rush and remove all the pus at once in that hour: indeed, remove a part of it from it. Then leave the abscess alone until another day. Then remove something from the pus again.
Do this many times according to the gradation until it comes out, especially if the patient is weak or feeble, a pregnant woman, a small child, an old man, or a decrepit person: for the animal spirit often dissolves with the excretion of pus, and perhaps the weak one dies, and you will not notice it.
Therefore, be very careful about this chapter.
And after your incision, by which you are piercing these abscesses, it is necessary to clean the wound: and consider. If therefore the wound is small or flat, then apply lint from linen, or old cotton. And if the abscess is large, and there are many incisions, then you must insert lint into every incision until it reaches the bottom.
And if you have cut a part of the skin in the abscess, or hollowed it out: then it is necessary to fill it with old cotton, or as when cloth is sewn, or wool is shorn without moisture: and bind it until the third day.
Then put it back, and care for it with what is necessary from the ointment, until it heals.
But if blood flows during your operation, then apply cold water and vinegar, after it has been soaked in the cloth: and put it on the place of the blood flow many times.
But if the blood flow continues, then you must apply the regimen, and treatment, and powders, which I have mentioned in many places of this our book, and from division.
But if it is in the time of winter, and the place of the abscesses is many nerves: then you must pour the powders with wine, and warm oil: and put them on the places.
And if it is in summer and the wounds are fleshy: then it is necessary to place moist sawdust soaked in water, or with oil, or with wine and oil, and keep everything cold. Until the third day, as we said, then it is necessary to dissolve the abscess, and cleanse it, and administer what is appropriate for its healing until it is healed.
This is therefore the necessary knowledge of universal abscess healing.
Indeed, according to the method of distinction, I have already said about every abscess, how there is a way to its healing individually by chapters.
Chapter 41.
¶ About the incision of an abscess that occurs on the scalp.
Small abscesses occur on the scalp skin, and they are of the kinds of knots, which contain the tunics that are to them sacks: as if they themselves were scratched chickens.
And their kinds are many.
From them are the fat ones: and from them are those that contain moisture similar to clay: and from them are those that contain moisture similar to friable and mushy: and from them are similar ones, and from them are those that are hard like stone.
And in the incision of all, and their removal is not fearful, as long as it does not make opposition to the artery at their incision.
And the operation in their incision is, that it is tried with an instrument, whose form comes after these, which is called Intromissus, until you know what it contains.
For if it is that which contains moisture, then dry it by incision according to the length of the surface incision: in this form.
Begin with a section using a straight line b. to the line g. When the moisture is cleared, then scrape off the dried skin (kistin) that contains that moisture, and do not let anything remain from it completely.
For many times it returns if something remains from it.
Then soak cotton in Egyptian oil, if it is present: and if not, in water and salt: and fill the wound with it, and let it remain until another day. For it will corrode what remains from the skin.
Then repeat over it with Egyptian oil second and third, and if you need it, until you trust that nothing remains from the skin, then care for the wound with oil until it heals.
If the abscess contains a thick knot: then dry it according to this form, with a cutting tool having the form of a cross: and insert nails between the grooves of the cut, and scrape it from all parts: and try your strength in extracting the skin that contains it.
But if the artery opposes you, then do what I will tell you next.
And similarly do in the stone abscess, from the cut and cure, as we said.
And the cut on the stone abscess is easier: because it has little blood and moisture. And sometimes there are some of these abscesses in the head in certain people, with whom there is no moisture at all.
Which is: because I cut on the abscess in the head of an old woman, and I found the abscess as a solid and hard, rough, white stone, which could not be broken: and if someone hits it with it throwing, it wounds itself.
In other head abscesses that occur, however, besides these abscesses that happen in the heads of children and around the roots of the ears, a section of all of them should be a superficial cut.
Or make an incision in them always from the lower part of them, so that the course of the pus may be relieved towards the lower parts.
Then take care of those with what is appropriate for their cure.
¶ On the section of Strophularia in the neck.
Chapter 42.
These abscesses often occur in the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groins: and sometimes they occur in the rest of the body.
And over those that occur in the neck, there is one and many: and they are generated from each other: and every Strophularia from them is within its own tunic, as it is in knots and abscesses of the head, as we have narrated.
And the species of these Strophularia are many. And from them indeed are stony: and from them are those which contain moistures: and from them are evil ones, which do not obey the cure.
In that therefore which you see of good disposition from among them, whose manifest is near the color of the skin, and moves to all parts, and is not annexed with the nerves of the neck, nor with the guidegium, nor with the artery, nor is deep: it is necessary that you cut it with a superficial cut from the upper part to the lower part of the body by a line, b. by a line, g., and scrape off the skin from all parts: and extend two lips of the skin with a hook, or with many hooks, if you need it, as we have said in abscesses of the head, and extrahe it gradually.
And it is an additional precaution that the vein or nerve does not get injured.
And it should be a blunt, not sharp, knife: so as not to add your hand with the incision, or disturb the weak, and cut what is not necessary.
But if you cut a vein, or an artery, and it prevents you from the operation, then place in the wound some powdered zeig, or certain powders that stop bleeding, and bind the wound, and leave it until the sharpness of the abscess subsides, and the wound becomes soft: or it begins to putrefy.
For the blood is stopped then. So go back to your operation until you complete it.
Then examine with your index finger, if there remains anything from the small strophuli: so cut them, and clean them.
But if there is a large vein in the root of the strophuli: then it is necessary not to cut that strophuli from its root: but it is necessary to tie it with doubled strong thread, and leave it until it falls off without harm.
Then fill the wound with old cotton, which you have already immersed in Egyptian oil. Then take care of it.
But if the strophuli is cut entirely, then it is necessary to gather the two wound lips: and sew it immediately, after you see that there is no excess remaining.
But if you see that there is excess remaining due to the size of the strophuli, then it is necessary to extend to cutting its root, and removing it: and apply the suture as we said.
And whatever from the strophuli contains moisture, pierce it with a shallow puncture: so that the place of its maturity appears to you: and place the puncture below the body, as we said.
After the perforation, apply liniment with ointment and similar substances to cauterize the remaining part affected by decay until you see that the wound is clean. Then treat it with a generative ointment of flesh until it heals.
Chapter 43.
Concerning the sectioning of the epiglottis from an abscess within the throat due to an accident.
The ancients performed this sectioning of the epiglottis, and I have not seen anyone in our land who has done it; and this is the writing of their words.
However, in those who have a synanche, the sectioning of the epiglottis should be avoided, since it cannot be done through that, because all veins and lung are weak.
But in those who have a hot abscess in the mouth, throat, or both jaws, when there is no illness in the channel, one should use sectioning of the epiglottis to avoid the danger that occurs from prefication.
Therefore, when we want to do this, we should cut the epiglottis under three or four circles of the epiglottis, with a small section through its width, in that which is between two circles by quantity, which is a section in a soft place, not in cartilage: and this place is convenient for the section, because it is free from flesh, and veins are far from it.
If the physician is timid, then one should stretch the skin of the throat with a needle. Then he should open the skin, until when it reaches the channel: avoid veins, if he sees anything from them.
Then he should cut the soft part that we mentioned: and it is indicated over the sectioning of the channel from phlegm that exits from it, because it is broken, and the division of the voice.
And let the open wound heal at some time.
Therefore, when the hour comes when the preformed foreskin is feared to be removed, gather the two lips of the wound and suck only the skin without cartilage.
Then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow until it is healed.
Says Albucasis, The summary of this conversation we have narrated is not an explanation unless when they see that some of these abscesses has already filled the throat of the sick person: and the sick person was lifted up over death, and he wished to be cut off from his breath: they went to cut the epiglottis, so that the sick person could breathe over the wound with some breathing, and be saved from death: and for this reason they ordered the open wound to be left until the malice of the illness is consumed, and its malice lasts for three days, and it is as if it is itself: then they ordered the wound to be sucked and cared for until it is healed.
And that which I saw myself is that one maidservant took a knife, and sent it with her into her throat, and it struck with it the part of the trachea.
And I was called to heal her, and I found her groaning, as is the groaning of the dead.
Therefore I exposed the wound, and I found blood that had come out of the wound in small amount. Therefore I was confident that she had not cut the vein, nor the artery: and air was going out from the wound.
Therefore I quickly sucked the wound and cared for it until it was healed: and nothing happened to the maidservant, except a hoarse voice: and she returned after days to a better condition of her limbs.
I advise therefore that I say: That in the cutting of the Epiglottis there is no fear.
¶ On the cutting of the Hernia of the neck.
Chapter 44.
This swelling called Hernia of the neck is a large abscess according to the color of the body: and it is much in women.
And it is according to two modes: for either it is natural: or it is accidental.
In the natural one certainly there is no skill.
But in the accidental one indeed it is according to two modes: of which one is similar to the fat knots. And the other mode is similar to the abscess that is made from the knotting of the artery. And in it there is fear, and it is not necessary to make a presumption against it with iron, unless in that which is small: and you prove it, and investigate it with the intromission. If therefore you find it similar to the fat knot, and it is not suspended with any vein: then cut it, as the knots are cut: and extract it with that which contains from the chest, if it is in the chest: and if not, then examine all of it. Then care for the place with that which is necessary from the cure, until it is healed.
Chapter 45.
¶ On the cutting of the species of Knots.
There are many kinds of knots, and I have already said all the kinds of them in the division: and it is necessary that I should tell here the difference between a Knot, and an Extrusion: since it causes doubt.
I say therefore, that when an Extrusion is heat, and fever, and very violent pain, until the boiling over of excess is sedated, and completion of putrefaction: then indeed fever and heat are quieted.
When dealing with a wound that is not inflamed, there is no heat, fever, or pain, and it is contained within its own pus, which is a sac specific to it and corresponds to the color of the body: and its beginning is like chickpeas, and it becomes like lentils, and there are larger and smaller ones.
And they are of two kinds: either fatty: or they contain moisture. And the colors of moisture are many, as I said in the division.
Therefore, when you come to the treatment of a wound, you must try it and examine it first with the instrument called the Intromissus, according to its form as it appears in the chapter that follows.
And the method of examining a wound and all wounds is as follows: you take this instrument and insert it into the moistest part that you find in the wound: and you gradually turn your fingers with it until you know that the instrument has penetrated the skin. Then your last hand according to the measure of the size of the wounds.
Then remove the Intromissus and examine what has come out at its tip.
If therefore it comes out running moisture, whatever the color is: then dry it with a superficial cut, as I said in the other wounds.
And if no moisture comes out at the tip of the Intromissus, then you know that it is fatty: so dry it with a cut having the form of a cross, in this form as I taught you: and suspend it with hooks, and scrape off the skin from all parts with facility: and guard the pus if you can above it, so that you can remove it along with the wound.
But if the pus is broken into pieces during the operation, and it is not possible to remove it whole, often this happens: then remove it piece by piece until there is nothing left of it.
For if something remains from it, too little or too much, the knot returns according to the most.
But if it overcomes you and something remains from it, then fill the wound at your completion with certain corrosive powders: sharp, and bind the wound, and place above it what sits the pus hot, and care for it with the remaining cure until it is healed.
Therefore if the knot is large, then cut its two lips, and care for it with that which fleshens.
But if to you the opposite vein of the pulsatilla, or not pulsatilla, then hasten, and fill the place with crushed zegi, and leave it bound for two days, or three, until the wound rots, and the boil of blood ceases: then return to cutting that which remains from the knot.
Chapter 46.
¶ On the outside instruments for cutting and piercing.
From these are the shapes of introducers, and they are of three kinds.
For indeed it is large, and from them it is medium, and from them it is small.
Let them be made of iron awl of the ends of squares properly, so that they quickly enter into the boil.
And these are the shapes of experiencers, and not, that is, piercing: and one of them is named beris, that is, piercing: and they are of three kinds.
For indeed it is large, and medium, and small.
They are joined, so that they investigate through them boils, and exits, and fistulas, and buboes from what is between them from the bones.
And others are made round, clean, soft, like the large awl which has seats, from citrine indeed, or from air, or iron, or silver.
And better than them are those made from citrine.
And they are made from black lead, which come together so that through them they experiment with fistulas, whose concavity is reflections, so that they reflect with their own softness along with those reflections.
And they are again of three kinds. Because from them are long, from them medium, and from them short, according to the quantity of the amplitude of the fistula and its stricture.
The form of Uncinates, and they are of many kinds.
Because from them are simple, that is, those in which is one curve: and they are of three kinds as you see, Large, Medium, and Small.
And from them are Uncinates blind: and they are of three kinds.
And from them are Uncinates having two curves, and they are of three kinds: and from them are Uncinates having three curves, and they are of three kinds: and all of these are necessary in their place.
And these are the forms of Scalpels, by which they cut and exfoliate Nodos, and abscesses: and they are of three kinds: because from them is large, medium, and small.
Their extremities by which the section is made are sharp, other extremities are not sharp: and they are not placed thus, except that with them is made a bandage in the exfoliation of Nodos at the fear of incision of the vein, or nerve: and that the sick may be healed by it, and find some tranquility for a little from the burning which he found at the exfoliation of abscesses.
They are made from air, and they are like a Ray, with which is made alcohol: and in the broad extremity there is a hidden punctum Spatium: and in it runs to the interior and exterior when you want, as you see.
The form of pus that hides between the fingers, at the location of the boil opening: and the sick do not feel them, and they are of three kinds, large, medium, and small.
The forms of the wounds through which blood flow is cut off: and they are of three kinds, large, medium, and small.
Let them be made of air or yellow, round, slightly long, as you see: and let they be at the delicacy.
And it is necessary that these forms of the wounds be large and small with you: so that you cut off the blood through them with speed in need, and then when there is no medicine present with you.
But you will not use them in the cutting of blood in every place of the body, and you will not use them except in fleshy places: as the backs of the legs, and the hips, and the backs of the arms, and the breasts, and the belly, and the groin, and similar to these, from fleshy places, moist.
And sometimes they are made of them small instruments similar to the husks of beans, according to their form: by which blood is cut off when it flows from the place of phlebotomy, or at the incision of the vein, or artery: and sometimes they are made of them round according to this form.
Chapter 47.
¶ Of the care of human breasts which resemble the breasts of women.
Sometimes the breasts of certain men swell at the fullness of sleep (that is, when they begin to become dirty in sleep) until they resemble the breasts of women: and remain pustulous foully.
Whoever dislikes this (practice), it is necessary for them to cover the breasts with a lunar incision, according to this form from line b to line g. Then they should remove the skin entirely, including the fat. Then they should fill the wound with a flesh-colored medicament. Afterwards, gather the two edges of the wound with a suture and care for it until it heals.
If, however, the breast declines towards the lower parts and becomes soft due to its size, as often happens with women: then it is necessary to make two incisions on its upper sides, each of which contains the other at their ends, until one line containing the smaller one is formed, according to this form from line b to line g. Then they should remove the skin that is between the two lips, and take off the fat, and administer what was said about the suture and powders, which is necessary for healing, until it is healed.
If, however, the incision does not hold together as it should due to the restlessness of the sick person or because of the flow of blood: then it is necessary to fill the wound with a corrosive ointment immersed in cotton, and leave it until it corrodes what remains of the fat. Then care for it until it heals.
Regarding the puncturing of abscesses, which occurs under the breasts.
Chapter 48.
These abscesses that occur under the breasts are of a type of hard strophularia, which contain kistas, and from these are those that contain moistures.
Therefore, those that are from these that contain moistures should be dried with a lunar incision, according to this form from line b to line g, when everything that is in the abscess is drained out of pus, then fill it with old cotton and leave it until another day.
Then remove the bandage and treat it with an appropriate ointment until it heals.
If the abscess is of the type of Strophularia knots, then cut it above, as we said in the section on Strophularia evenly.
If the wound extends so that it can emit pus, then apply a cauterizer to it according to what we said in the previous one.
Chapter 49.
On the section of abscesses that occurs due to artery and vein.
When the artery is broken and the skin that is above it is consolidated, an abscess often occurs from this: and similarly, an abscess and swelling also occur in veins.
And the signs by which it is known that the abscess and swelling are due to the artery and vein, are: because when the abscess is due to the artery, it is long, collected in the deep part of the body: and when you press the abscess with your fingers, you feel as if there is a noise to it.
And that which is due to vein, is round in an obvious part of the body.
And the section on this abscess is an error, and especially that which is under the armpits, and in the groins, and on the neck, and in many parts of the body: and it is great and very large. Therefore it must be avoided with iron in its care, and that which is from them also is at the extremities, or on the head, must be avoided.
Therefore on that which is from them due to inflation of the artery opening, find in the skin section in length. Then open the section with hooks, then the artery: and free it from the tunics, until it is uncovered.
Then insert the needle under it and make it penetrate to the other side, and tie the artery with a double thread in two places, as I taught you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples.
Then prick the place that is between the two ligaments with a lancet, until all the blood that is in it comes out and the abscess is dissolved.
Then apply the treatment that generates pus until the ligaments fall off: then care for it with suitable ointments until it heals.
If it is an abscess due to the cutting of the vein, then you must hold what is possible for you to remove from the abscess with the skin. Then insert the needle under the place that you held with your hand, and make it penetrate: and let there be a double thread on it, until you remove it from the other side. Then tie it with the abscess with a good ligature: according to what I told you in the ligature of the vein, from two parts with two ends of the thread.
But if you fear that the thread will be removed, then insert another needle with another thread under the abscess entirely at the incision of the needle: press and tie your thread in four places.
Then cut the abscess in the middle of itself, until when it comes out what is in it: then cut off the excess skin, and let go what is tied from it.
Then place on it a compress that you dipped in wine and oil. Then apply the treatment that is made with lint and ointment until it heals.
Chapter L.
On the abscess that happens from the twisting of nerves.
Just as it happens that an abscess occurs in an artery and vein, similarly, an abscess can occur in nerves: this happens to them from a blow or from excessive labor, and the like. It is most common in the places of helpers, or calcanei, and in every place where the movements of the joints occur: and it is a heavy abscess.
Its color is similar to that of the rest of the body, and it occurs in many positions without pain: and when it is compressed with great force, the sick person feels in it a sensation similar to paralysis.
And it is not an abscess that is aggregated in the depth of the body, but rather it is under the skin, and it moves to every part, and does not go to the front, nor before, nor back to the rear parts.
Therefore, what is from them in the joints, it is not necessary that it be approached with iron. Perhaps contraction will occur.
But in that which is from them in the head, or in the forehead, pierce the skin with a lancet. If therefore it is a small abscess, then hold it with forceps, and cut it off from the root.
And if it is large, then suspend it with a hook, and excise it: then remove it, and gather the wound with a stitch: and care for it until it is healed.
Chapter LI.
About cutting abscesses that occur in the belly.
It often happens to some men in their bellies, and in the rest of their bodies, that they have warts, which are called fungous growths, by similarity with mushrooms.
Whose root is thin, and their head is thick, and their lips are turned over. And among them is little: and among them is that which is highly valued greatly.
Indeed, I have seen a man, and in his belly were two testicles, which were more like other things than anything else: there was no difference between them, they were white, small roots, and they faced each other, and they were found, and moisture always ran from them.
I therefore cut them, and I found in the weight of one as if X and 8 ounces and in the other as if 6 ounces. And the operation in their cutting is that you consider then, if the sick person is wet, and the color of the testicles is white, moist, delicate roots: then cut him with a broad spatula, and there be cauterization in your presence in fire.
For often blood is driven out of its cutting: therefore hurry if the blood overcomes you, then cauterize it.
If you see the sick person afraid and timid from the cutting with iron, then take a thread made of lead properly, and tie with it a cloth: whose method we have said, and leave it for two days.
Then add to the stricture of lead. Therefore do not cease to tie lead, whenever it is pressed on the testicles, until it is cut off, and falls by itself without labor.
But if the testicles are coarse of roots, then in their cutting there is something fearful and timid: especially what is in the belly.
However it is possible to cut its middle. Then cauterize it, so that it does not return.
Then care for it, until the wound is healed.
And beware that you do not presume to cut testicles which are of brown color, few senses, foul appearance: for indeed it is a cancerous abscess: and I will come with the remembrance of Cancer after this.
Chapter 52.
Translation: On the Treatment of Umbilical Hernias.
Umbilical hernias occur for many reasons. Or from a tear in the abdomen, which is above the belly, and protrudes through it, or an intestine, according to what happens in other ruptures. Or from blood that flows from the vein, or from the artery, as was previously mentioned. Or from the abdominal wall being too loose in that area.
If it is due to a tear in the abdomen and the protrusion is through the thigh, then it has a similar color to a pustule: and it is painless, without pain: and it appears to be in different positions. And if it is due to the protrusion of an intestine, then its position is with that which we have mentioned, of greater diversity. Therefore, when you press it with your fingers, it disappears: then it returns, and perhaps it is with that sound: and it is greatly enlarged at the entrance of the bath, and the effort is violent.
But if it is due to moisture, it is painless, then it does not disappear when you press it with your hand, nor is it compressed, nor does anything else happen.
If it is due to blood, then with these signs it appears to be a pustule turning black from the slope.
But if it is due to flesh born, then it is a heavy, thick, hard pustule, and it is shaped according to one quantity.
But if it is due to looseness, then the touch of it is gentle.
And the operation in it is, so that you consider at that time, if the umbilical hernia is due to blood from the artery, or the vein, or looseness: then it is necessary to be prevented from its treatment. For in that case there is fear and trembling, as I taught you in the chapter where I said about abscesses due to the artery and vein.
But if the prominence of the navel is due to the intestine or a fistula: then you must order the sick person, as much as possible, to hold their breath and stand upright. Then signs with the cautery around the navel of the whole body. Then order him to lie down on his back between your hands on his back. Then circle with a broad-bladed knife around the navel on the spot that you indicated with the cautery. Then extend the middle of the abscess towards the upper parts, with a large needle. Then tie him around the navel strongly with a strong thread, or with a silk cord from a strong silk ligature: and let there be a knot in the ligature.
Then open the middle of the abscess extended above the ligature. If therefore you find that it is already captured by the ligature: then remove the ligature, and insert your index finger into it, and push the intestine towards the interior of the abdomen: and if you find a fistula, then take it with the needle, and cut off its excess.
But if the opposite is against you, the artery or vein: then circle it much. Then return to your operation. And take two needles, and insert into them two strong threads: and insert two needles into the circumference that you made around the abscess in the form of a cross, which you make to pierce.
Then tie the abscess in four places on the needle: and if you wish, remove the needle, and let go of the place, until the extended flesh rots: and falls off by itself: or cut it when it becomes thin and rotten.
Then take care of that (wound) with the appropriate medicine until it heals.
But if the prominence of the umbilicus is from the flesh or moisture, then you should drain the abscess as we mentioned earlier. And remove the blood or moisture that you find in it.
Then take care of that (wound) with the appropriate medicine that hardens the area.
Chapter 53.
¶ On the treatment of Cancer.
We have already mentioned the division of cancer species and how to treat it with medicines, and we must be careful with its treatment with iron, so that it does not ulcerate: and we said that cancer generated in the womb, and precautions for its treatment.
And the ancients said that when cancer is in a place where it can be eradicated, such as cancer in the breasts or thighs, and similar places located in the limbs to remove the whole of it, especially when it is small and beginning.
But when it is old and large, one should not approach it.
For I could not heal anyone from that: nor did I see anyone before me who reached that.
And the operation on it, when it is located as we mentioned, is to go ahead and dissolve the weak part from black bile several times. Then if you find blood flow with obvious fullness.
Then prepare the weak part with preparation, where it will be located with the operation.
Then insert hooks that suit it into the cancer. Then drain it from all parts with the skin, according to examination, until nothing remains of its roots: and let the blood flow, and do not cut it quickly, but express the places and wipe off the thick blood entirely by your hand, or with whatever is possible there from instruments.
If the unevenness of the blood flow due to an incision in the artery or vein bothers you, then cauterize the vein until the blood stops flowing. Then take care of the wound itself along with the other treatment until it heals.
On the Care of Hydrops.
Chapter 45. Now we have already discussed the division of hydrops species, how water accumulates, and all its symptoms, as well as its treatment with remedies.
And the one that is cured with iron is only the species of ascites alone, and it does not approach with iron the species of tympanitis: nor does the species of hydrops entirely: for that is fatal.
When you have already been cured of this species of hydrops tympanitis with remedies, and your treatment did not include: then consider. For if the patient has already become weak, or there is weakness with him other than hydrops: such as if it is with him cough, or diarrhea, and similar things: then beware that you do not treat him with iron: for that is fear.
But if you see the patient overflowing with strength, and there is no other illness with him except hydrops alone: and he is not a child, nor an old person: then the method of operation in him is, that you lift up the patient standing between your hands, and the assistant after him will press his belly with his hand pushing the water towards the lower part of the ribs.
Then take a sponge of thistle in this form. It should be two parts sharp, long, and sharp at the ends like a sponge. However, there should be something of brevity gradually in it, so that you do not pass with him to the operation up to the intestine, and you do not hurt it.
Then consider. For if the generation of Hydropisis is from the part of the intestines, then it is necessary to extend with a cut from the navel by the quantity of three fingers, to the lower parts in a straight line above the pecten.
But if the generation of Hydropisis is due to pain in the liver, then your cut should be on the left side from the navel by the quantity of three fingers.
And if the generation of Hydropisis is due to the spleen, then your cut should be on the right side: and it is not necessary either that the cut should be in the side on which the sick person wishes to lie, so that the superfluities do not flow to that weaker place.
Then pierce with an instrument through the whole skin. Then insert into that cut, and introduce your hand with a spatula between the skin and the flesh, as if you are scraping it: and let the quantity which excoriates be the quantity of a nail, or about that.
Then pierce the flesh until the spatula reaches the empty place: and there is the place of water. Then extract it, and insert into the hole an instrument of which this is the form. And it is similar to a cannula: it is made of silver, or of brass, or of gold, light, clean: in its lower part there is a small hole, and on its sides are three holes, two from one side, and one from the other side: and it has an incised tip, according to the mode of incision of a pen, as you see: at its upper end is a ring.
For when the instrument reaches the water, then it immediately flows down over the instrument, therefore evacuate from the water in the middle of the hour.
Because if you evacuate from it more than is necessary, perhaps the sick person dies in the hour by the resolution of his animal spirit: or he suffers from syncopes which approach death.
However, you should draw out from it according to the amount of its virtue, and according to what the positions of the sick person signify to you through its power, and through its goodness.
Then draw out the instrument, and hold the water.
This is because it will be retained immediately due to the skin that holds the opening which is above the siphon: of which I have spoken, so that you can pierce it in the same way.
Then repeat the instrument on the second day, if you see the sick person bearing that: and also draw out from the water a small quantity.
Do this on several days without fear, and guard yourself from error: until there remains in the water only a little.
But if you fear for the sick person, and let out much from the water: then care for him with burial in hot sand, and much sweat in the bath and sun, and wait for thirst: and care for him with dry medicines, until he is healed: and cauterize on his stomach, and epar, and spleen, after extraction of the water: according to what I have spoken in that which preceded.
¶ On the care of children who are born in places where their urinary openings are not pierced.
Chapter 50.
When someone of the children leaves from the womb of his mother, and the head of his mother is not pierced, or the opening is narrow, or in not its place.
Therefore you must assist with the piercing of it immediately when he is born with a small and very sharp knife, in this form.
Then place in the opening a thin lead clamp, and tie it: and hold it for three days, or four.
When therefore he wants to urinate, remove it, and mix. Then reduce it again.
And if you do not place the lead, it is already possible that the urine that flows over the place does not allow it to become obstructed.
But he whose fistula is narrow, he is treated with lead, as we said, for many days until it becomes wider.
Those in whom the fistula is not in its proper place, they are injured. That is, because from those who are born, the fistula is at the end of the head of the maiden: therefore she cannot urinate towards the front, until she raises the maiden's staff to the upper parts with her hand. Nor is there generation for her, because the semen cannot reach the matrix according to straightness: and it is a very shameful illness.
And the method of operation in him is that the weak one lies face down on his back. Then extend the head of the maiden with your left hand by forceful extension, and cut the head of the maiden from the place of the penis, with a sharp point, or a narrow knife: as is the incision of a pen, or as you cut something, so that the middle of it comes to the head of the maiden: and so that the fistula falls in the middle according to what is proper.
And beware of you during your operation from the flow of blood. For it often happens. Therefore place it with that which cuts the blood, and care for the wound, until it is healed.
¶ Of the white things that occur in the prepuce and head of the maiden, and corruption, blackness, and adherence.
Chapter 66.
Often these white things occur in the maiden, and it is a disgusting flesh.
And from it another is a malignant one, and another is not malignant.
Therefore, you should hang the non-malignant one with a fine needle, and cut it off until you cleanse it entirely. Then place on it a piece of cotton soaked in Egyptian oil. Then care for the wound itself after that with Dyafinicon oil until it heals.
If the Albather is malignant and has a foul color, then you should apply a cautery after its incision and its scraping.
If the Albather is inside the foreskin of an uncircumcised man, and it is a part of the Albather inside the foreskin and a part outside: then you should remove the Albather that is inside first, until it consolidates, then care for it externally: because if you care for it simultaneously, the foreskin will not be secure and will protrude.
And now even in the testicles, blackness and corruption occur. Therefore, you should cauterize the entire thing that has already blackened and what wants to become corrupted, or is already corrupted.
Then place a line on it after that with honey that has been beaten with flour of poppy seeds and crumbled bread, and ground herbs.
Then care for it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
If however bleeding occurs, then apply a cautery with a lunar cauterizer, in this form.
For the cautery is a lancet with two positions at once, namely for bleeding and wounds when they are corrupted.
If it gnaws the head of a virgin and destroys everything in an hour: then you should insert a cannula into the opening of the penis with lead, so that the weak one may drip on it.
In adherence of the prepuce to the head of a virgin, and indeed this adherence does not occur unless in one whose prepuce is healthy, and circumcision is not required over it: and sometimes adherence occurs due to a wound, or abscess: therefore it is necessary to scrape it with a sharp spatula, until the ligament is dissolved, and the head of the virgin is freed from all parts.
If it is difficult to distinguish this precisely, then it is necessary to scrape something from the head of the virgin and from the prepuce. Because the prepuce, when it is thin, perhaps is pierced due to its thinness quickly.
Then separate between the prepuce and the head of the virgin with a fine linen cloth, which is already made into water cold, so that they do not stick again.
Then it is treated with styptic wine, until it is hardened.
Chapter 57.
Concerning the cleansing of infants, and the treatment of them from error that happens to them.
Circumcision is not the dissolution of continuity, like other wounds: but since it is from our operation, our will, and its use is properly in boys, it is necessary that we mark in this operation a better sign, and a path leading more easily to salvation.
I say therefore that the ancients did not say circumcision in any of their books: because they do not use it in their laws, and it is only what we have acquired by experience.
Because I have found the majority of artisans, and phlebotomists to use cleansing by circumcising with a scalpel, and with forceps: and they use those who are affected, and ligaudo with thread, and incision with a needle.
I myself have already tested all these methods, and I have not found a better method of cleaning with tweezers and tying with thread.
Since often the skin escapes when cleaning with a scalpel. Since the skin of the prepuce has two layers, perhaps the upper skin was cut and the lower layer was exposed, therefore it is necessary to make another incision and cause future pain. And with the cleaning that is done by touching, that is, digitally, as surgeons use, the incision of the extreme member of the male body is not secured, since perhaps it enters into its opening.
But in cleaning with a spoon, perhaps the iron escaped and ruined your operation, and the skin of the child is short by nature, and often they are born like that, which does not need cleaning, and I have already seen it.
However, in cleaning with tweezers and tying with thread, a good experiment has shown to me, because the tweezers are proportional to the incision, therefore, since the sharpness that is above is like the sharpness that is below. Therefore, when you place your hand, the two sharpnesses are proportional and they incise according to one operation at one time, and a compression of similar figure is made, containing the skin of the virgin from all parts with which there is no error at all.
And the method of your operation is that you make an estimate, especially a child, if it is from those who understand a little, which you do not do except that you tie thread in its own virgin, and leave him until another day.
Then make him enjoy and be happy in every way possible to you from that which he receives his understanding. Then make him stand between your prepared hands, and not sit: and hide the needles in your sleeve or under your foot, so that the child does not see them at all, nor anything from the tools.
Then insert your hand into his sleeve, and blow on the skin, and pull it upwards, until the head of the sleeve comes out. Then clean it from what gathers in its dirtiness.
Then tie the marked spot with double thread. Then tie it below that with a small piece of thread. Then hold with your index finger and thumb the spot of the lower tie, and good retention, and cut between the two ties. Then lift the skin quickly upwards, and extract the head of the sleeve. Then let the blood run slowly (for it is better) and place powder on top: and above the powder a cloth in which the expanded gut was boiled in rosewater, shaken with rose oil. Recently good: and let him lie on top of it until another day: and care for the rest of his healing, until he is healed.
But the form of the needle for cleaning is this.
They should be sharp two ends, and they should be incidents: so that the branch of the claw does not stick out in them: and the length of the two needles is like the length of two handles equally.
But the mistake that occurs in cleaning is: because perhaps the inner skin is completely escaped, or a part of it near the incision.
Therefore it is necessary, that you extend it from your hour with your nail before the formation of the pus at the spot: and cut it according to equality.
If you cannot hold her with your nail, then remove her with a hook and cut her.
But if more than three days have passed and what remains under the probe is inflated, it is an abscess: then let it go until the abscess becomes hot and you scrape it with some ointment, and cut it according to what is prepared for you, and beware of the tip of the probe. For it will not harm her.
Therefore care for it with the powder that we mentioned in the treatise on powders, and if it cuts through the skin above the measure and goes to the upper part, it does not harm her either.
Therefore care for it with what we said until she is healed.
Chapter LVIII.
¶ On the extraction of a stone retained in the bladder.
Urinary retention in the bladder is caused by a blockage made from stone, or congealed blood, or pus, or flesh-like matter, and similar things from those that we mentioned as cures in division.
And if the stone does not dissolve and you see that the retention is due to the stone that is already in the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary for him to be lying on his knees and cared for. Then his feet will be placed on his back, and he will extend his belly from the upper part of his back, and tie his short breath as much as possible for him. Therefore, with the neck of the bladder towards the stone's expulsion, it is dissolved.
If it does not dissolve with what we said and the matter is strong on the weak one, then it is necessary for the extractor of the stone with an instrument called a siringa, whose form is made of silver, and is thin, light, concave like the cannula of a bird's quill in subtility of the radius, long in the likeness of the palm of one and half hands: and it has a thin cannula in its head.
The method of extracting a splinter using this instrument is as follows: take a doubled thread and tie a good ligature at its end, either with wool or cotton. Then insert the end of the thread into the lower part of the forceps and, if there is any excess lint, cut it off with scissors. However, if there is no excess lint, insert the thread into the cannula with force, as previously mentioned.
Then apply the forceps with oil, either with butter or with white of egg: and make the invalid sit on the seat, and rub the perineum, and the forceps itself with wet oils, and oil of olives, and warm water.
Then insert the forceps into the splinter with ease until it reaches the root of the splinter.
Then double it back from the upper part near the navel.
Then push the forceps into it until it reaches the bladder, and the invalid feels that it has reached an empty space: and this is not done in this order unless the passage through which it goes is where there is a bend.
Then gradually extend the thread with wool. For the splinter will follow the lint.
Then remove it and make the splinter run through the urinary passage: and repeat the forceps, and do not stop doing this until the bladder is emptied, and the invalid finds relief.
Regarding the quality of the discharge from the bladder with Clepsydra.
Chapter 65.
When an ulcer or blood clots in the bladder, or pus is confined in it and fluids and medicines wish to distill into it: then make use of an instrument called Clepsydra, and this is its form.
It is called deaf, that is, closed. And in it are three openings, two on one side and one on the other, as you see.
And the concave place, where that which impels is, should be according to the quantity that it will push it without addition until when it is drawn with it something, from moistures is attracted: and when it is impelled, with it is expelled far: as does the clepsydra, by which is thrown naphtha, that is, Greek fire in battles of Mars.
When therefore you want to throw moistures into the bladder, insert the extremity of the clepsydra into the moisture, and draw with it that which impels to the upper parts, for the moisture is drawn into the concavity of the clepsydra.
Then insert its extremity into the reed, as we told in the syringe. Then impel the moisture with that which impels, for indeed that moisture has come to the bladder immediately, so that it feels it weak.
The form of a syringe by which the bladder is catheterized.
Let it be made of silver, or gold: whose head higher is like a little camel, and under it a pouch in which the string falls.
Then take the bladder of a sheep, and put in it the moisture, by which you want to catheterize the bladder. Then tie it between two pouches with a strong rope and double thread: and heat the moisture a little over the fire.
Then insert the extremity of the syringe into the reed, afterwards tighten your hand on the bladder with moisture with a decent stopper, until it feels weak, that that moisture has already come to the bladder.
If you do not have a bladder present, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle from it, and pierce it completely to remove all its roundness. Then insert a strong thread through those holes, as they are turned. Then gather the circle, like an apothecary: after you place in it what you want from moistures, oils, and waters.
Then tie it with an instrument: and do with it as you did with the bladder from the expression with your hand, until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter 60.
¶ On the extraction of a stone.
Now we have spoken about the division of the species of stone, and its cure with medicines: and I said the difference between a stone formed in the kidneys, and the bladder, and its signs throughout: and I said about the operation of a stone that falls into the hand and cutting: and that is a stone that is actually formed in the bladder: and that which is shaped in a reed: and I am narrating that with clear explanation and abbreviation.
I say therefore, that a stone formed in the bladder, most often happens to children.
And from its signs it is that urine exits from the bladder like water in its fineness: and appears in it sand white, and he rubs his reed weakly, and struggles with it, and often hangs. Then he rises up, and exits with it the anus in many of them.
And it is easy to cure children, from which they follow until fourteen years. And it is difficult in the elderly. But in young people it is medium, in that which is between them: and of him whose stone is larger, cure is easier: and if small, is opposite his cure.
When we arrive at the treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the sick person with a clyster, which draws out all the feces that are in his intestines: for this, when neglected, sometimes prevents the discovery of the Stone in an examination.
Then the sick person should be taken with his feet, and shaken, and moved towards the lower parts: so that the Stone may descend to the bottom of the bladder, or leap from a high place several times.
Then make him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands be under his buttocks, so that the bladder may become entirely inclined towards the lower parts.
Then feel for it, and touch him from outside.
If therefore you feel the Stone in the space, then hasten immediately with a lancet above it.
But if it does not at all come under your touch, then you must wipe the index finger with oil from your left hand, if the sick person is a child: or the middle finger if he is an adult complete: and introduce it into his anus, and search for the Stone, until it comes under your finger: and turn him gradually towards the neck of the bladder.
Then press upon it with your finger, and push it towards the outside against the place of which you wish to make an incision: and command the assistant to press the bladder with his hand, and command another assistant to extend the testicles with his right hand towards the upper part: and with his other hand, to remove the skin which is under the testicles in the part from which the incision is to be made.
Then introduce a lancet with the following shape: And find in it that is between the anus and the testicles, and not in the middle, to the side of the left buttock: and let the incision be on it above the Stone, and your finger be in the anus: and let the incision be transverse, so that it may be an external incision wide, and an internal one narrow, according to the quantity which is possible for the egress of the Stone from it not greater.
Perhaps indeed he compresses the finger, which is in the anus, a stone at the incision, and exits without difficulty.
And you should know that because of the stone, which has angles and edges, it makes difficult exit for it.
And from this, it is smooth, similar to a gland, and round: and its exit is made easy.
Therefore, to him who has angles and edges, add in the incision.
If he does not exit thus, then it is necessary that you use ingenuity above him: or tie over him with a belt properly, whose extremity is like the moon, which ties over the stone, and does not slip from it: or that you insert under him a thin instrument, curved at its extremity.
But if you cannot do so above with it, then widen the opening slightly. If something binds you from the blood, cut it off with a knife.
But if the stone is more than one, then push the first large into the opening of the bladder. Then cut above it. Then push a little after that: and likewise do if there are many two by two.
But if it is very large, then it is a matter of ignorance to separate above it with a large incision. Because it happens to the weak of two things, either that he dies, or that it happens to him frequent dripping of urine: because the place is not at all consolidated.
But administer its expulsion until it exits: or use ingenuity in its fracture with forceps, until you extract it piece by piece.
Then when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with thyme, and aloe, and dragon's blood: and bind it, and place on top of it a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or rose oil, and cold water: so that the abscess remains hot.
Then place the patient on their back, and do not untie the ligament until the third day. When you finally untie it, apply heat to the area with plenty of water and oil.
Then care for him with Dyafinicon ointment and Basilicon ointment until he is healed.
But if a pus-filled abscess occurs in the wound, and it is hot, corrosive, and similar: such as when blood congeals in the bladder, and urination is prevented from it: and this is known by the discharge of blood with urine. Therefore insert your finger into the wound and remove the blood. For if it remains, it will cause decay of the bladder and its putrefaction.
Then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt: and apply everything that is suitable for its healing until it is healed.
And it is necessary during the entire period of healing, to bind two legs and bandages, cause of the medicines that are placed on the area.
But if the stone is small and it is in the passage of a virgin, and it is stuck in it, and prevents urination: then care for it with what I have told you before you reach the section. For often you will be saved from the section by this treatment, for indeed I have proven it.
And it is, that you take the Perforator from iron alferico, whose form is triangular at the end, sharp, fixed in wood.
Then take a thread and tie it with it under the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
Then insert the iron perforator into the wood with ease, until the Perforator reaches the stone: and turn the Perforator in your hand on it gradually: and try to make its puncture, until you make it penetrate from the other side.
The urine is immediately discharged.
Then press your hand against what remains on the stone from the outer part of the wall. For indeed it is broken and goes out with the urine, and the sick person is healed.
If, however, this cure is not prepared for you because of something that prevents it from that: then tie a string under the stone, and another string above the stone. Then dry on the stone in the very wall between the two strings. Then remove it. Afterwards dissolve the string, and clean the clotted blood that is formed in the wound.
And it is not necessary to tie the string under the stone unless it does not return to the bladder: and the other string above, unless when the string is dissolved after the stone comes out, the skin returns to its place, and covers the wound: and for this reason it is necessary for you to raise the skin when you tie the string above, so that it returns to your complement, and covers the wound, as we said.
Chapter 61.
Chapter on the Extraction of Stones from Women.
The stone is not formed much in women.
But if it happens to any of them, then the cure is difficult, and is prevented by many ways.
One of them is: that the woman perhaps is a virgin.
And the second is, because you do not find a woman who conceals herself from the doctor when she is chaste, or from those who have husbands.
The third is, because you do not find a woman well knowing this art, especially the operation with the hand.
And the fourth is the distance from the place of the stone: therefore it requires deep incision, and there is fear.
If necessity calls for it, then you should take a woman doctor who is well-versed in medicine, as they are rarely found.
However, if you cannot find such a woman, then seek out a chaste, wise, and present female obstetrician who is well-versed in the art of women's health: make her present, and especially her, to do everything you instruct her to do based on your examination.
Firstly, it is necessary for her to examine if the woman is a virgin: then she should insert her finger into her anus and search for the stone.
If she finds it, then she should cover it with her finger and then instruct the obstetrician to insert her finger into the weak vagina and search for the stone after placing her left hand on the bladder and gently compressing it.
If she finds the stone, then she should gradually move it from the bladder opening downwards with great skill until she reaches it at the root of the thigh.
Then she should cover it over the weak vagina at the root of the thigh, from whichever side she prepares herself and feels the stone in that part: and her finger should not be removed from the stone, covering it underneath: and let the incision be small in the first place. Then she should insert the radium over that incision.
Then she should insert the radium over that incision. If she then feels the stone, then she should add to the incision a corresponding amount of radium according to the size of the stone that is being expelled from her.
And know that there are many kinds of stones. From these, one is small and large, gentle and rough, long and round with branches.
Therefore know its kind, as it is signified to you by this above what you wish.
If therefore it convinces you blood, then add in the place of the wound ground cumin, and hold it for an hour until the blood is separated.
Then return to your operation until the stone comes out: and make, that you prepare with you from the tools which I said in the extraction of the stone in the men, so that you help through those in your operation.
But if it convinces you bloody flux, and you know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery which is cut: then put powder on the place, and bind it with bandages with a proper binding: and do not move it: and let go the stone, and do not take it out. Perhaps the weak woman will die. Then care for the wound.
But when the sharpness of the blood is calmed after days, and the place rots, then return to your operation until the stone comes out.
Chapter 62.
¶ On the cutting of the hydrocele.
Hydrocele is not, unless the accumulation of moisture in the white bag under the skin of the testicle containing the egg: and it is called a sac.
And sometimes it is in its own pouch, which nature has prepared for itself in the part of the eye, until it is thought to be: which is another egg, and is the skin of the testicle between the white bag, which we said: and it is not made except rarely.
And the generation of this hydrocele is indeed from the weakness which happens to the testicles: therefore this matter is poured out to them. And sometimes it happens from the blow on the testicles.
This moisture has many colors. For its color is inclined towards yellowishness, or it is red with blood, or filthy, black, or it is watery white, and that is more.
And the signs by which it is known where the collection of water is, are these. For if it is in the back white which we said, then the abscess is round to the length somewhat like the figure of an egg: and the testicle does not appear, because the moisture contains it from every part.
And if the moisture is in its own proper cloth, then the abscess is round with part of an egg, and therefore the man estimates it because it is another egg.
And if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white back, then it falls under sense.
Therefore when you want to know the color of the moisture, then try the color of the moisture in the abscess with the square inserter, whose form precedes. According to that which goes out in the heel of the inserter, judge of that which is between it.
When therefore we come to the cure with iron, then it is necessary for you to command the sick one, that he be bled if possible, and you see his body full.
Then let him lie on his back on a high bed slightly, and put under him many cloths.
Then you sit on his left, and command the servant, that he sit on his right, who extends his rod to one of two skin of the testicles, and to the part of the belly.
Then you take a broad spatula, and dry the skin of the testicles from the middle in length, until near the pecten: and make the cut according to the rectitude of the line which divides the skin of the testicles, until it arrives at the white back comprehending: and scrape him and observe, or caution from this, that you scrape him: and your scraping is from the part which hangs with an egg more: and subtly scrutinize with the scraping according to the quantity which is possible for you.
Then pierce the siph with a wide hole and draw out all the water.
Then separate the two lips of the cut with hooks and extend the siph to the upper part, but do not touch the skin that encloses the testicles: and incise the siph however it is possible for you to incise it, or entirely, or in pieces, especially the thin side. For if you do not carefully examine, there is no safety in the incision, lest the water return.
But if it proceeds outwards from its own skin at the time of your operation: then when you have completed the incision of the siph, bring it back. Then gather the two lips of the skin of the testicles with a stitch.
Then care for it as the other wounds, until it is healed.
But if you find something corrupted from another stain, then it is necessary to bind wounds, which are the support, fearing the flow of blood.
Then cut off the testicle with its support, and draw out the thing: afterwards care for it with what we said.
But if the water is gathered in two parts, then you will know that there are two branches: therefore cut off the other part according to what you did in the other equally.
And if it is equal to you, that the operation be one, then do: afterwards wipe off the blood. And insert in the incisions a wool soaked in oil, or in rose-tinted oil: and place another wool than you immersed in wine and oil, and spread it over the two testicles, and on the belly: and place double cloths above, and they are pads: and bind them above with a bandage, which has six according to this form.
Then take two cloths, wash and fill them with red-dyed wool, according to this likeness: and make their ends that which is pressed from the belly, or wet wool: and gather them together with a band in the loins of the animals: and one end takes over the anus up to the back, and the second takes to the part of the beak: and two ends above two hips, and two ends another on two groins, and gather the whole band in the loins of the animals.
And sometimes this incision is artificially medicated with a cautery at the place of the cut with iron: and it is, that you take a thin scalpel as a cautery, and scrape with it the skin of the testicles: and it is burned, according to what we have told: until when it detaches the white containing water: then take the scalpel, according to this form.
The letter Greek is similar.
Then pierce with it that white, and it is burned, until all the moisture comes out.
Then extend the white with hooks, and scrape with a thin burning cautery, and cut it according to what is possible to you, until you remove all of its roots.
And beware from egg, lest it touch the fire.
And know that this operation is safer, and farther from the flow of blood, and better than the operation with cutting.
But if contradiction makes you in the hour of the cut, or in the hour of the burning abscess hot, or flow of blood, or anything else: then it is necessary that you cure what contradiction makes you from that with the cure which belongs to it, according to what was premissed.
If however the patient is timid and does not anticipate this operation due to its horror: then perform the incision as I have described it, and it is done.
When you are certified about the significations we mentioned regarding the watery ramex: then you must make the sick person sit on an elevated seat.
Then incise the abscess in its lower part with a broad-bladed knife: and place the incision along the length of the body, and let it be wide enough for all the water to run out.
Then place it on a clean cloth, and bandage it, and let it run off the remaining water: then care for it until the wound heals.
If however there is resistance to the escape of water at the time you are incising it: and this is not because of any other reason, but because a white cloth causes resistance in the wound opening, and prevents the exit of water: then you must insert a needle into the wound, or an instrument with which water from hydrocele is extracted, whose shape has been mentioned before: or add to the operation of the wound for a short time.
And know that water returns and accumulates after six months, or about that time. When therefore it accumulates again, then incise it in the same manner, and the sick person will pass his days.
Chapter 63.
¶ On the care of fleshy ramexes.
Know that in the incision for this ramex, there is often a lot of danger due to fear. Therefore it seems to me that its removal can be saved from this.
And I remember the operation in it, and the appearance of abscesses.
I say therefore that many abscesses occur in the bodies of men, from which the testicles are composed; and this happens for many reasons, namely.
either from an excessive sharpness or sharpness, which is poured out towards the testicles. or from a blow.
And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body, and there is no pain found in it; and it is a heavy abscess.
And perhaps it is a stone abscess, whose color is dark, and there is no sense in it.
And sometimes it is caused by the knotting of the arteries and their inflation; as has already been mentioned: or from the inflation of the veins.
Therefore, what is caused by those from the inflation of the arteries, is known by the arrangement of the abscess, when you press it with your fingers. And it is not necessary to touch it entirely.
But that which is caused by the inflation of the veins, does not spread out from it anything at all with compression with your fingers.
And now it is possible that a cut is made on this kind of form, and on the remaining flesh; and it is to separate the skin of the testicles. Then extend the thing upwards, and remove it with a white rag; and free the suspender from the vessel, and tie the vessels: and cut the suspender after you have freed it from all parts from the parts of it.
If therefore the thing is consolidated with those fleshy things, then it is necessary to draw the thing, and cut it.
And if there is an adhesion between anything from the rag, or in that which is between the vessels: then it is necessary to free the whole of that adhesion, and cut it with a round cut.
If, however, the birth of flesh is in a place of adhesion which is posterior, then it is necessary to cut off the whole of it and extract the egg, as we have said.
When, therefore, your operation is completed, then fill the wound with wool soaked in rose-scented oil and wine, and then care for it along with the other cure until it heals.
Chapter 64.
About the care of Ramecis, which is with Vitum.
There is an abscess wrapped in a certain wrapping, similar to a boil, with the softening of the testicles: and it is difficult for a weak motion and exercise, and walking.
And in the treatment of this illness there is from fear, because of that which preceded its remembrance.
But it is necessary for us to say the operation in it according to what they did first.
I say therefore that you should make the sick person sit on an elevated seat. Then push the testicle support towards the lower parts. Then hold the skin of the testicles with your fingers, with the vases which are near the maiden: and another servant should hold them and extend them with strong extension.
Then cut with a flat broad sharp crosswise section through the vases, until the vases are exposed.
Then scrape off from all parts, as we told you in the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
Then fix in them a needle in which is the double thread, and tie it in the first place where the Vites occur: and tie it again in the last of them. Then cut them in the middle straight section according to the length of the body, and extract what is gathered from the humid and corrupted foulness.
Then care for the wound with the healing of the other wounds, in which there is a desire to generate soundness, so that the vessels that nourish one testicle fall. For it is not an evil through that one.
But if the grape occurs in all the vessels, then it is necessary that they be removed because of this testicle with the vessels: so that it does not lose nourishment, for the incision, and it rots or dries out, and it is not a benefit with them.
Chapter 65.
¶ On the care of the ram's intestines.
The event of this ram's intestines is from the cutting that occurs in the sifach extended over the belly in the part of the inguinal from the mirach of the belly.
Therefore, the intestines descend from that rupture to one testicle. And this rupture is either from the sifach or from the extension of it.
And these two species occur from many causes. Or from impact. Or from jumping. Or from shouting. Or from the heavy lifting of things and similar.
And the sign when it is from the extension of the sifach. It is that it happens gradually over a long time, and it does not happen suddenly: and it is an abscess equal in width and depth: therefore, because the sifach compresses the intestine.
And the sign of it when it is from the cutting of the sifach, because it causes to happen from the beginning of its severe pain suddenly: and it is an abscess different, appearing under the skin near: and that is because of the exit of the intestine, and the course of it to the exterior of the sifach.
And sometimes it exits with the mesentery: and this is called the mesenteric intestine, and mesocele: and sometimes it forms with ventosity.
And sometimes it runs into the intestine feces, and it is retained there: and it is with it a sign of weakness: because it causes a dull pain, and especially when it is pressed.
And in the treatment of this disease's symptoms with iron, there is fear: therefore it is necessary to avoid that case in it.
And the mode of operation is, that you command the weak one, so that he brings the intestine with his own hand to the interiors of its concavities, if it obeys returning. Then it will lie down on its neck between your hands: and raise its legs.
Then extend the skin that follows the skin to the upper parts, and dry the skin of the testicles completely along its length. Then fix two hooks in the lips of the cut, according to what you need to open the cut with them: and the cut should be according to the amount, that it is possible, so that an egg comes out from it.
Then scrape the siphak, and what is under the skin of the testicles, until when it is detached the white siphak hard from all parts: then insert your finger index in that which follows the testicle, in that which is between the white siphak, which is under the skin of the egg, and between the second siphak, and finish with it the adherence that is in the posterior part of the egg.
Then move with your right hand to the interiors of the skin of the testicles: and with this extend the white siphak upwards, with your left hand: and raise the egg with the siphak to the part of the cut: and command the minister, that he extends the egg upwards: and you solve the adherence, that is in the complete solution.
And examine your fingers, so that there is nothing wrapped inside the uninvolved intestine in a hard white sihah. But if you find something from it, then push it down to the lower abdomen.
Then take a needle, in which there is a thick thread made of linen from ten threads: and insert it among the last sihah, that is, the skin that follows the incision of the testicles: then cut off the ends that protrude from the thread, until there are four threads. Then arrange some of them on top of some with the figure that is in the form of a cross: and tie them with alsifach, which we mentioned, because it is under the skin of the testicles by a strong ligament, so that nothing from the vessels that nourish them can send anything to them: so that no hot abscess arises from it. And place again the second ligament beyond the first ligament, farther than two fingers. And after these two ligaments, leave from the sihah that is under the skin of the testicles, a quantity equal to the size of a finger: and cut off the rest of it all according to its roundness, and take out the egg from it.
Then cut off the lower part of the skin of the testicles by the incision from which blood and pus flowed: as we mentioned in the one that was previously mentioned.
Then apply wet gauze to the oil, and place it on the wound: and apply the ligament that we mentioned. And when sometimes the white sihah that we mentioned is cauterized after its incision, to prevent the flow of blood. For this often happens. And leave the ligament until it falls off by itself.
If, however, the event is delayed, then it should be rubbed with hot water and the remedy we mentioned should be placed on it until it falls off.
Then care for the wound along with other wound care, until it heals.
Chapter 66.
Concerning the soft splint.
In this soft splint, I have not seen anyone who dared to treat it with iron.
And the first said that it is made as we mentioned in the splint which is with vine. Which is, to apply strips of cloth after the cut on it with ease below: then dry in the middle, and care for it finally with what opens it, until the strips fall off: and care for the wound, as we mentioned, until it heals.
Chapter 67.
Concerning the disruption that occurs in the groins.
When rupture occurs in the groins, as we mentioned, and the location stands out, and nothing from the intestines descends below the testicles: and if something does descend, it is little, and it returns in all hours: but if that time is prolonged with it, a fissure is added to the sifach, until the intestines descend into the sifach.
And that occurs from the extension of the sifach, which is in the groins, as we mentioned. Which is, because the sifach is extended: then it is softened, and the location swells, and stands out.
And its care is with cauterization, as its previous account mentioned.
And sometimes it is cured with iron, in this manner: and it is, that the sick person lies on their back between your hands. Then dry the location of the swollen and standing out rupture, with cutting across its width, according to the amount of three fingers.
Then tie the alsifa and, which are under the skin, until when it is detached the white sifah under the following skin.
Then take the ray, and place it on the elevated place from the sifah, and press it deep into the belly.
Then tie two elevated places on the end of the ray from the sifah, and connect one of them with the other by a stitch: then remove the end of the ray.
And do not cut the alsifa at all, nor tie anything, nor anything else, as I have made you know in the cure of the intestinal branches.
Then care for that with the healing of wounds. When therefore you cut the thread, clean it, and restore the wound until it is consolidated.
For the sisach contracts, and no elevation of rupture is added.
And the cautery is better in this place: for it is closer to safety.
Chapter 68.
¶ On the softening of the skin of the testicles.
The skin of the testicles is often softened in many men, because the flesh which is between them is softened, and it defiles its appearance.
Therefore it is necessary for him who is asked about its cure to make the sick person lie on his back, and cut off the whole skin which has been softened over the natural skin.
Then he should sew together two lips with a stitch: and if you wish, sew in the first place three or four stitches of the skin which has been softened, and a firm stitch.
Then cut between the stitches.
Then care for the healing of the remaining wounds until it is healed, and the threads fall off.
Chapter 69.
Of Castration.
Know that castration is excommunicated in our law: and because of this, it was permitted for me not to remember it in my book; and the remembrance of it is not necessary except for two reasons.
One reason is that there should be this in the knowledge of a physician when he is questioned about it; and so that he knows its cure for him who has been harmed by it.
And the other reason is that we often need castration of certain animals, for our uses through it, such as oxen, horses, and cats, and similar animals.
I say therefore, that castration is done in two ways. Either by abrasion. Or by a cut and section.
But in that which is done by abrasion, the method of operation is: that we make the animal sit in hot water until the testicles become softened and soothed, and hang down: then rub them with your hand until they dissolve and do not appear under touch.
But in castration by a cut and section, it is necessary that you hold the animal, and press the skin of its testicles with your left hand.
Then tie the suspender, and cut over all of it with one cut, until when the two eggs proceed: then cut them after you have scraped each, and do not leave on them any excision except the fine sifac, which is on the vessels.
And this method of castration is better than that which is done by abrasion: because abrasion perhaps leaves something of the testicles, wherefore the animal desires copulation.
Then cure the wound until it heals.
Chapter 70.
The care of Hermaphrodite in two ways.
Hermaphrodites are of men according to two modes. One of them is because it appears in him that follows the space, or on the skin of the testicles, in that which is between two testicles, a figure like a woman's vulva, in which are hairs: and sometimes urine runs from that which is on the skin of the testicles.
In women, however, there is one species, and it is a woman's vulva above the nipple like small male testicles projecting to the outside: of which one is like a man's priapism, and two are like two testicles.
And the treatment of three species, two from men and one from women, is: because it is necessary to cut flesh added, until the impression of them disappears. Then care for those with the treatment of the remaining wounds.
In the second species of men, from which urine exits, which is on the skin of the testicles, there is no operation, nor is its treatment at all.
Chapter 71.
The cutting of the tenting and flesh projecting in the vulvas of women.
Perhaps tenting is added over the natural thing, until it is defiled and becomes an ugly aspect of it: and sometimes it is magnified in some women so much, that it expands like in men, and reaches up to sexual intercourse.
Therefore you must hold the excess of the tenting by hand, or with a comb, and cut: and do not end in the incision, especially at the deep root: so that there does not occur blood flow.
Then care for that with the treatment of the wounds, until it is healed.
When the flesh is formed, it is the flesh that is born in the opening of the mother's womb until it fills it up; and perhaps it may have gone out to the exterior parts according to the likeness of a tail: and because of this some of the first name it as an illness called "caudata". Therefore we must treat it as we would treat the Prolapse, and cure it until it is healed.
On the treatment of Alratica, which is a wound in a woman who has not been pierced.
Chapter 72
Alratica is a wound in a woman who has not been pierced, or has a small opening. And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental is due to the illness that preceded it, and this is caused by flesh added, or thin chaff, or thick: and it is formed in the deep womb, or on its sides, or in the upper part of it, or in the lower part of it: and it prevents coition and impregnation, and childbirth, and perhaps it prevents menstruation.
And the knowledge of this is gained by the sight of the midwife, if the opening is visible near at hand.
But if it is not visible, then seek it with your fingers or with a probe.
But if the opening is due to thin chaff, and is near two lips: then hurry, and tear it open.
And you should place a sponge on top of the two lips.
Then place your fingers of both hands at once, and the woman should be on her back with her legs spread apart. Then extend the two lips with force, until the thin chaff is torn and the opening is opened.
Then take wool and soak it in oil, and place it on the spot: and let the woman apply it every day, so that the wound does not harden again with another substance.
If however the suppurating wound is thick and full of pus, then it is necessary to separate it with a broad, flat leaf of myrtle.
If however the suppuration is from flesh born, then suspend it with needles, and cut it: and let there be medicines with you that sedate the flow of blood without biting, such as acacia, and dragon's blood, and thistle aggregated with whiting.
Then administer a wide tube of lead, so that the wound does not harden quickly, hold it for several days: and then administer linen made of dry linen, and then care for the rest of the healing until it is healed.
And sometimes the birth of flesh from other wounds will occur: therefore it is necessary to cut them according to this method: since there is no carcinomatous suppuration in carcinomatous suppuration which is in the womb, there should be no contradiction with iron at all.
Chapter 73.
Concerning the care of hemorrhoids, Athehelil, and red Bothor in wounds of women.
Hemorrhoids indeed are the opening of the veins, until blood flows from them frequently.
When therefore hemorrhoids are suppressed, they become red: and I have already said in the division of their species, and signs of them: and I will say here what receives healing from them, and what does not.
I therefore say, that hemorrhoids which are in the opening of the womb, and do not appear to sense: then there is no healing with iron for it.
These among them which are on the opening of the womb above which falls the sense, are those which are treated.
Therefore it is necessary that you introduce the woman into a cold house. Then extend the thread with forceps, or with a rough cloth, and cut them from their roots.
Then powder them on the flow of blood from one powdered piece without biting: such as acacia, and dragon's blood, and turpentine, and similar to them.
Then press her feet against the wall for one hour. Then lay her down in cold water.
If the flow of blood persists: then make her sit in a decoction of sumac, and the husks of beans, and of roses, and similar.
Then take barley flour, and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a plaster with it on her back.
If therefore the blood is cut off with it, good: and if not, make wings to stick to her back, and breasts, without scarification.
Then take wool, and dip it in the juice of tarathit, or the juice of arnoglossae, or the juice of the branches of the alaulat, that is, aglanter, with sea-water, and make it stick to the wound.
Then when the abscess rests, then care for the place with ointments, until it is healed.
But Albarth red is similar to the heads of alhase, and is rough in appearance.
Therefore it is necessary that you cut what appears from it, according to what I said in the lilth equally: and care for it, until it is healed.
Chapter LXXIV.
¶ About the perforation of the rupture which happens in the womb.
Chapter LXXIV.
I have already spoken of all these afflictions and their symptoms, and the signs of each, and their cures in division. Now I must speak of hot abscesses which occur in the womb when there are abscesses that gather around healthy flesh, and you wish to know how its opening is made with a knife.
Therefore you must consider. Then if the pain of the abscess in its beginning is sharp with impact, heat, and fever: and you see it reddening: if it falls upon it, then do not rush with its puncture: and care for it with it that it may help to ripen it until when it rests, the sharpness of the accidents.
Then you must make her sit on a seat that dampens two seats, and she leans back, or is placed on her back, and brings her feet to the lower part of her belly: and her hips are spread, and she places her arms under her thighs, and ties both suitable bands.
Then the midwife should sit on the right side, and administer the instrument that opens the womb's opening.
And you must when you wish to administer this instrument, that you form with a probe deep into the woman's womb: so that it is not what enters from the instrument more than deep into the womb, and wounds the weak.
But if the instrument is greater than deep into the womb, then you must place cotton on the roof of deep into the womb: so that the entrance of the instrument entirely into the womb is prevented: and you must place a revolving wheel, which runs in the instrument, from the upper side: and he holds the instrument, and turns the minister revolving wheel, until the deep into the womb is opened.
When it appears that the Exitura is ready and is touched by hand, and is soft and malleable, then it is necessary to separate it from its head with a broad-bladed knife.
When the pus has been drained, then it is necessary to place a piece of linen soaked in rose-scented oil or green oil, which has some hemostatic properties, under the wound: and place the linen, and extract the section in deep into the matrix.
And place it on top of the matrix, and on top of the clean linen soaked in water in which the wounds are bathed.
Then it should be treated after two days with ointment that is suitable for that, until it heals.
And sometimes the matrix and wound are washed, so that it is cleaned with water and honey: then with water in which the root of the lily or long-leaved aristolochia is boiled: then return to the ointment.
If the wound is hidden inside the matrix, then it is necessary to be restrained from its treatment with iron, but treat it with what we said in division.
Chapter 70.
¶ The teaching of obstetrics, how to treat fetuses that are born alive but not in the natural form.
It is necessary for the obstetrician to know first the natural form of birth.
From its signs, therefore, it is known that when you see a woman being compressed towards the lower parts, and desires to smell the air, and is relieved on top of her which is above her of birth, and hastens the exit of the fetus: then know that this birth is in the natural form, and its exit is on its head, and the afterbirth with it: or suspended, or hanging from the navel.
When you see these signs, then it is necessary to compress his belly, so that the embryo may quickly descend.
For when it has descended upon its head, the afterbirth also descends with it, and is cleansed of those excessive substances by a good cleaning.
But whoever is beyond this birth, is unnatural, blameworthy.
For sometimes the fetus is born with its legs first, and its body comes out before its head, and its feet, and one of its hands, or one of its feet: or its head is born and one of its hands: or its belly is born: and perhaps it turns over on its neck, and similar things from those blameworthy figures.
Therefore it is necessary for the midwife to be wise, subtle in all these things, and to beware of error and deception for herself: and I am showing every figure from them, and how its nature is in that, and how it is signified by it, and what it stands upon.
When the fetus is born with its head first, and its birth becomes forceful, and difficult for her, and you see that its strength has already weakened: then make her sit on a seat, or let women hold her: and vapor rises from her mouth with fenugreek decoction, and with wet oils.
Then the midwife inserts a little spatula between her fingers, and wipes off the afterbirth with it, and covers it with her nail, until what is in it from the moisture has passed: and press the woman's belly, until the fetus descends.
But if it does not descend, then it is necessary for the woman to be cleansed from the mucilage with fenugreek, with sesame oil.
Then instruct him to stand behind the curtain, so as to be compressed: and make him sneeze with the conditioned powder, holding his nose and his own nose at the same time. For the fetus will come out immediately.
If both hands of the fetus come out first, you should gradually return them with a loop. But if it does not obey at the entrance, then place the woman on a seat, and lift her feet upwards: then shake the seat on the ground: and hold the woman, so that she does not fall with the shaking.
Therefore if the hands do not come out and the fetus dies: then cut them off, and extract the remaining fetus: and tie its hand with a cloth, and extract it with equality: for it will come out.
The exit of the embryo is on its feet. When the fetus comes out on its feet, then it is necessary to push it upwards: then turn the fetus gradually: afterwards equal it.
Then take one of its feet, and stretch it gradually.
Therefore when they come out up to the hips, then instruct him to be compressed, and make her sneeze with the conditioned powder: it will come out, if God wills.
And if it does not come out with what we have told you, then return the fetus gradually, until you place it according to its natural shape. For it will come out then with easy exit.
But if it is prevented from coming out with all that we have told you: then take from the mucilage of aloe, and oil of sisaminum, and melted gum: and beat all in a mortar with good pounding: then draw a line with it on the woman's belly, and below her abdomen. Then make her sit in warm water until she has an emission of hypocondria.
When therefore you see that her lower parts are already warmed up, then make her a poultice of myrrh and apply it. When therefore she holds the poultice for one hour, then make her sit on a stool. Then make her sneeze: and squeeze her mouth and nose: and press the lower part of her belly with gentle compression. For the evil will come out immediately.
The exit of the foetus on her knees and hands. When it comes out according to this form, then she should gradually insert her fingers inside. Then the woman should lie on her back, and her feet should hang down to the lower parts: and she should be lying on the bed, and fold her hands. Then press gently on her belly gradually. Then remove what is under her feet from the pillows, until she is prepared in the lower part. If the foetus does not come out, then take her feet and move them with violent motion. Then press gently on what is above the hypocondria gradually, until the foetus comes up to the upper parts. Then she should insert her fingers and equalize the foetus gradually: and tell the woman to press herself until the foetus comes out.
The exit of the foetus hanging laterally from her hands. She should gradually reduce her fingers. If she cannot reduce them, then lift up the woman and make her walk.
If indeed she cannot walk, then make her lie on the bed: and shake her legs with violent motion.
Then apply the liniment that you have prepared from mucilages.
If she receives the part, then make her sit on a seat. Then strive in reducing the hand, and equal the child according to the natural shape: and make the woman sneeze, and instruct her to press herself until she exits.
The exit of the child over its neck, with expanded hands, and its face is towards the back of its mother. The midwife should hold the hand of the child, then gradually turn it and equal it with ease.
When therefore it is equalized, then place on its mouth what we mentioned from oil and mucilages.
Then instruct her to move gradually. When therefore you have done that, then make her sit on a seat, and instruct her to lean towards the right side. Then instruct her to press: and make her sneeze with the prepared [remedy].
The exit of the prepared child on its side. When it descends to the mother's opening according to this manner with the afterbirth, then cut the afterbirth with your nail until it is emptied of moisture.
If therefore it hangs on the face of the child and its neck, then cut it from the navel: so that it is not retained, and dies.
Then push the child to its insides, until you place it according to what is proper: and instruct the woman to press herself several times: for indeed she will exit lightly at the exit.
The exit of twins, or of many children. Know that twins are often born: and sometimes they are born three, and four. However, this is indeed foreign and rarely occurs.
Five things are indeed extraordinary and do not live completely: and they contain them, although they multiply, with one egg: and they separate by scissors, distinguishing between them, tied in the navel of each of theirs.
And sometimes they come out as one fetus exits naturally and easily, and they come out by an unfavorable exit, as we have mentioned.
If some of them are difficult to deliver and reach what we mentioned from unnatural figures, then they should be treated as we have mentioned: and let the skilled midwife do what she does with ease and difficulty, and fit according to every figure with that which is prepared for her by the leading one towards salvation.
Remembering what is formed in the womb from embryos, and they are aborted.
Sometimes one is formed in the womb and two, and three, and four, and five, and six, and seven, and more than ten: and it has already been verified to me that a woman aborting gave birth to seven, and another fifteen, all of them formed.
That which was done by the measurement of the glorious wise one.
Therefore, this whole thing should be in the knowledge of the obstetrician. Perhaps it will reach her like that one: therefore let her have with her what is necessary to oppose it
Chapter 76.
About the extraction of a dead fetus.
When you are caring for a dead fetus with that which I said in the division by medication, and it does not come out, and you must use an operation with your hand, then you should consider.
If therefore the woman is of sound virtue and is not with any of the accidents from which there is fear of her loss: then it is necessary that the woman be placed on a bed, on her back, and her head be inclined downwards, and her legs be raised: and let the minister hold her from two sides, or let her be tied to the bed, so that her body not be drawn out during extraction of the fetus.
Then moisten the mouth of the mother with warm oils mixed with a thick decoction of marshmallow root, and fenugreek, and linseed.
Then let the midwife anoint her hand with these oils and decoctions: then she should insert it into the womb with ease. Then let her seek with her the place where she can hook nails from the fetus, and convenient places near it.
Consider therefore then, if the fetus is prepared to descend on its head: then hook nails into its eyes, or in its neck, or in its mouth, or in its palate, or under its beard, or in its ribs, or in nearby hypogastric regions.
But if the descent is on its feet, then in its foot, and in its ribs in the middle.
And it is necessary that she hold the hook with her right hand: and place the curve of it between the fingers of her left hand: and insert it with ease into one of those places we mentioned, until she reaches the empty space.
Then let her hook another nail, or a third if necessary, so that the contraction be equal, and not incline to one side.
Then let it be extended with equal extension, and not extended only along a straight line, but moved to all parts, so that her exit is eased: as is done with the tooth during its extraction.
And it is necessary in that which is between them, that the extension be softened. But if a part is retained from it, then the midwife must apply some fingers with oil, and insert them from the side, in order to turn that which is retained with them.
If therefore a part of the fetus exits, then they should exchange the forceps to another place which is higher: do this until the entire fetus exits.
If therefore a hand exits before another, and it is not possible to reduce it, due to its tightness: then it is necessary to wrap a cloth over it. Then extract it until when it exits entirely, cut it at the joint of the foot, or at the elbow: and thus it is necessary to do in the other hand, and in two feet.
But if the fetus's head is large, or tightness occurs to it at the exit, or there is water accumulated in its head: then it is necessary to insert between the fingers a sharp spatula, and press with it the head, and extract the water: or break it with an instrument called Almisdac, whose form comes with the forms of the other instruments in the chapter that follows.
Similarly he must do if the fetus is of large head by nature, then it is necessary to cut through the skull: or extract it with a misdach, as we said. Then draw out the bones with forceps.
But if the head exits and is tightened at the fork: then press until the moisture that is in the chest flows out.
But if it does not twist, nor obey at the exit: then cut the head in pieces, as much as possible for you.
But if there is an abscess below the belly, or there is water in it: then it is necessary to pierce it, until the moisture flows out of it.
If indeed the fetus is above its feet, then its attraction is easy and its direction towards the mother's bone is light.
But if it is restrained near the belly or chest: then it is necessary to remove it with the cloth that you have wrapped around your hand: and wipe the belly or chest until what is in them runs out.
But if the other limbs are removed and the head remains: then the midwife should insert her left hand. Therefore if the mother's bone is open, then she should insert her hand into the depth of the mother's bone and seek with it the head and draw it with her fingers up to the mother's bone: then she should insert a hook or two hooks into it and draw it with them.
But if the mother's bone is closed, due to an abscess that has occurred to her: then it is not necessary for her to labor over it, but rather it is necessary at that time to administer a decoction of wet things, fat: and administer ointments: and she should sit in waters that will soften and moisten.
But if the fetus is on its side, then it is possible to equalize: then what we said about the living fetus will be administered.
But if it is not possible, then it is cut in pieces and removed.
And it is necessary that you do not dismiss anything from the secondina entirely inside.
When therefore you have completed your operation, then administer what we said about hot abscesses that occur in the bellies.
But if bleeding occurs, then it should descend into stopping waters and administer the remaining cure.
And indeed I have seen a woman in whose belly a dead fetus was: then she became pregnant over it with another, afterwards the other fetus also died. Therefore, after a long time, an abscess occurred on his belly button, it swelled up until it burst open, and then he began to emit pus.
I was therefore called to treat him, and I treated him for a long time, but the wound did not heal.
Therefore, I placed strong attractive plasters on him, and the bone came out of its place. Then several days passed by, and another bone came out. I was therefore surprised since the bone is not in the belly.
Therefore, I thought that they were bones of a dead fetus.
I therefore examined the wound, and I extracted many bones while the woman was in better health: and now she has lived for a long time without any more bones coming out, and she still emits a little pus.
And I did not confirm this foreign matter, unless because there is knowledge and help from the skill and craft of the physician who administers it by hand for healing.
Chapter 77.
¶ On the forms of necessary instruments for extracting a fetus.
The form of Vertigines that opens the womb.
Here below is the form of a constrictor, by which the books are equalized, where there are two handles on the two ends of two pieces of wood. However, this handle should be thinner than the constrictor: and it is made from either ebony or boxwood.
And the width of all the wood is almost like two fingers: and the edge of each of them is almost like one finger, and the length of each of them is a palm and a half: and in the middle of the two pieces of wood are two additions of the same kind of wood, which have already been fastened in both, whose length is half a palm and a little more: and the width of each of them is almost like two fingers, or a little more.
And these two additions are inserted into the mouth of the mother, so that it opens with them when you turn the two Vertigines.
Another form similar to that one, more subtle and lighter.
Make it from the wood of ebony or boxwood, according to the likeness of forceps. However, at the end of it there are two additions, as you see above: and the length of all the addition is almost a palm: and the width of each is two fingers.
Therefore when you want to open the womb with it, then make her sit on the bed, hanging her feet, with what is open between her legs. Then insert these two additions joined into the womb: and you are holding the lower end of the instrument between her thighs. Then open your hand with the instrument, as you do with forceps, equally according to the quantity that you want from the opening of the mouth of the womb, until the midwife does what she wants.
The form of another Vertigines which they said the ancients called Forma Impellentis, by which the fetus is pushed.
The form of Almisdac, by which the large head is crushed: and it resembles forceps, to which there are teeth at the end, as you see.
And sometimes it becomes crooked, like forceps in this form, as you see, to which there are teeth like the teeth of a saw, by which it cuts and crushes.
The form of Uncinus having one hook.
The form of Uncinus having two hooks.
The shape of the Spatula Forceps, which has two ends for cutting off the head.
The shape of the Spatula Forceps, also called Levers.
These instruments are all used and the more their species multiply and are prepared by the craftsman, the faster they are for their operation and higher among people, due to their quantity.
Therefore do not despise an instrument from them, which is prepared by you. For the necessity of them is inexcusable.
Chapter LXXVIII.
¶ On the Extraction of the Afterbirth.
When the Afterbirth is retained after childbirth, then you should order the weak one to hold on to her breath. Then make her sneeze with a vinegar: and tie your hand over her mouth and nose. If therefore it comes out through this, good.
Then take a pot and drill a hole in the abdomen: and put in it opening the womb herbs, such as calamint, rue, and aneth, and camomile, and savory, and oak sawdust, and centaury: take all these herbs, or some of them, and soak them with water, and put them on fire.
Then put a bundle of reeds on the hole of the abdomen pot, and another end in the womb: and hold it until the steam reaches the hollow of the womb.
Then make her sneeze, as we said. For the Afterbirth will come out with ease.
If however there remains after this treatment and it does not emerge: then command the midwife to immerse her hand in either sisamin oil or the thick juice of the mallow plant. Then she should insert it into the uterus and seek out the secondina with it. When therefore she has found it, then she should receive it and extend it gradually.
If however it is attached deep in the womb, then she should insert her hand according to what we have narrated until when she finds the secondina, and gradually extracts it according to straightness, so that the matrix does not fall during a strong traction: rather it should be changed with facility to the right and left sides: then add to the amount of traction. For she indeed obeys at that time and is preserved and avoids adhesions.
If however the mouth of the matrix is contracted, as we have already narrated: treat it with sneezing and from the remedy of the pot with herbs.
If however it does not emerge with all that we have narrated, then beware lest you exhaust her in the repetition of extraction.
However it is necessary that what emerges from the mouth of the matrix from it be tied to the hip of the woman. Then cleanse her with the ointment tetrapharmacon. For indeed it will rot her after days and dissolve and emerge.
However when it rots, the bad smell is removed from her and goes to the stomach and head, and harms that weak one. Therefore it is necessary that suitable fumigations be administered to that one.
For some of the ancients have already experienced the fumigation of nasturtium and dried figs.
The form of the instrument used to smoke a woman during retention of Secundine and menstrual flow.
Let a similar instrument be made from iron or bronze, and place its wide end over the fire: and let the smoking be placed on the prunes: hold it until that smoking is consumed: and repeat another.
Chapter 79
On the cure of the unperforated anus.
Many children are born, and their anuses are not perforated, which have already been sewn up with a fine thread. Therefore, the midwife should pierce it with her finger: and if not, she should pierce it with a sharp spatula: and she should beware of the hand, lest she touch it.
Then place on it a lint soaked in wine and oil. Then care for it with ointment until it is healed.
But if you fear that it will be sewn up, then place a lead tube in the opening for many days, and remove it when the child wants to defecate.
And now the sewing up of the anus also occurs from the healing of the wound or from abscesses. Therefore it should be sutured, then treated with what we said from the cure and lead.
Chapter 80
On the cure of fistulas that occur in the lower part.
Fistulas that occur in the lower part are Nodulation and Grossitude which occur near the anus, which are deformed: or in the space of one part: and it is a fistula, or more.
When therefore that nodulation becomes old, it opens, and flows out from it watery white fluid, or thin pus.
And sometimes among these fistulas are those that penetrate. Therefore, those that penetrate are known by what comes out of it during defecation and softness, when an infirm person is used for defecation: and perhaps it comes out of these worms.
And among them are fistulas when they are in space penetrating up to the bladder, and up to the vaginal opening. And among them are those that penetrate up to the hip joint, and up to the tailbone.
But from the fact that it is known as a penetrating fistula up to the anus, even if it does not penetrate, is to insert your finger into the anus: and to insert a thin probe from air, or iron: when there is no tortuosity.
But if there is tortuosity in it, then insert a thin lead probe into it, or a horsehair pin from horsehairs, until you feel the probe, or the pin in your finger.
But if you do not feel it entirely, and nothing comes out of the opening from defecation, and softness, nor worms as I said: then you will know that it is not penetrating: so hasten to healing.
And when a fistula is penetrating up to the bladder, or to the urethral opening: then its meaning is the exit of urine from it, and its prevention from this that the place may consolidate with medicines.
But if it is penetrating up to the hip joint, or to the hip bone: then its sign is that the probe reaches there, if there is no tortuosity up to the bone: and the discovery of pain in the circumference of the part, and that pus comes out of it always: and that medication does not hold in it, nor consolidates with ointment.
In these fistulas that penetrate deeply, there is no cure at all: and the cure of them is a labor and vanity, from foolish doctors, under whom they are formed.
But in that which is not penetrating and not ancient, there is hope of healing with a probe, according to what I tell you, and I have already tested: and it is, that the sick person lies under your hands on his back: and raise his legs up above his hips, and his hips are inclined towards his belly. Then he will insert the pointed end of lead or air, if there is tortuosity in the fistula, until you know where it has reached with the probe.
But if the sick person feels it around his anus, then you must insert your finger into his anus.
If therefore you feel that the probe has already penetrated through itself detected, besides what you feel between your finger and him, or flesh: then you will certainly know that it is penetrating: therefore do not labor in it, since there is no healing in it, as we said.
But they said that in some men flesh is healed, and from the medication by which it is hoped to be improved, it is, that you burn a thin cauterizing iron according to the size of the fistula, as was said before, and insert it into the fistula, until it reaches around the anus. Then repeat that twice, or three times, until you know that all the flesh added to the filtered ashes is burned, which are like the cannula of a bird's feather.
Then care for that with uncovered linens in butter, until those flesh which are burned come out: then care for that with ointments generating and consolidating flesh.
If therefore he is healed, it is good.
And if not, then never with another cure.
And if he escapes, try, and if he does not reach your finger, which is in the anus, and is between him and the tent, being thick with flesh, or sifac: and you see a fistula following the surface of the skin, then dry the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and you go drying with the tent that is in the fistula, until the cutting reaches where the end of the tent reaches, and the tent is freed and falls.
Then clean those filtered fleshy parts, which resemble the quill of a bird's feather, so that nothing remains from them.
But if the blood overcomes you, and dissolves between you and your operation so that you can cut those fleshy parts: then it is better and quicker to cauterize it with fire, or with sharp medicine.
Because the cauterizer with fire brings good conditions, it adds burning of those fleshy parts added, and separation of blood, and drying of moisture.
Then care for that with unfolded linens in butter, or crushed with cauls, until the place emits pus, and those burned fleshy parts come out in pus.
Then care for that wound with consolidating ointments, generating hard flesh: and they are medicines in which there is stypticism and drying.
For when it is restored, then already he is healed: and do not fear repetition.
But if the fistula has already reached to the depth of the anus, and is separated from the excess of the body: then put your finger in the anus, and inquire with it.
If you feel a pull and there is between you and it, a linen cloth or flesh, and it is near to penetration, then there is no operation on that unless according to the way of trust and hope.
That is, because it is administered in three ways: either by cauterizing it, as we have said, or by separating it, until you reach its concavity, so that it may be possible for you to introduce the lint and healing from the nearby. And do not proceed too much with the cut, so that you do not cut the muscle containing the anus, and it happens above the weak exit of defecation without will. Then care for that with what we have said.
Perhaps it may be healed: or extend that linen, and cleanse it after you have separated it almost to the anus, as we have said, or with another sharp-ended tool. Then cleanse those fleshy parts which are in the cut, until you can with inspection.
Then attempt the healing of the wound with the cut, and the upper opening where it is solidified: and there remains an open fistula in the inner part of the anus, and it will be lighter on the weak.
And sometimes the fistula will follow in this way: and it is, when you insert the tent into the fistula: and it is on the side of the anus around the surface of the body with the skin and the margin of the anus: then take the sharp-ended tool, which is like a needle, that is, preparing hides, in this form. And insert into it a rolled thread from five threads, and about it. Then insert the tent with the thread into the fistula, until you reach its concavity.
If the penetration is near the inner edge of the anus, then remove a thread from that opening: insert your finger into the anus and remove the thread's end, gather both ends at once, tie them together, and release it on one or two days: the longer the thread in the flesh, the more tightly you should tie it until the flesh between the two ends of the thread rots away, then care for the wound until it heals.
But if the opening of the fistula is not penetrating: then make it penetrate however you are prepared to do so, unless it is very deep. For it does not matter if you do not cut into the muscle, as long as you do not harm it.
Then treat it with the same method until it heals.
The shape of the spatula used to probe the fistula, whose sharpness is very acute on one side and not on the other, so that it does not cut what is not necessary, as you see.
Chapter 81
On stitching hemorrhoids from which blood flows from the incision of them: and care for fissures.
There are hemorrhoids in two ways. For they are either inside the anus, like coal or prune stones: or they are like grains of wheat themselves. And from them there are small and large ones: and blood flows from them always, and it is one, and there are many. And they are outside the anus, and at its ends.
However, those that are outside the anus are for the most part few in moisture, from which flows yellowish water or little blood flowing constantly: and they are according to the color of the body.
And the cure for what is inside the anus is, as you command the sick person to squat: and it is expressed until the anus appears to you. Therefore also hang them with thorns: or hold them with your nail. Then cut them at their roots.
But if they do not hold in them thorns, because of their moisture and softness: then take them with a rough cloth, or with a coarse cloth from double-woven wool, and extract them with your fingers. Then cut them, and powder over them after the incision some hot powders, so that they stick in the place of the cauterizer. Or cauterize them according to what preceded in the chapter on cauterizing. Then care for them with the rest of the cure, until they are healed.
If the anus does not obey the outflow, then enema the sick person with a clyster in which there is a small bitterness, so that it cleanses with what is in the anus, and obeys outflow quickly, when the sick person expels himself.
But if the thorns are outside the anus, then the matter is light, easy: and it is that you take them with your nail, or take them with a thorn, and cut them. Then care for them with what we said, until they are healed.
And who abhors incision with iron, then it is necessary that the administrator suture their wounds according to this method. Take a raw thread, and insert it into the needle. Then extract the thorns to the upper part, and make it penetrate with the needle from the other side of its root: and wrap up two ends of the thread in the lower part of the needle, and they are horizontally: and tie the thorns with a strong knot. Then remove the thread, and extract the splinter.
Do this with all the needles, and let one go from each of them: do not cut it yourself, so that there will be no excessive bleeding from it.
Then place a cloth soaked in rose oil or carron oil on the buttocks, and place it on the buttocks: and command the sick person to rest. Then let it go until it falls out.
When the needles therefore fall out, take care of them with ointments and the rest of the healing, until they are healed.
¶ On the treatment of fissures. For often it happens from the dryness of the feces, and the constriction of nature.
When they therefore become dry, and do not work in them medicine: then it is necessary to scrape with the Spatumilis needle, or with your nail, until they become moist, and remove the upper skin which prevents them from consolidating. Then take care of them, until they consolidate as it should be.
If they do not consolidate: then repeat them with a stronger razor than the first, until they bleed much, and then peel off, and take care of them, until they are healed.
¶ On the treatment of wounds that are not turned over, and those that are turned over: and of needles that have been bitten by ants.
Chapter 82.
You should know that Almirmar is not other than a round knot according to the color of the body, similar to the claw: and it is made throughout the body, especially in the lower parts of the feet, and fingers: and it happens from them pain during walking.
Therefore it is necessary to follow what is in the circumference of the claw, and to be held with forceps, or with a needle, and to be removed from its root.
Then, if you wish, you can cauterize it according to what was previously mentioned in its chapter.
However, from the flat surface of the body, there is a small, rough, porous, round projection. And often, this happens in the hands of children.
And its treatment is to stretch the skin, and cut it: or to tie it with a silk thread: or with hair, until it falls off. And if you wish, you can cauterize it with fire, or with a sharp medicine: and now the opposite warts, and not the opposite, will be removed with the tool that I will mention.
However, a formica is also a small, porous projection on the surface of the body, which penetrates deeply into the valley: and when it finds cold, it feels like a stinging bite of an ant, and it happens throughout the body: and it does the most harm in the hands.
And its treatment is to take a needle from the quill of a goose, or the quill of a strong-winged bird: and place it on the formica, until the circle of the needle contains its parts. Then turn your hand with the needle, until you separate what is in the circumference of the formica: and place it in deep flesh, and remove the formica from its root.
And if you wish, you can do it with a needle of air, or iron, according to this form.
Let the upper part of the needle be pulling the uncovered ear towards its height, so that it will relieve the pain of its grasp and its rotation.
And if you wish, you can cauterize the formica according to what was previously mentioned in the chapter on cauterization of warts.
Chapter 83.
Translation: On the forms of instruments used for lancing and treating anus, relieving intestinal obstruction, and treating colic.
Sometimes a lancet is made of silver, or of gold-plated brass, or of bronze, or of hammered metal.
And sometimes it is made small and large, according to those in which they are used.
Therefore, the lancet used for treating young children should be small, and if their anuses are weak or painful, so too should their lancing be.
A large lancet.
The handle of the lancet, that is, the upper part in which the string is tied, should be wide according to this manner: and it should have a separation so that the string ties as you see, and the lower part that is inserted into the anus, should be deaf, that is, not open, smooth, sharp, drawing to subtlety: and in one of its sides there should be two holes, and in the other side there should be one hole.
And the size of the holes should be according to the thickness of the needles, and a little smaller, and it should have a container in which medicines are placed from the bladder of an animal: or from paper, which is according to the shape of a small asofrati: whose root is one palm.
And it should be pierced through the holes many times as it is turned, and there should be a space that is the thickness of a digit between each hole. Then insert into those holes a strong thread from raw silk, which is from ten threads, or about that number, and gather with it the container like an asofrati. When therefore it is placed in that container, it should be tied at the head of the lancet between two distinct contractions with a strong tie. Then apply a poultice with that.
This is the shape of the circle as depicted here, and the hole.
The quality of applying the poultice with that is: to fill a vessel, or bladder, from medicine, which should be heated according to the amount of tolerance of the sick: and beware that it is not very hot, or very cold.
Then the sick person should lie on their back, and raise their legs to the top: and place under them a blanket, that is, skin on which men lie, or linen.
Then apply oil, or with white of egg, or with mucilage of fenugreek, or similar, to the extremity of the poultice. Then insert it into the anus with ease. Then the attendant should receive the vessel with both hands at the same time, and squeeze it with force, until all that is in the poultice comes out into the intestine.
Then remove the poultice, and raise the sick person's legs to the wall.
If the medicine requires it to go out, then hold as much as possible. And if he sleeps with it all night, it is better in the cure.
But if you apply a poultice to him in the pains of the solution of the belly, and hasten its exit: then repeat the poultice, until he is healed.
If there are hemorrhoids, or painful abscesses in the anus, then it should be a thin, very soft poultice, from the poultices with which children are treated.
And this is the shape of the thin poultice on which there is a tight skin.
Chapter LXXXIV.
I have already spoken of the division of wound treatment in the book, and now I will explain its cure with the hand and with medicines according to completion.
I say therefore that wounds are divided according to the way they are made and according to the place on which the wound falls.
The things by which wounds are often made are like the throw of a stone: or an incision with a sword or knife; or percussion with a lance, a stick, or an arrow: and similar things from many objects.
But wounds which are made according to the parts of the body are like a wound which falls on the head, or neck, or chest, or belly, or back: and similar from these members.
And I am telling the cure of certain wounds, so that I may set forth this reasoning and rule upon the remaining wounds.
And I will begin with simple head wounds, because the memory of complex ones will come at the beginning of Chapter Third.
I say therefore. When a simple wound occurs in the head and there is no fracture of bone: consider then if it is from the throw of a stone or similar things, and already it has broken the skin only: and it is a large wound, and you fear for the bad outcome of a hot suppuration: then hasten, and perform a cephalic bleeding immediately: and do not hesitate to do this: and take out from his blood according to the quantity of its power: if there is nothing prohibiting bleeding from phlebotomy, especially if it is blood that exits from the wound in small amounts. And let the bleeding be from the opposite side of the wounded part.
And let the bleeding be from the opposite side of the wounded part. Let him be cautious of himself from overfilling, and wine, and coarse foods.
If however something prohibits a mincement, then it should be reduced from the food, and not approach meats, nor wine.
And place upon the wound if it happens to him an abscess hot, a poultice infused in rose oil alone, or with wine in which is astringency.
If however you are secure from the hot abscess, then place upon the wound, if it is recent with its own blood, and not changed its air, powder which I will tell after a little: and if already changed it, then place upon it some ointments, until it heals.
If however the wound is large, or is from a cut of a sword, and similar: and not gather its lips with pledgets, then gather it with stitches, according to which I will tell in wounds of the belly about their stitches.
If however the wound is already detected from the bone, and hangs, and not retention of it, except in a small suspension: then cut it. Then care for the wound with medicines, and restore in it hard flesh in place of skin, and command the sick, to be fed on foods in which is bulkiness, as are heads, and cooked wheat, until it is like a pulp: and similar.
If however you find in the skin putrefaction, and not adheres to bone: then cut the rotten whole, and throw it away: then care for it.
If however in these wounds is an artery, or vein from which flows blood: and not cut through medicines, then look upon the artery. If however you find it not severed, then dry it with Spatumili, or tie it. If necessity calls when it does not provide what we said, then cauterize it until the blood stops flowing.
But if these wounds are small, simple, then the matter is easy, light: so that you sprinkle this powder on them, because it hardens them before they change due to air.
Method of Powder for Flesh Wounds. Recipe one part of honey, two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of unburned lime: grind it all thoroughly, and sift it: and fill the wound with it, and bind it tightly, until it sticks well on top of it, and coagulates with blood.
Then bind it from above with bandages, and let it go, and do not untie it while it remains, so that it does not stick. For this medicine is not removed from it until it is healed.
And sometimes it does this alone, when you do not have honey, and dragon's blood in your presence: and lime also performs the same operation in many large wounds, when it is placed on them and bound, and are recent wounds with their own blood, which has not changed due to air.
If it has already changed due to some alteration, especially when it is in the time of summer, then this powder is not in position: therefore take care of it with what we said, so that you put on top of it some digestive ointments: or put on top of it some poultices made with barley flour, with water and honey, until they emit pus. Then take care of the rest of the healing, until they are healed.
But if it happens with the wound a fracture in bone, and it is small, then remove it with Gesti: and I will now tell you about the healing of fractures of the head in what is to come.
Of Wounds of the Neck.
If, however, a wound occurs in the neck, there is no difference in treatment between it and a simple wound of the head.
But if the nerve of the neck has already been cut, or the artery: then if it is a nerve, there is no skill in it, except that its cure should be avoided with that which causes strong styptic action, such as zinarius, and zegi, and similar substances. Because nerves are harmful and they contract them.
And you should not place anything at all cold on the wound: because the substance of nerves is cold, and its continuity is with the brain, which is higher than the members: and let that be used to cure from medicines gently, such as limewater with sweet water, often infused with oil, or with red oil, and tuthia, when it is also washed with sweet water: and the other mineral stones, in this way, and moist ointments.
But if the wound is large, then apply a suture: or cut off its lips with cotton. Then care for it until it heals.
But if the wound is deep, or it occurs in that sinus in the lower part of it, in which already pus has accumulated, then perforate it in a more depressed place in it.
But if the artery has already been cut in the wound, and blood flow has resulted from it: then separate, or dry it, and ligate it: or cauterize it, if necessity requires it.
But if the spines of the neck have already been cut, or the whole, and the alhaudegi have been saved: then gather the lips of the skin with a suture on the cannula of the neck, and do not touch the neck, but rather even it, and reduce it to its natural shape. Then tie it with a decent ligature and leave it for several days. Then care for it with ointments that have astringency and drying properties until it heals.
If the wound has already made an impression on the bone, then probe it: if there are any bone fragments in it, remove them all, or as much as you can from them: and what cannot be prepared, leave it until the wound rots and separates and its discharge is relieved.
If the wound is recent, then apply powder that I have mentioned to it. If however it seems that there is a bone in the wound and a fistula forms, then care for it with the remedy that I mentioned in its chapter.
About the wound in the forceps.
If there is a puncture of the lance or the knife, and you see its depth, then consider. If therefore a fetid gas escapes from the wound when the patient pants because of it, then know that the wound is mortal.
If it is not deep and is recent with its own blood, then do not apply powder to it from the first hour, nor tie it up so that the blood is not retained in its depth and returns to the heart and kills the patient: but put on it a drawing ointment and dissolve it in the day twice.
If however the ointment is not present to you, then put on the opening of the wound an old cotton, so that it sucks out what escapes from it because of its moisture: and make the patient sleep over the wound, so that what gathers in it may be drawn out.
If however three days or more have already passed since the wound, and no spasm has occurred to the patient, nor a bad trembling of the heart, nor a stricture in breathing, and you see the rest of its conditions good: then know that the wound is safe. Cure yourself and with your companions, and with the rest of the treatment, until you are healed.
However, if indeed his cure is excused and it always opens up, then you know that it has already become a fistula. Cure yourself from your chapter.
And if the wound is from an incision of a sword, or a knife, and it is simple on the surface of the chest, or the back: then cure yourself with that which preceded from the stitch, if it is large: or with powder, if it is small.
But if it has already made an impression on the bone, and it has broken off from it fragments: then inquire the wound, and hasten to remove those fragments, if they are separated. But if they are not separated, then leave them, until the wound rots, for the extraction of them is relieved.
However, the judgment of other wounds occurring in other members in treatment, is the judgment of that which we said.
§ On wounds of the belly, and the exit of the intestines, and their exit.
The rupture which happens to the belly is great, and middle, and small.
From a great one sometimes the intestine exits, or the number of intestines.
Therefore the introduction of them, and their stitch is more urgent and difficult.
And the small rupture also becomes difficult from another way. Therefore it follows that the reduction of them is difficult, if you do not hasten to their introduction to their place immediately: for it swells, opens up, and becomes full: therefore the entrance of its difficulty.
Therefore it becomes a better rupture of the middle one: for since with it the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, as it is difficult in these two species.
You should know that there are four types of sutures for a wound.
There are two common sutures that meet in the umbilical wound and in the wounds of the rest of the body, and there are two other sutures that properly communicate with the other wounds. However, they are more proper with the umbilical suture, and I tell you each one with explanation and declaration.
I say therefore, because when the wound is small and something comes out of the intestine from it, and it is difficult to reduce it: then it is for one of the two reasons. Either because of the smallness of the rupture, as we said: or because there is inflation in the intestine due to cold from the air.
Therefore when it is like that, then you should warm it, so that you immerse the sponge, or a wet cloth in warm water alone. Or boil it in water with vinegar, and pepper, and salt, and marjoram with the intestine, until the inflation is dissolved.
Sometimes it does that wine in which there is hemostasis: and it is better than water alone in the resolution of inflation.
When therefore you see the inflation already resolved, then moisten the intestine with water in which it was boiled again, or warm. For through that it is relieved from its small opening.
But if the return of it is excused after this cure, then cut in a small rupture, with the instrument by which hemorrhoids are cut.
And the first cure is better when it is prepared, than cutting: and no force is made to cut after need and lack of instrument.
Let one part of it be which is twisted, sharp, and the other part not sharp, and the tip not thin with thinness of Spatumilis, but rather a little blunt: and that is what resembles a caul, as you see.
When a wound becomes larger and enters the intestine, it is necessary to reduce it back to its natural form in its proper place, if possible, because this is better.
When indeed the rupture is large in the lower part of the belly, then it is necessary to make the person lie on their back with their legs higher than their head. And if it is in the upper part of the belly, then place their head lower and elevate their chest higher than their lower parts.
Similarly, if the rupture is in one of the two parts of the belly, then place your attention and always consider this, that the part in which the wound is should be higher than the other part.
And thus it is necessary to apply this in large wounds and in middle wounds.
But in small wounds, apply it according to what is prepared for you.
Then make sure that a faithful servant is present between your hands who holds the entire rupture with his hand: and gather his lips. Then gradually expose from it to the one who follows a suture something after something: and this is the common method of suturing one.
And it is, that you receive a needle, or a number of needles according to the quantity of the wound's width. Then let go of the quantity of a finger's ring, that is, a doctor's: and fix the needle one on which you insert the thread in both skin ends, with two skin ends that are from the interior, until you make it penetrate from the other part, and now you have gathered two skin ends and two sifac ends: and four rows are made.
Then tie with a double thread around the wound, using a needle from two sides simultaneously, until the two lips of the wound are gathered together neatly.
Then let go of the thickness of the finger and fix a needle on it as well: after that, lace it with a thread, just as you did with the first needle. Therefore do not stop doing that with the one you need from the beds until you complete the constriction of the wound entirely.
And let the needles be of medium thickness between the thickness and thinness: for thin needles are very quick to penetrate flesh: and thick ones are difficult to enter the skin: therefore it is necessary that they be of medium thickness in both thinness and thickness.
And it is not necessary, that the needle be fixed in both edges of the skin nearby too much: so that the flesh does not penetrate quickly, and the wound is not opened before its consolidation, and they do not extend even with the stitch, so that the wound is not prevented from consolidation.
Then cut the ends of the needles, so that they do not wound the weak one while he is asleep: and place cotton pads from all sides, which hold the ends of the needles: and let them go, until you know that the wound has been consolidated.
And this kind of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds. For one needle in their stitch is enough, or two, or about that.
But the second stitch is common, so that it gathers with the first stitch the four ends: ends, two of the skin, and two of the thread in the vice one, with the needle in which the thread is wrapped equally in thinness, and thickness.
Then, when you have penetrated with the needle these four extremities, reduce the needle from the part where you began, so that a thread soaked in honey falls from the upper part of the wound: so that it may be a suture, just as they stitch together pieces of cloth, and place between every suture an amount of thickness equal to the little finger.
This suture, however, people know.
And with this suture, I healed the wound that had occurred to a man in his belly, who had been wounded with a knife, and the wound was a tear larger than a span of one hand: and it had exited from the intestines about two spans from the middle intestine, and there was a tear in the middle of the belly.
I therefore reduced it after it had stood out from his intestine outside the wound for twenty-four hours.
The wound was therefore healed in the space that it was approximately fifteen days: and I cared for him, and he was healed: and he lived after that for many years, returning to his former condition.
And the doctors had judged, that he would not be healed.
And by a miracle, it was that I did not care for him with ointment. Because I was in a place where ointment was not found, nor anything from the medicines. Therefore I placed over the wound old cloth twice a day, and I assiduously washed it with honeyed water, until it was healed.
Two therefore species of suture proper I will say according to the account of the language.
And it is, that you begin with a sharp suture: and you insert the needle from the outer to the inner part.
When therefore the needle penetrates the skin, and goes into the muscle going according to the length and width of the whole body: let go the end of the suture in the side in which you inserted the needle, and make it penetrate in another extremity from the inner part to the outer in the other end.
When you have made it penetrate, then make it penetrate thus in the same extremity from the outer part to the inner: and let go the extremity which is on this side, and make the point penetrate the other extremity from the inner part to the outer: and make it penetrate with your penetration as you make it penetrate in that extremity of the mirror, which is on its part, until it penetrates entirely into it.
Then also begin from this same side, and withdraw it entirely with the extremity which is on its part, and take out the point from the skin which it has penetrated.
Then also bring it back into that skin, and withdraw its extremity which is on its part, with that extremity of the mirror: and take it out from the skin which is on its part, and make one of them thus, and the other: and make one after another, until you have withdrawn entirely outwards according to that example.
And the sum of this stitching is that you stitch with the same thread which they use to stitch skins: so that you stitch one of them thus from one part of one extremity of the skin: and so that you let go it thus from another part of another, until you have completed.
The second kind of proper stitching, which Gale nus said.
This his speech was told, that you should stitch it according to the likeness in which some physicians use them, so that they gather all part to its suitable corresponding part by nature: and apply the extremity of the mirror to its other extremity, and the extremity of the mirror to its other. And that is done according to what I tell you.
You should insert the needle into the tip of the probe near to you from the outer side, and make it penetrate to the inner part in that soil; and dismiss its two ends. Then turn the needle, and make it penetrate from the outer side to the inner part in its two ends, namely on both sides.
Then turn both of them, and also make them penetrate from the inner to the outer side in their two ends, namely in the two other probes which are on the opposite side.
And this method of suture is better than a common and easy suture, and it is the suture which precedes the remembrance.
This is therefore also the word of Galen.
And some said. The suture of the belly should be corrected with two needles. That is, you should insert one thread into both of them: and begin with the insertion of the needle which is with you, and make it penetrate to the other side, according to the suture of those who equalize the hides.
And you should know that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly: then its suture is more difficult than the sutures of the other parts of the belly.
The judgment indeed of the wound's medication, is the judgment of the other wounds.
That is, because when you seek the recent wound with its own blood, before it changes itself by the air: and reduce the intestine, and its own, and prepare it: then place on top of the powder of the flesh of the incarnate.
But if the air has already changed the wound: then place on it some ointments which are present with you, until they make pus: and fall off the threads, and strengthen the sutures, and the probe. Then, care for it as is the cure of the remaining wounds, until it heals.
But if you do not have the medicines present to you, then put on it immediately, after it begins to emit pus, a wet and old cloth: and change it twice a day, as I taught you, until it heals.
For you do not need other medication in many situations, when the wounds are simple.
But if you fear that the wound will spread to the main members in the injury, then it is necessary that you immerse a soft cloth in warm-tempered oil, or in rose oil: and place it in the circumference of the places which are between the groins, and under the buttocks.
But if he feels pain, or punctures, or putrefaction in his intestines (for this often happens), then enema him with a strengthening wine, black, warm: especially if the putrefaction has already reached the intestine, and become a penetrating one up to its concavity.
And know that what is from the thick intestine is easier to healing: and that which is from the thin ones, more difficult to healing.
But the intestine which is called the Jejunum does not take healing from the wound which happens in it at all: and this is because of its multitude, which is from veins, and their size, and because of the thinness of its body, and because of its proximity to the nature of nerves.
But if that which proceeds from the wound is pus, and you collect it recently: reduce it according to your reduction, by which you reduce the intestines equally.
But if it has passed by him a space, and now it is green, or black: then it is necessary that you tie it with thread above the place which has become black from it, so that blood does not flow. In the joints are veins and arteries.
Then cut what is beyond that ligament, and place the two ends of a string hanging from the lower part of the wound outside it: so that the pull on you will be relieved by its attraction, and its extraction in case of a joint injury, and the discharge of pus from the wound.
Remember the wound that occurred in the intestine.
When a rupture occurs in the intestine and is small, it is possible for some people to be restored: because I have seen a man who was wounded in his abdomen with the impact of a lance, and it was a wound on the right side of the stomach, and it was an old wound: and a fistula formed, and he exited from it with excretion and flatulence.
Therefore I placed a remedy, until I was not confident in his healing: nor did I cease to refine him, until he was healed and the place was solidified.
After I saw the place already solidified, I was afraid of the weak one, that something bad would happen to him in his abdomen: and it did not happen to him from that bad thing. And he remained in his better conditions, eating and drinking, and defecating, and entering the bath, and exercising in his diets.
And now some experimenter said that when a wound occurs in the intestine and is small, then it is necessary to tie it according to this method. And it is, that you take ants of large heads. Then gather the two lips of the wound, and place one ant with an open mouth on top of the two wound lips. When therefore he puts it on that, and closes his mouth, cut off his head, for it sticks and is not released.
Then place another ant near the first one, and do not cease doing that with the ant after the second ant according to the amount of the wound throughout.
Then bring him back, and his wound. For those heads remain attached in the intestine, until the intestine is eaten, and he is healed, and no harm is caused to him completely.
And now it is possible that the intestine is even bound with a fine thread: which is removed from the intestine of the animal, and is attached with it when it enters the needle.
And there is, that you take the end of this thread from the intestine, and it is fouled much. Then tie in its end a thin thread wrapped up. Then insert that thread into the needle, and with it the intestine. Then bring him back in the disruption.
And this method of stitching with ants and intestine is not but according to the way of trust and hope.
You know, the wound that is large, wide, especially if it is in one of the thin intestines: then there is no cure but suturing, and there is no healing at all.
§ On the care of fistulas, and abscesses.
You know that every wound, or abscess when it grows old and becomes old, and becomes an ulcer, and does not consolidate, and emits pus always, and is not cut off: then it is universally called in whatever member it is fistula, and we call it Zuchemen.
A fistula, in truth, is a filtered constriction, hard, white: with which there is no pain, nor is there a concavity of a bird's feather; and because of this, some call it Risatus, that is, a feather.
And in some hours, it emits pus. Perhaps the moisture is torn in some hours. And sometimes this moisture is much, and is little; and it is coarse, and it is delicate.
And I have already mentioned in the division, when I said wounds, that every ulcer which does not heal, nor is there flesh born in it, is not that except for one of nine causes.
Of which one is, either because of the lack of blood in the body: or because of its malevolence: or because between him and his lips there is flesh hard, preventing the birth of flesh: or because it is very dirty and filthy: or because the ulcer itself is putrid, and the matter that is put into it is of bad quality: or because the medicine is inconvenient in its cure: or because corruption falls in the region, a kind of pestilence, or by property in the region, as happens in Caesaraugusta, where there is difficult digestion of sufferings, and healing of pus is delayed in it by nature: or because in it is one bone, or a number of bones.
And I have already shown all these causes and signs of them, and their cures with medicines in the division: and it is necessary for me to do here to make you know the cure of Fistula and Zuken, which is made by way of operation with hand.
Know therefore, that Fistula happens in all parts of the body. From these (wounds) are fistulas that reach the large veins and arteries, or nerves, or sciatic, or to the intestines, or to the bladder, or to some from the ribs, or to some from the spine, or to some from the composite joints, such as hands and feet, and from these are those that approach the proximity of the main member, and similar ones.
Therefore, from these (fistulas), according to this method, is difficult healing due to illness, and it does not receive a cure, and occupation with it is labor and ignorance.
But if it is from any fistula whose depth does not reach these places that I mentioned: and you hope and trust in its cure, and wish to approach the knowledge of it, then take a probe from air, or iron, if the fistula tends towards straightness, and seek it with it.
But if there is twisting in the fistula, then investigate it with a thin lead probe. Because lead, being soothed by its own body, is relieved and cured around twisting.
But if the fistula has many openings, it is not possible for you to signify over it with a probe. Therefore, cysterize from these opening from its own openings.
For the moisture by which you cysterize itself goes towards other openings and runs out of them.
Then, inquire according to what manner it is possible for you: so that you may know what is the bone, or nerve, and whether the fistula's cavity is long or near: or whether it is a fistula with many openings, and stands on the whole of it, with great strength of yours, with your questioning, when you question the infirm, and in invention of pain at compression with your hand on the place, and similar signs and causes of abscess.
When you stand on all those true stations, then go to healing according to your confidence: and it is, that you consider then, if it is a fistula near appearing, or in a safe place far from the junction, or from the nerve, or the artery, or the vein, or one of the places which I told you: then seal the fistula according to what was previously mentioned from my narration, and remove what is in it from filtration, and corrupt flesh, which is born in its mouth from flesh, or thelul, and similar things: and cure that, until it is healed.
But if the fistula is of great depth, and is according to straightness: then it is necessary that you seal it in the deep as much as is possible for you. Then cleanse it from all its corrupt flesh.
Then administer pure linen in sharp medicines: and introduce it until the depth of the fistula which you comprehended with iron: do with it several times, until the sharp medicine corrodes all that remains in the depth of the fistula from corruption.
Then restore it with ointments which generate healthy flesh, until it is healed.
But if it does not heal by that, then cauterize it according to what we told you.
If therefore the cause of the fistula is bone, and it is certified to you that: then inquire that, and seal it according to what I told you: if something does not prohibit you from the vein, or the nerve, or the principal member, as we said.
If therefore a bone is exposed to you, and there is something of corruption and blackness in it: then scrape it, until the corruption of it is all removed. Then take care of that wound with what has healed it, until it is cured.
But if it does not heal, and it emits pus as it did before, then you will know that you have not reached the complete removal of corruption.
Then clean it again with the second layer, and make a thorough examination of its reason and cleansing of itself with your utmost strength.
Then restore it. If it heals, then it is good: but if it does not, then you will know that that corruption is deep within the body, which you have not reached. Therefore, it is not your duty to abandon nature itself.
But if the corrupted part is small and it is possible for you to do so, then draw it out with fine forceps that are suitable for that.
But if there are many bones, then make a thorough extraction of them all, and do not leave any of them with your strength.
But if something contradicts you from the moisture, and there is no fear or mistake in the incision of them, then cut those moistures and flesh, if they are there, and free the bones.
But if you do not have the preparation to remove the bones from your hour, then place on the wound what will putrefy it: and leave it until that which is in the vicinity of those bones from flesh and moisture putrefies.
And guard the wound so that it does not consolidate. And it is bound together with the section that you have cut in your operation. I say, place it on top of it, if you fear, a cloth soaked in ground sulfur with oil: or a cloth soaked in Egyptian ointment, or some green herb of ointments.
When those moist putrefactions decay, and the bones are separated from them, the removal of these bones is relieved, and their attraction.
But if there is one large bone, such as the thigh bone, or the hip bone, and similar to these, and that which has decayed from it is a large part: then shave it with the last razor, until that blackness and corruption are removed. Then restore the wound.
But if that which is in it has decayed, and it is a large part, and corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to saw it, and cut it entirely until the place where corruption has reached: then care for it, until it becomes solid.
And I tell you about the zuken that happened to a man in his thigh: so that you may place this example and help on your operation.
There was a young man of about thirty years old, to whom pain occurred in his thigh, caused by something that moved over him within the body, that is, from inside, until the matter reached the leg, and a large abscess formed: and there was no external cause.
Therefore, he extended with him time with the error of doctors, until the abscess was opened, and they gathered with him many matters. And the cure of his was postponed until the leg was fistulated, and there were made in him many openings: all of which emitted pus and bodily moistures.
Therefore, he suffered from many doctors for about two years, and there was not in him a wise one in the art of hands, until I was called, and I saw his leg, and the matters that were running out from those openings with great speed: even his whole man's body was already shriveled, and his color was yellow.
Therefore, introduce the probe into one of the body's orifices, and the probe reached the bone.
Then I examined all the orifices: and I found that they all reach each other from all parts of the leg.
Therefore, I pressed, and cut across one of those orifices, until I exposed a part of the bone: and I found it rotten: which was already decayed, discolored, and putrefied, and perforated, until it reached the marrow.
I therefore scraped off what I had detected, and prepared it from the rotten bone.
And I assigned, that there was not in the bone except that corruption which I had cut and scraped off. And I had already removed it.
Then I placed the healing of the wound with consolidating medicines for a long time. And it was not consolidated.
Then I probed, and exposed above the bone second above the first detection: and I found continuous corruption with the bone: and I scraped off what appeared to me even from that corruption.
Then I tried to restore it. And it was not restored.
Therefore, I exposed it again, and did not stop inserting the bone separately, and trying to restore it: and it was not restored, until I inserted about a palm's length, and extracted it with its marrow.
Then I restored it with medicines, and it was consolidated quickly, and healed: and there was no need for this repetition in the operation of it, and cutting of itself, except because of the weakness of the infirmity, and shortness of its tolerance, and my fear of it from death: because it happened to him in every hour from excessive evacuation syncope diseases.
He was healed by a complete cure: and flesh was born in the place of the bone, and it was good for the arrangement in his body, and his strength returned to him; and he returned to his own arrangements: and he did not cause him any harm at all in walking.
But if the bone is already broken in the place of the body: then it is necessary to bind it like this: and you take a bandage, and tie it at the end of the prominent bone: and command someone to stretch it upwards: and put another bandage made of coarse wool first. Then tie it over the flesh, which is under the bone: and extend its end, so that you can pull the flesh downwards: and you cover the flesh over the place where you want to saw, so that the saw does not hurt the flesh.
Place a piece of wood or a board under the lower bone, because when you do this, it does not prevent the flesh from becoming rotten.
And it is necessary that the sawing be on the place of the corruption a little, so that there is no corruption in the hollow of the bone: and it does not appear in its appearance to the senses, and forces it to another sawing of its kind.
If the bone is corrupted, and it is not prominent, but continues with its part: and the corruption is in the middle of it, or in its own part: then cover the flesh from all its parts entirely. Then place a piece of wood underneath.
Then saw it from the first side, where the corruption is, until the sawing continues from the other side: and the sawing should be according to the length from the corruption a little, as we said.
If the corruption is in the joint: cut the corrupted joint, and saw the bone from the other side where it continues.
If indeed there is corruption in the connection of two joints, then there is no skill in it except for amputation.
If however the corruption is in the pectoral fin of the hand or in the pectoral fin of the foot, then it is quite difficult in that case. However, you must investigate how the corruption appears to you. And amputate it, and clean it according to any possible arrangement for you, and with whatever skill it is corrected for you, when it does not give you opposition of the vein or nerve.
And you should know that there are many teeth and saws for cutting these bones according to the position of the bones, and their preparation, and their coarseness, and their fineness, and their size, and their evenness, and their hardness, and their rarity. Therefore it is necessary to prepare every kind of instrument suitable for that operation.
And you should know that these operations signify to you the kind of instrument that you lack, when you are with a long study. And knowledge of these methods of this art is a testimony of the methods of diseases: then indeed you will find for yourself that which is suitable to it from the instruments for all infirmity.
And I am confirming to you in the last number of this chapter's instruments, which you place examples on which you cut, and proof by which you experience on another.
The form of another saw.
The form of the razor for suturing wounds. The head of this razor should be in the form of a star-shaped clasp, and its points should be in the form of the points of an eschalot.
And it does not suit, except that it should be rubbed with it the heads of the sutures when they are rotten, or a large mouth and a large one is.
The form of the larger razor.
The form of the broad razor.
The form of the razor in which there is a concavity.
The form of another delicate razor.
The form of another curved extremity razor.
The form of a small delicate testing razor.
This resembles a drill, and its end is like a saw: it will be shown in many places from the reason of the bones.
The form of the razor that suits its reason that is pierced through the bones.
Its end is triangular, and its sharp ends are.
It is made of Indian. And likewise it should be made of all that we have said of the razors, and the knives, and the saws.
Of cutting the ends, and sawing the bones.
The ends rot, either by an external cause or an internal one.
When therefore you have cured that corruption with the medicine of the doctor, and it does not bring about a cure: and you see the corruption falling into the member, which does not rebound at all: then it is necessary that you cut that member as far as where the corruption follows, so that the weak one may escape through that from death, or from the malice which is greater than the defect of the member.
And the sign that occurs in this case is that the limb is blackened, until it is thought to have been burned by fire or has decayed after a discoloration: until that putrefaction reaches as far as the following limb, and spreads throughout the entire body.
Therefore, when the incision is made, and if the cause of decay is from the impact of certain venomous creatures, such as sea scorpions, vipers, and rattle snakes, and the like.
If therefore the decay or impact is at the end of the finger, then cut the finger, and do not leave any space for decay, so that it may reach as far as the other hand.
And similarly if it happens in the hand, then cut it from the root of the wrist, and do not leave any space for decay, until it reaches as far as the forearm.
And if it attacks in that place, then cut the arm at the elbow, in its joint.
But if decay passes through, and you see it around the elbow: then there is death of the weak one. And to administer besides that for cure, is a quantity of power.
And similarly do with the foot, when decay attacks in the finger, then cut it at one joint: and if it takes hold of the claw of the foot, then cut the whole foot. But if it climbs up to the knee, then cut the leg at the joint of the knee.
But if decay has already reached above the knee, then there is no cure in it, except to let go and leave the weak one to death.
And the way of cutting the limb, or sawing it, is to tie the ligament on the lower one, which you wish to cut: and tie the ligament above the place. And the assistant extends one ligament downwards: and the assistant extends another ligament upwards. And you separate the flesh that is between the two ligaments, with a sharp spatula, until the flesh is completely exposed. Then it is cut, or tightened.
And it is necessary to place cloth on all parts of the body, and not touch the healthy place with the saw: and a wound is added to the injured person, and a hot abscess.
But if bleeding occurs inside while operating, then cauterize the place quickly: or put on top of it some powders that absorb blood. Then return to your treatment until it is completed.
Then bind the wounded limb with the appropriate ligament for it, and care for it, until it heals.
And I tell you what happened to a man in his foot, the same thing that I am telling you.
That is, because blackness occurred in his foot, with burning that resembles the burning of fire: and that corruption first occurred in his finger, until he began to have his whole foot.
Therefore the man removed himself from himself, after he saw corruption occurring in his member with its severity, which he found from pain, and burning of it: and it occurred to him at the joint, and he was healed.
And after he had passed a long time, that same corruption occurred to him in his finger of his hand index.
Therefore he came to me, and I tried to recover that excess with him which I put on his hand from medicines after the cleansing of his body: and that excess was not reflected, and it began to occur in another finger: until corruption occurred in his hand.
He therefore called me to cut his hand, but I refused to do so, hoping for a cure from the rebound of that excessive blood flow: and I also feared death itself during the cutting of his hand. Because the power of man was over that case.
After he therefore gave up hope from me, he returned to his own land: and he came to me from that, because he hurriedly cut off his whole hand, and he was healed.
And I did not bring this account, unless it be a help concerning that which falls under the type of this sickness: and that there be a signification by which it is signified, and according to which it is treated.
Concerning the care of fistulas, and the quality of cleansing with medicines.
When an abscess occurs in certain fleshy members, and the duration of the abscesses is prolonged until it forms a collection of pus: then it bursts or is perforated, and that which is in it, as if it were excrement, escapes, and the place remains empty as if it were a vessel: and the skin which is over it, like a fabric which has become thin: and it does not reach to its ultimate corruption, nor imprints itself on the bone, nor on the nerve, nor on the ligament: it deserves to be called a sinus: and it is not called a fistula: nevertheless if the duration of its existence is prolonged until it imprints corruption on some of these members, then it is called a fistula, or zuken.
And its care is, that you cut off that entire skin as it rolls back: and especially when it has become thin, and has been made like a fabric: and you trust that it will not adhere to the place, because of its corruption.
If you hope that the skin will stick and there will be no corruption in the final result: and if there is thickness in the skin from the flesh, then treat it with Clister: and it is, that you should look to the Ear.
Then if it is large, and the pus that comes out of it has a foul smell: then treat it with Egyptian medicine, which is acetic acid, oil, and zinc, equal parts are received, they are poured into a jar: and they are cooked over fire, until the medicine turns red: and it becomes as thick as honey.
Then take from it what you need: and dissolve it with water and honey, and treat the Ear with it: and tie the opening of it, and let the medicine into it at a quantity of two hours.
Then take it out with expression: make it for days so many, until the Ear is cleansed, and the smell is removed.
And sometimes it is treated with water of ashes, when you are not present with this medicine: and it is, that you should take charcoal of willows, or charcoal of ilex woods: and throw it on it water. Then clean it, and treat it with it, until you trust that the Ear is already cleaned.
If the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine, nor water of ashes, then treat it with water and honey, which has already mixed some of the crushed zinc. Or treat it with honey and wine mixed, because of the property of honey is to cleanse, and wash: and the wine makes the Ear stick, especially when there is an excess of tonicity and dryness in the wine.
When you do this frequently and trust that the sin of corruption is already removed, then cleanse it with what causes flesh to grow in it.
And it is, that you take from the plaster of dyafinicon: and dissolve it with rose oil and strengthening wine: or cleanse it with certain medicines and other ointments, whose properties I have written in the treatise on ointments.
If the orifice of the sinus is narrow, in which the catheter does not fit: then enlarge it slightly with a little iron: or place in it a rolled-up piece of linen in Egyptian ointment, or in basilicon ointment, until it is enlarged.
And similarly if the orifice is also large, then gather its lips with a stitch: and let out from it as much as the catheter enters without adding anything.
And similarly if the orifice from which the pus flows is elevated: then dry it in a lower place that is in it, so that the pus may flow out from it downwards: for when pus is confined in the depths of the sinus, it prevents flesh from growing in it.
If it is not possible for you to dry the sinus around its lower part as you wish: then try to prepare the member with preparation by which pus may flow out from it with ease according to what is prepared for you. Try to make sure that nothing at all from the pus remains in it: and take solidifying medicines which are placed on the sign, suitable for what you wish. And spread them on linen cloth. And the cloth should be of such a quantity that the entire sinus may be covered. Then, cut with forceps directly into the opening of the sinus, a bit beyond the opening of the sinus. Then, spread a thin layer of ointment on another cloth according to the size of the opening: and place it on top of that, positioned far from the sinus opening, so as to facilitate the exit of pus from it: and do not remove a large cloth unless after several days.
However, the one that is above the sinus opening, is the one that you remove every hour, so that what accumulates in it from pus can come out: and so that you know whether that which runs out of it is much or little, digested or undigested.
And when you again consider the location of the sinus itself, whether it feels pain in it, or not, and whether there is an abscess in it, or not, and whether there is an abscess in it.
Therefore, when your treatment is given in this way, and you see the matter that comes out through the sinus opening, then you know that the sinus has already adhered, or approached adhesion: then therefore dissolve it in the morning, or on the third day: and when you heal the wound, then change the cloth and reapply the ointment.
But if pus comes out of the sinus after a long time, then do not despair of its adhesion, for its healing is approaching, because there are men who slow down the generation of flesh in their wounds, and there are those who act contrary to that.
But if pus comes out of the sinus after many days, then you know that the sinus does not adhere.
Therefore, if the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and its duration is prolonged, then add in the drying of the medicines, but let the doctors make the medicines in their substance wet and in their dryness virtue: such as ointment dyafinicon when added to it an excess of zegi.
And from the most recent, that is cured, it is, that you take the unguent of diaphenic, and it is dissolved with rose oil, and it is rubbed on top of old wine equal in substance to it.
Then mix it with that, and use it.
And now it does a similar action to this, when the unguent of diaphenic is not present to you, honey, when you melt it, until it thickens, and use it. Or take myrrh, and aloe, and frankincense: grind all of it, and powder it on top of honey while it is on the fire. Then line it on top of the cloth, and tie it over the sinus: and line with honey that you melted, until it thickens: and powder it on top of it, and put it on top of the cloth, and tie it.
And sometimes it is administered in that aristolochia longa, and the roots of the heavenly lily, and it is lily: and the flour of the herb, and centaury. Use them simple, or mixed, grind it, and the mortar itself: and powder it on top of the honey that I mentioned, and use it.
If the sinus lasts, and it is not healed by this cure: then you know that there is corruption in its depth: or already it makes an impression on the bones, or on the other hard limbs, or ligaments: then cure it with the cure of fistulas, according to what was previously mentioned.
¶ On the cure of panaritium and the nail worn away, and the incision of the finger added, and the cut.
Panaritium is an abscess that is born under the nail of the hand, or foot: and perhaps it is born in the other fingers.
When, therefore, the disease is prolonged and its cure is neglected, it festers with a hot abscess: or it rots, and emits pus, until it corrodes the root of the nail: and perhaps it corrupts the whole of it, and perhaps the corruption reaches the bone, so that there is an offensive odor: and it becomes the end of the digit broad, and its color becomes dark.
When, therefore, you cure it yourself, with what we said in the division, and do not bring about its cure: then it is necessary for you to cut off with a knife all the remaining excess from the nail. Then cauterize the wound after that. For the cautery is very healing.
But if the bone is healthy, and the nail is also healthy, and the additions of the nail already compress the flesh to the interior, and they begin to prick it, and they wound it: then you must place a fine needle under the angle of the nail which pricks the flesh, and push it upwards: and cut the flesh with ease, and put on what remains of the flesh from burning, corrosive medicines, until it is all removed. Then care for it with ointments, until it is healed.
But if the corruption has already pressed into the bone, then you must cut that bone, and remove it: for it will never be healed as long as the corrupted bone remains in it.
But if you see the corrosion and corruption spreading into the digit, then cut it at one node, according to what was previously remembered of it. Then care for it, until it is healed.
But if an injury occurs to the nail, or a blow: and pain occurs in it, then you must bleed the sick person first. Then, dry the nail with a sharp spatula, making a transverse cut from above downwards.
And guard against the cut reaching the flesh beneath the nail, for you would cause severe pain and it would be a cause for delayed healing of the flesh in that location.
Then care for the wound with whatsoever alleviates pain.
However, the finger added to some men's hands may be entirely fleshy: and perhaps they have bones, and perhaps there is a nail in it: and some of them are born in the root of the joint, or its birth is in certain knots of the finger. Therefore, he who is born in certain knots of the finger does not move: and he who is born at the joint of the finger may perhaps move.
Therefore, for him who is fleshy among them, the cut is easy. That is, you should cut it at its root with a broad spatula.
However, for him whose birth is in the root of the joint, care is difficult. Therefore, avoid cutting it.
However, for him who is born in the finger at the last knot, then you should cut into the first flesh of his round cut up to the bone. Then saw the bone with one of those saws fitting for that. Then care for it until it heals.
However, the consolidation that occurs in fingers afterward often happens either from the birth of the man, that is, he is born with it, or from the consolidation of the wound, or from burning by fire, and similar things.
Therefore, you should separate that consolidation until the fingers return to their natural form. Then place between them a linen cloth, or infused cloths in rose oil: so that they do not stick together quickly, and separate between them: or place between them a thin sheet of lead, until the wound is healed according to what is appropriate.
And similarly if there is consolidation by certain fingers with the palm, then dry that consolidation, according to what is prepared and suitable for the shape of the member.
Chapter on the Incision Wound.
There are ulcers that are covered, thick, full of melancholic superfluities which occur in many parts of the body: and the most common outcome of them is in the legs, especially in the legs of those who travel and work and carry.
Therefore it is necessary that the practitioner perform a strong excitation of the body from black bile, several times.
Then phlebotomy of the patient in the basilica.
Healing of them with iron, is indeed according to two methods. One of them is, that they be dried and the black blood be drawn out. And the other method is, that the vein be raised and all of it be drawn out.
The incision of it is indeed according to this method. First, the leg is fomented with hot water much, until the thick, dirty blood is dissolved. Then bind the weak leg from its upper part of the hip, to the lower part of the knee with a cloth. Then dry the vein in one place, or two, or three wide incision.
Then raise, that is, draw out the blood from the lower part of the leg, upwards, and from the upper part it should be that the phlebotomist weakens the first. Then, cut off the nail with a sharp instrument until blood comes out in an amount that you see is sufficient and that the weakness of the patient can tolerate.
After that, bandage it and instruct him to abstain from foods that generate black bile: and repeat the evacuation and phlebotomy when the veins are full and it harms the patient.
However, his evacuation is done in this manner. Shave the leg of the patient if there are many hairs on it. Then, put him into a warm bath: or apply hot water to his leg with hot water, until it reddens and the veins are full: or exercise him with strong exercise if there is no bath present, until the limb warms up.
Then, cut the skin directly over the vein section along its length: or at the last part of his leg near the knee, or in the lower part of his leg near the heel.
Then, cut the skin with hooks and remove all the flesh from the vein until it appears to the sense: and at its appearance, what you see is that it reddens down to a dark color. When therefore it goes out of the skin, you see it white as if it were a string.
Then, put under it a radium until when evacuated and goes out of the skin: suspend it with a blind hook, gently.
Then, cut another section near that section with three fingers. Then, remove the flesh from the upper part of the vein until it appears. Then, evacuate it with radiums as you did, and suspend it with another hook, as you did first.
Then, cut another section, or more sections, if you need it. Then incise, and make the final cut at the calcaneum.
Then remove it to the cut that is above it.
And make it until you remove it from the cut that is above it, or from all higher cuts, until when it exits entirely: then incise it.
If however it does not obey you in being removed and incised: then insert a sharp needle with strong thread doubled, and tie it, and remove it: or insert under it Radium: and turn your hand to all parts, until it exits. And beware, lest it be incised. For if it is incised, it becomes difficult for you to remove it greatly, and enters above the weak from it harm.
When therefore you have removed it entirely: then place on the wound a bandage soaked in wine and rose oil, or oil: and care for it until it is healed.
But if the Vitis is contracted, having twisting which is involution to parts, and is not as we said according to straightness: then it is necessary that you cut over it to all part of its twisting, and places of its involution.
Then suspend it with hooks, until you remove it entirely: and beware at your cut on it that you do not incise the vein, or wound: for difficult will become for you to remove, or extract it. Therefore preserve your prudence.
The Form of the Incision which heals the Vitis.
The Form of the Involution of the Blind.
It is not to it straightness like other Involutions, nor is it sharp extremity, so that it does not incise the vein: and is thick flexuosity, gentle: because if it were subtle, it would incise the vein by its subtlety: indeed there is to it excessive thickness, as we said.
Translation: On the Extraction of the Femoral Vein
This vein is generated in the legs in warm lands, such as among the Alizegi and in Arabia, and in dry, warm lands with few greens, that is, where there are no plants or trees.
And perhaps it is generated in other parts of the body besides the legs.
Its generation indeed is from the putrefaction that occurs under the skin, like what happens inside bodies with snakes and vermin such as roundworms, and worms generated between the skin and flesh.
And the sign of the onset of this vein is that an intense inflammation occurs in the leg. Then the location is opened. Then the vein begins to exit from that location of opening, as if it were the root of a plant or an animal.
When therefore it appears from that end of it, then you must wrap over it a piece of lead, whose weight is from a drachma of keil, up to two drachmas and the knot: and let the lead be suspended from the leg.
Whenever therefore something exits from it to the outsides, wrap that in lead and knot it. If however it is prolonged much, then cut off a part of it, and wrap the remainder. And do not cut it off root and branch before it exits entirely. For if you cut it off, it contracts and enters into the flesh: and it causes an abscess, and putrefaction, and a bad wound in that location.
Therefore it is necessary that it be gently handled, and drawn out gradually, until it exits from the last of itself, and nothing remains in the body from it: and from this vein exits in certain people which is in its length five palms and ten. And now he has come to me because a man has died from an injury of 20 palms.
If you are suddenly faced with a medical situation: then insert the probe into the hole, and pierce it through the hole, with the body, until everything that is in it is evacuated from the matter: and treat the putrefaction of the wound with medicines for several days. Then care for the wound itself with the treatment of abscesses.
And this vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot, or in the foot itself: and there are many openings for it, and a branch exits from every opening.
Then care for it as we said in the division, and with what was previously mentioned.
¶ On cutting for worms generated under the skin, and it is called "boil.
This disease is called "boil" in a certain land among us: because it often happens to boils, and it is a small worm that is born between the skin and flesh.
And it goes through the whole body, ascending and descending: and it shows itself to the senses during its movement from limb to limb, until it breaks wherever it breaks in the skin, and exits.
And its generation is from the putrefaction of certain humors. As worms and snakes, that is, roundworms and tapeworms, do in the belly.
And it is feared from its harmfulness. Because when it goes through the body, and is raised to the head, and reaches a place: then perhaps it opens in it, and exits, and destroys the eye: and this happens often.
When therefore you wish to cure him and extract him, it is not done except during his walking and the appearance of himself to his sense.
Therefore, you must bind what is above him and what is below him with a strong constricting bandage. Then cut above him and extract him.
If it has gone deep into the flesh and you cannot find it, then place a hot iron over the spot until it dies.
And the greater danger is its corruption, which corrupts the eye, as we have said.
But if you see that it has already reached the head near the eye, then bind under it a good eyebrow binding. Then cut above him and extract him.
And the sick person should use a cleaning of his body with remedies dissolving foul humors and bad things.
And he should beware of foods that generate putrefaction in himself.
¶ On cutting above the pain of Nakir.
This pain is called Nakir in our land: and it is a pain that occurs in certain members, then it is transmitted from member to member.
And I myself have already seen it, as I tell you. I was called to an infirm woman in certain villages. And she detached her arm, and I saw inflation of a small vein in the tendon of the arm.
And after remaining for an hour, I saw one inflation going with a firebrand, like a snake, ascending to her shoulder faster than it could be: so that it was like live silver when it ran from place to place.
Therefore the pain went away from that place and fixed itself on her shoulder.
Then I sat for one hour, and it ran into the rest of the body, until it reached another arm.
Then he told me that it was circulating throughout his entire body, as I had seen.
I was therefore amazed at the speed of its movement from member to member. And indeed, I had not seen this sickness with my own eyes in this way before. However, I had seen many who found pain moving from member to member, and I had not seen it with my own eyes as I saw it in that woman.
And I do not think that it is [so], except because the woman was from those who are from dry bodies of veins detected: hence therefore it appears to the senses that this movement is caused by that windiness.
And it is necessary that they do not appear according to this reason in those who are delicate, and with humid bodies, of hidden veins.
When therefore you wish to cure him, and the patient feels that pain: then if it is apparent to you by sight, as we said, then bind above it quickly, and underneath: and dry above it, until that windiness is confined: and cauterize the place.
But if you do not see it with your own eyes: then cure him with a shaking of the body, and with that which expels windiness, and carminate them with fetid pills, and pills of sarsaparilla, and similar ones.
§ On the Extraction of Arrows.
Arrows vary according to their kinds, and according to the places in which they fall out of the body.
Indeed their variety is [such] because among them are those which have large and small, and hollow and dull points. And among them are those that have three angles. And among them are those that have a tongue. And among them are those that have stars.
Those indeed which are according to the members in which they fall, is according to two modes. For indeed the members are from the principal concave members, such as the brain, and heart, and lung, and kidneys, and intestines, and bladder, and similar things. When therefore it falls into any of these members, and the signs of death appear to you, which I tell you after, then it is necessary that you seek the extraction of that arrow from them, for death follows him in which is, in many positions. And when those evil signs do not appear to you, and the arrow is not hidden in the depth of the member, then extract it, and care for the wound.
For from the signs of the brain when it falls into him arrow, and penetrates the mouth, and goes out that which is above the brain, is: because they happen from it strong soda, and scotomia, and vertigo, and redness in the eyes, and inflation, and redness of the tongue, and spasm, and mixture of intellect, and vomiting of choler. And perhaps it goes out blood from the nostrils, or from the ears. And perhaps it cuts off speech, and destroys voice. And it goes out from the place of the wound white fluid similar to pus. And it goes out from that similar flowing of flesh.
If therefore those signs appear to you, then abstain from care, and extract the arrow if it does not go out.
But the signs of the arrow when it falls into the heart, are: that itself is near the left nipple: and feels with it as if itself is fixed in a hard thing, not in a empty thing. And perhaps the motion of an arrow is similar to the motion of a blow: and black blood runs from the wound. And then follows a chill in the extremities, and cold sweat, and convulsions. Therefore know that death is certainly approaching.
And the sign of an arrow when it pierces the lung is the appearance of foamy blood from the wound: and the swellings that follow the neck become abscesses, and the color of the sick person changes. And he breathes out a great, deep breath: and seeks the cold draft of air.
If the arrow falls into the lung, which is in the chest: then it is near the small ribs: and there is a great difficulty in breathing with intense pain, with sighs: and all the limbs of the arms move.
And if the arrow falls into the stomach, then perhaps something undigested from food comes out of the wound.
And if the arrow falls into the belly, and it is stuck in it: something of feces comes out of the wound, or a stool, or an intestine that is already torn. There is therefore no hope of his cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
If the arrow falls into the bladder, and urine comes out of it: and something proceeds from it to the outside, and the pain is stronger on the sick person: then know that it is fatal.
The other parts of the body, such as the face, and neck, and throat, and spine, and ribs, and backbone, and hip, and leg, and similar things from the limbs are saved according to many arrangements: when the arrow does not find an artery, or nerve: and it is not a poisonous arrow.
And I tell you what I have seen of these arrows, as you indicate in your treatment.
This is because a certain man had an arrow fall into his lacrimal duct, at the root of his nose. I therefore removed it from the other side, under the fat of his ear: and he was healed, and no harm came to his eye.
And I removed another arrow from a Jew, which had fallen into the fat of his eye under the lower eyelid: and the arrow was already hidden, and I could only extract its small end with it, with which it adheres to its reed: and it was a large arrow from the arrows of the Turks, with a blunt arrowhead, in which there are no ears.
The Jew was therefore healed, and no harm came to his eye.
And I removed an arrow from the throat of a Christian.
It was an Arabic arrow, and it has ears. I therefore cut it off above it between two ribs: and it was already submerged in his throat. I was careful with it as I extracted it: and the Christian was healed.
And I removed an arrow from a man which had fallen into his belly: and we thought he would die from it.
After therefore thirty days had passed over him, and nothing was changed on him from his dispositions, I cut above the arrow: and I punctured it, and extracted it: and he was healed, and no harm came to him.
And I saw a man on whose back an arrow had fallen, and the wound was healed over it. After therefore it had been for seven years, the arrow came out at the root of his thigh.
I saw a woman who had an arrow pierce her womb, and the wound was healed over it, and the arrow remained inside her: and there was no change in her posture or condition, and she did not find any harm from her natural bodily functions.
I also saw a man who had an arrow pierce his face: and the wound was healed over it, and he did not find much pain from it: and there were many similar cases like this.
I also extracted an arrow from a man from the Prince's household, which had pierced him in the middle of his nose, and it had already begun to decline towards the right side a little bit: and the arrow was completely hidden.
I was therefore called for his treatment after the arrow incident for three days. I found the wound of the arrow to be quite tight.
I therefore examined it with a fine probe, and I did not feel it: but he himself found the pricking and pain under his right ear. I therefore hoped that this was the pricking from the tip of the arrow.
I therefore applied the plaster in the place where there was the power of attraction and digestion, confident that the wound would become an abscess and I would see a sign of the arrow so that I could cut it off: and nothing unexpected happened in the location to indicate that the arrow had followed the location.
I therefore applied the plaster to him daily for many days: and nothing unexpected happened, and the wound healed in between: and he remained weak from its extraction for a few days, until he felt the arrow inside his nose on a certain day. And he told me about it.
And he told me about it. I therefore placed a sharp and corrosive medicine on that wound for many days until it became open: and when I examined him again with a fine probe, I felt the tip of the arrow which was sticking to the wood.
Then I added to the opening of the wound through that sharp medicine, until the visible end of the arrow appeared to us: and it passed by me with it a certain period of time, approximately four months.
Then, after the wound had been enlarged, and it was possible for me to insert pliers into it and move it, but it did not obey and exit: then I did not cease to sharpen and ingeniously work on it with various methods of craftsmanship, until I began on a certain day with pliers made well according to the form they will have in the end of the chapter, until I extracted it. Then I restored the wound.
And indeed the doctors judge that the cartilage of the nose is not restored. Therefore I restored it, and the wound was healed and solidified, and the sick man was made healthy with complete health: and nothing at all harmed him.
And I tell you the quality of extracting certain arrows: so that you may place that rule and signification on that which I did not say.
Because the parts of this art and their distinctions are not understood with the narration: nor does that book comprehend it, and the wise craftsman compares with little over much: and with that which is present, over that which is absent: and he found a new operation and a new instrument among the descents of things extraneous to this art when they happen.
I say therefore, that arrows do not exit from the members in which they are fixed, except according to two modes. Or by attraction from the place from which it entered. Or from the opposite part.
And that which exits from where it entered is either an arrow proceeding in a fleshy place: and it is attracted and exited.
If it does not comply with the outcome from the hour in which it falls: then it is necessary to let it go for several days, until the flesh that is around it rots: and its attraction is alleviated, and its exit.
And similarly if it sticks to the bone, and does not comply with you for exit, then let it go also for several days: and repeat it with attraction and motion every day, until it exits.
If it does not comply with you for exit after days: then it is necessary to drill in the circumference of the arrow in the very bone from all parts with a fine awl, until the arrows are enlarged. Then attract it, and extract it.
But if the arrow is already hidden in a place of the body, and is concealed and hidden from sensation: then seek it with probing. But if you feel it, then attract it with some instruments that are suitable for its attraction.
If you cannot apply a bandage over the wound due to its constriction and length of the arrow in a deep place where there is no bone, nerve, or vein, then prick the wound until it expands and make it possible to remove the arrow.
If there are ears to which the arrow is attached, then free the fixed flesh from all sides and in every way you can, and if it cannot be removed from the break in the ear and their twisting, continue until it dissolves.
And when you perform the extraction of the arrow in any place, then use the twisting of your hand with forceps to all parts until you make it dissolve: and with subtlety, subtly, so that the arrow is not broken and it becomes difficult for you to attract it and its removal.
If you cannot apply it in one hour, then leave it for several days until the surrounding parts decay. Then repeat it: for the tunica will be healed if it causes contradiction to you of blood flow, then administer what we said from the cure in its chapter: and guard your virtue from incision of vein, or nerve, or chord.
And administer your ingenuity in every way that is possible for you to dissolve the arrow: and it should be with ease, tranquility, slowness, and firmness, as I told you.
And it is necessary that you do when you pull the arrow, that it be weak according to its figure, as it was at the accident of the arrow in itself. Because it is more beneficial. If it is not possible for you to do that, then administer what is possible from the figures.
The arrow that exits from the opposite part, or has already begun to protrude from it, does something to the exterior: either it causes a bony prominence at the tip of the arrow due to the proximity of the upper layer of skin, which you see sticking out; therefore, cut it off and make the incision according to the amount that the forceps can grasp in it.
Then pull it out: indeed, it becomes easy to extract.
If indeed it is retained in the bone, then twist your hand according to its roundness until the arrow is impressed into the bone and expands itself: then pull it out.
And if not: leave it for several days; then repeat it, until it exits.
If the shaft of the arrow is in it, then push it with that.
But if the shaft has fallen off, and you wish to administer an impulse: then insert a concave instrument into it, so that its concavity enters into the tail of the arrow: then push it with it.
But if the arrow is concave, then push it with the inserted instrument. For indeed, the arrow is relieved by that.
But if the arrow is poisoned, then it is necessary, that you concave the entire flesh in which the poison is: if it is possible for you to do that. Then care for it with what is suitable for that.
But if the arrow is falling into the chest, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the side: and it is close to that which you touch with the tent, and it is possible for you to cut above it: then cut, and beware of the incision of the vein, or nerve, and extract it.
Then tend to his wound, if you see it, and care for it until it heals.
And this is the shape of forceps, by which arrows are extracted.
Let their ends be similar to the beak of a bird, which are made like iron; when they grasp the arrow, they do not let it go.
And many shapes are made from them, large and small, and medium-sized, according to the size of the arrow, its length, and the depth and width of the wound, and its contraction.
The shape of the pusher is concave.
And the shape of the pusher is dull.
This is the dull end of the pusher like a radius, so that its entrance into the concave arrow is eased, and it is pushed with it.
On bloodletting from veins.
The veins to be bloodlet from, which have become accustomed to the body, are thirty.
Of which there are sixteen in the head: two pulsatile veins that are behind the ears, called the "herbs": and two arteries, which are visible in two temples: and two veins that are in the two lacrimal ducts of both eyes, which are called "aspiring": and a prepared vein in the middle of the forehead: and a vein at the end of the nose. And two jugular veins, which are in the neck. And two veins that are in the upper lip of the mouth. And two veins that are in the lower lip. These are veins that are called Al-Jichir. And there are two veins that are under the tongue.
However, the veins that are being bled in the arms, there are five veins in each arm.
One of them is called the Cephalic vein, and it is on the lateral side of the arm; and the people call it the head vein. And the Dark one. And there is a Medium vein, and it is composed of the branch of the Basilica vein, and the branch of the Cephalic vein; and the people call it the body vein. And the Basilica vein, and it is placed on the inner side of the arm; and it is also called the Titillacarus. And the people call it the abdominal vein. And the Cord of the arm, and it is placed on the forearm; and it is the one in which bleeding is done, and it is the one that appears above the thumb with a clear palm.
And the Salivate vein: and it is a vein that is between the ring finger and the little finger; and there are two branches to it.
And in the leg and in the foot, there are three veins. One of them is the one that is under the curvature of the thumb on the lateral side. And the second is the Saphena: and its location is next to the heel on the inner side. And the vein Nesse: and its location is next to the heel on the lateral side.
And in the leg, there are other three veins similar to those.
§ On bleeding from two veins after the ears.
Indeed, the bleeding of two veins that are after the ears is a remedy for ancient catarrhs, and hemicrania, and sahafati, and old head sores.
The quality of bloodletting, as I mentioned earlier, is as follows. And it is to be done by cutting the head of the sick person: and the back of his head is to be rubbed with a rough cloth in the place of two veins, with good friction. Then the sick person ties his neck with a ligature, until two veins appear. And their locations are behind the ears in two depressed places of the head. Therefore, seek them with your finger, and where you feel them pulsating under your finger, there mark them with cauterization.
Then take the phlebotomy knife, and it is called "Incidens". Then insert it under the vein into the skin, until the phlebotomist reaches the bone. Then elevate your hand with the vein and skin towards the upper part, and cut the vein with the skin incision "Incidens". And let the length of the incision be the width of two fingers, or about that: and let out as much blood as you wish.
Then tie it with bandages, and let it go, until he is healed.
And it has already preceded at the beginning of the book, its incision and cauterization.
Of the two arteries which are in two times of bloodletting, the remedy is for the ancient hemigrape: and a bad salt, and an abundant suppurant: and the course of superfluous sharp fluids to the eyes.
And the quality of bloodletting them is as follows, as I told you. The sick person ties his neck very tightly, until two veins appear clearly to the sense: and the pulse of them is shown under your finger. Then, indeed, with cauterization.
Then, you should lift the skin above the vein towards the upper part with your index finger, and insert a phlebotomy needle from below, and lift the vein towards the upper part. And cut it, as you did in the other two veins: and make it bleed according to the amount of your need.
Then, dissolve the tightness of the weak [vein], and place your finger on the vein for one hour. Then, place a cloth and lint on it, and tie it above with a strong compression: and let it go, until it is healed.
And the memory of them, their cutting, and their extraction have already been mentioned at the beginning of this book.
The purpose of bleeding the front vein after bleeding from the cephalic vein is for old face ailments: and for hemicrania, and redness: and foul sores.
And the quality of its bleeding is, as I tell you. Tie the weak [vein] with a thread, until the vein appears. Then, take the tool called the fossorium.
Place the sharp point that is on the head of the fossorium above the vein, and strike it with a plectrum, or with another tool in its manner: and let the blood run according to the amount you wish. Then, dissolve the puncture of the weak [vein], and tie it, until it is healed.
And sometimes it opens with a wide phlebotomy needle. However, it is not necessary for a phlebotomist to have sharp extremities, like other phlebotomists, but rather broad extremities. And the phlebotomist should perform it according to the transfusion: for the mouth is near, and perhaps the phlebotomist may be broken in it when he is thin.
However, the bloodletting from two veins that are in two lacrimal arteries of both eyes is for eye pain and redness, and swelling in the eye, and facial aches.
And the quality of their bloodletting is that it tightens the weak neck with a rope. Then the phlebotomist performs it, and you should be standing over his head.
And let the bloodletting be performed according to the transfusion, for a short distance, with a thin phlebotomist, broadly, for there is no flesh in that place. For if the phlebotomist is thin of extremities, perhaps he is broken.
Then let him run from the blood as much as is necessary for you. And place a bandage on them, and tighten them at night one time, and loosen them.
However, bloodletting from the nasal veins is for conferring to acute fever, and violent sweating, and facial aches, such as hemicrania, and redness that occurs in the face: especially when it is old.
And the quality of its bloodletting is that it tightens the weak neck. Then hold his nose with your left hand, and take a thin phlebotomist, long: and fix him in the middle of the rabbit's, between what distinguishes his nose according to straightness. Because the wound does not appear to the senses there, and because the blood begins to flow immediately.
And it is necessary for you to place your last hand with the bloodletting instrument for a short time: and make the blood flow according to your need. Then bind it up at one night. Indeed, it is restored quickly.
Indeed, the two bloodlettings of the fingers are a remedy for the constriction of breathing, and the onset of leprosy, and melancholic ailments, and impetigo and bad wounds, and corroding, that is, herpes.
And the quality of their bloodletting is that the weak person should be bound under both with a bandage: and the artist should stand over the head of the sick person, and the sick person should be sitting on a seat.
Then bloodletting of the vein to the length of wide bloodletting for a short time. Then extract from the blood an amount that is temperate, or according to what you see from the need that is for that. Then do likewise with another vein.
Then unbind the bandage, and bind two veins with a middle binding: so that the weak person is not exposed. And let it go until morning. For indeed, the wound is healed.
¶ On the bloodletting of the veins of Albucasis. But the bloodletting of Albucasis' veins is a remedy: because it brings to alcola in the mouth, and corruption of the gingiva: and bad wounds: and fissures of the lips, and bad wounds, even those that are in the nose, and around it.
The quality of bloodletting for them is that you should make the sick person sit in front of you: and tie a tourniquet around their neck. Then roll their lip, and look at the two veins: one of which is on the right side of their lip, and the other on the left: and the demonstration of each is by the darkness of both. And this is true: because among them are small veins, black. Therefore cut both with an incision entering.
But if doubt is upon you, and you do not know which of them is: then direct to the incision of the larger ones, and their more manifest.
And similarly do to the two veins that are on the upper lip: and most of all custom goes with it: and cut the two veins that are on the lower lip.
§ On bloodletting of Vein under the tongue after Cephalic bloodletting. Of the two veins that are under the tongue bloodletting is a remedy: because Cephalic bloodletting is for prevention of those which are in the throat, and pain of the throat, and pains of the mouth.
And the quality of bloodletting them is that the sick person should sit between your hands in front of the sun: and elevate their tongue, and look under the tongue from one side a vein, and from the other side a vein: and the color of each declining to blackness.
Therefore bloodlet both: and guard, that your last hand in bloodletting them. For under them are arteries, and perhaps it may happen flow of blood from those arteries.
Three veins are tapped for bloodletting in the arm, and this practice has become customary in all people.
And bloodletting from these is done in two ways. Either by pricking with a broad-bladed myrtle knife: or by oiliness to the subtlety of the incline: or by cutting with a scalpel knife, and it is called Alnesil. And this is its form.
And from these are species broad and subtle according to the width and tightness of the veins. The form of the myrtle knife is broad, as you see. And it suits for opening deep, full, protruding, visible, thick veins, and those that contain thick, turbid blood.
And this knife is of less width and more subtle at the tip.
And it suits for bloodletting from thin veins that contain thin, yellowish blood.
The basilica, which is one of these three veins' jewel, is a treasure. Because it draws blood from illnesses that are under the throat and neck, from the chest and belly, and because the bloodletting follows it, therefore the bloodletter with this knife should be careful and have great fear of it, for under it is an artery. Therefore if he errs and adds to the bloodletting puncture, he will cut that artery, and a blood loss will occur. Therefore it is necessary not to bloodlet with this knife when pricking, but rather to cut with Alnesil.
If the Basilica does not appear clearly in an apparition, then you should exchange it with another, or seek out a branch of it: or perform bloodletting at the place of the arm's cord. For indeed it is clear, and dry it with a leech (phlebotomo Anesil), as we have said.
But if you wish to perform bloodletting on it, then you should do so before the stricture of the arm, touching the place until you know the place of the pulse. Then mark the place with a hot iron, then the arm, and dry the vein by hollow cutting with a leech (phlebotomo Alnesil), as we have said. And beware that the blow does not fall over the distance from the place of the artery.
And when you see, when you tie the bandage, swelling in the place that you marked with a hot iron, then that swelling is the swelling of the artery: therefore remove it.
If you see blood coming out at the bloodletting, like the urine of a child, and it is thin and red blood, then you know that it is from the artery's blood. Then therefore hurry, and place your finger on it for a long distance, then remove your finger. If therefore the blood is cut off (for often it is cut off), then tie the arm, and let it go: and beware that the weak one is not moved from its motion: and let it be on its fear.
And do not move it for several days until it is healed.
But if the blood does not cut off, and it binds you: and there is no medicine present for you in your moment, then cut the artery, if it appears to you. The extremities of it contract, and the blood is cut off.
Or take the horn of a rhinoceros, and pierce it: take half of it, and bind it over the place of the vein's binding, with a bandage and cotton until another day.
Then if the blood is cut off, it is good. And if not: then care for it with the one who preceded its remembrance from the place of dust removing the flow of blood: and the cutting off of his blood is not difficult in many positions, because of the small wound's place, and the possibility of a bandage from the arm.
However, the fistula for the vein's phlebotomy is a tool that draws blood from the upper part of the head and the lower body: because it is composed of the branch of the Basilicus, and the branch of the Cephalic, as we said.
And it is fitting for the phlebotomist that it be above fear from its phlebotomy, because under it is a nerve. If therefore he adds in the puncture of the phlebotomist, and finds a nerve, it happens to her stupor, and difficult is its healing, and perhaps she is not healed completely.
And this nerve often appears to the sense. But if it is hidden in some people, and is subtle, and does not show: then it is necessary that you place your phlebotomy where the phlebotomy, section with Alnesil, and separation of the nerve with your strength.
If the vein is between two nerves, then pierce the vein in length.
The translation of "De uena Cephalican" from medieval Latin is "On the Central Incisor Tooth. The translation of "Phlebotomiae autem uena Cephalicae iuuamentum est, quia attrahit sanguinem ex capite, et confert ad aegritudines oculorum" from medieval Latin is "The central incisor tooth is a remedy for phlebotomy, as it draws blood from the head and is useful for eye ailments.
The translation of "Et oportet in hac uena proprie, si uis, ut phlebotomes eam pungendo cum phlebotomo oliuari, aut cum phlebotomo myrtino: quoniam est saluior uenarum omnium, quoniam non est subea arteria, neque neruus" from medieval Latin is "It is proper to use this tooth for phlebotomy by pricking it with a lancet or a myrtle needle, as it is safer than all other teeth because there is no artery or nerve beneath it.
The translation of "Verumtamen conuenit tibi apud phlebotomiam, ut deuites cum phlebotomo caput lacerti tantum, et quaeras locum leniorem: et non nocet ei, si non inuenitur cum percussione prima, ut iteretur super eam cum phlebotomia aliquotiens" from medieval Latin is "However, it is proper for you to use a lancet to prick the tail of a lizard during phlebotomy and search for a softer spot, and it does not harm it if it is not found with the first blow, but can be repeated with phlebotomy several times.
The translation of "Verumtamen fortasse apostematur in quibusdam hominibus quando non phlebotomatur in percussione prima, sed non nocet ei illud apostema in aliquo" from medieval Latin is "However, it may abscess in some people when it is not pricked with the first blow, but it does not harm them with that abscess somewhere else.
The translation of "¶ De utilitate Phlebotomiae, et cautelis in ea obseruandis" from medieval Latin is "On the Usefulness of Phlebotomy and Precautions to be Observed in It. The translation of "Qualitas autem Phlebotomiae, et accidentia eius ex ea, in cuius rectificatione oportet te cogitare" from medieval Latin is "The nature and accidents of phlebotomy, and how to correct them, is what you should think about.
Firstly, you should know that bloodletting is not administered unless for the preservation of health and its continuity, and as a precaution against the onset of illnesses.
And so that bloodletting can be performed on one of the three veins in the elbow, namely the Cephalic, Fusca, and Basilica. And so that bloodletting can be performed at the beginning of spring on a fasting day, in the summer, and in the winter: and in the autumn and winter after eating, when the signs of repletion appear.
And bloodletting should be performed on the first or third day after three hours have passed since the previous day.
However, bloodletting that is administered during illnesses does not have a determined time: but when the appropriateness and necessity for it arise at night or during the day, and at every hour, and at all times.
And it is not appropriate for children to undergo bloodletting until they reach the age of fourteen. Nor should a pregnant woman undergo bloodletting except from the fourth month until the seventh. And elders who have already passed sixty years of age should not undergo bloodletting.
Therefore, when someone wants to undergo bloodletting for any reason at all, it is necessary for them to cleanse their intestines beforehand with a mild enema if there is much feces retained in them: so that the veins during bloodletting do not draw out superfluous putrid substances harmful to the principal members.
And the person who is suffering from toctina, that is, a nauseous feeling of fullness, nor the overfed, nor one avoiding drunkenness, until that is removed from them. Nor with one who is weak due to hydrocephalus.
And bleeding should be avoided again after colic pain, vomiting, diarrhea, frequent intercourse, labor, exercise, and vigils, and fasting, and everything that dissolves strength from the body or the animal.
Then consider the subtlety of humors before that, if blood is thick with food and drinks, and medicines: if it is possible for him to have that.
Then he should enter the bath, if nothing prohibits him: or he should be exercised with some exercise, so that the blood is thinned.
And place bleeding of his in the chest, around the third day, as we said: and try, that his chest is emptied on that day from all animal misfortunes: such as distress, anger, and fear: and from all bodily accidents, such as labor, and punishment, and superfluity, and the like.
And let his seat be present with those things of which custom has run from usage of men from aromatics, and perfume, and dancing and the like by quantity of possibility.
Then the bleeder should sit on a bed, which is higher than the bed of the bleeding: then he should draw his arm, and rub it with his hand twice or three times. Then he should tie the ligament with a bandage, and cover it twice.
And let the bandage be tempered, because when the bandage is unequal, or by superfluity in the bandage, then it prevents the course of blood: or in mollification, then also prevents the course of blood.
Then after bandaging, it is necessary that the bleeder should rub his hands simultaneously on him until the veins swell and disappear from sensation.
Then the bleeder washes off the cupping glass with a little oil, as is proper.
Then he places his finger, the index finger of his left hand, on the vein under the spot where he wants to perform the cupping, not too much: so that the vein does not escape, and the blow is contained. For from the veins is what you find as a string escaping at cupping: and from them is what is full of puffiness: and when you place the cup on it, it contracts under the cup, and deceives the bleeder, and does not open the vein: and if it opens it, it is tight: for this reason therefore it is necessary that the bleeder be firm, and be careful in all these things.
Then he should remove the cup. If therefore the vein is opened from one strike, then it is good. And if not, then repeat that stroke at another spot under that place not too much, or above it with haste: if the place does not become inflamed.
But if it becomes inflamed, or the weak person swells, then let him go on the day, or on two days: and do not bind the bandage. For perhaps the inflammation will attract hot. And he should not enter the bath.
Then he should repeat cupping, if he wishes.
But if the opening is small, or the blood flows thinly: and you fear that not enough quantity of blood will come out as you wish: then repeat cupping in the same hole according to straightness, and add a little in the operation.
And do that with haste, before the place becomes inflamed, for an inflamed place is in many people at small operations.
If you see that it is already suppurating, then you should not touch it at all, for nothing excuses it in your presence. And place something on it from the oil dregs, as it will soothe the course of the blood. And it is better in this place than the oil itself, and than the other oil.
Similarly, administer the oil dregs in all your bloodletting, where the bleeding is prohibited from the course of the blood: and they make it the Tyrian balm, and sagzenea, when placed on one of them on the spot.
For the blood is thinned and dissolved when it is thick.
But if an abscess occurs in the place of bloodletting, for it often happens, especially to those who are not bloodlet from that time, or is a small opening of the vein, then hurry and place on the spot a sponge soaked in water and salt, warmed slightly: and tie it for an hour: for it will dissolve.
And you should do this after the blood has exited from the vein itself, with its own supplement, or from another vein.
But if something remains in the place after a few days of blackness or greenness, it does not harm that: and if you wish, place on it something aloe, or myrrh solubles: or something from the mint juice, that is, calamint or similar.
But often indeed abscesses and swellings occur at bloodletting of the Basilica.
Then place your hand on it, then if you find softness at the compression of your hand on it, then that swelling is bad. Therefore, take something from what we said and place it on it. For perhaps the blood flows from that of the artery.
But apply a plaster to it with what has stopping power, so that the wound may harden. Then care for that itself with the other cure, until it is healed.
And it is necessary, to extract all blood from every man according to the quantity of its virtue. And what appears from the color staining the blood.
For if the blood is black, then let it go out, until it becomes red: and similarly if you see it is thick, then let it go out, until it becomes thin: and similarly if it is sharp, then let it be removed, until its sharpness is taken away.
And it is necessary for him who is full, strong, and needs extraction of blood once, so that the phlebotomy of the vein may be increased, and he may be a side-bleeder: and in him who is weak, let it be the opposite of that.
And it is necessary, that he may extract it at intervals, and that there be a narrow opening: and better what is administered in the phlebotomy of the vein is, that it be transverse section, not puncture.
And this method of phlebotomy is safe from the flow of blood, and from the incision of the nerve: and it is more praiseworthy, and safer than phlebotomy by width and length.
And to whom it is customary to arrive at phlebotomy with syncopes, it is necessary that he may eat before the phlebotomy, a little bread soaked in water of pomegranate: or secanibin, if he is heated: and extract from him from the blood in three intervals, or four.
And if he is of a cold complexion, then let him take before the phlebotomy bread soaked in syrup of myrrh, or in syrup of honey flavored with species, or in aromatic syrup fragrant.
If it happens that a syncope occurs during phlebotomy, and the cause is multiple exits of blood, then it is necessary for him to take water of flesh and fragrant syrup: and to use aromatics with algalia, and to bind his chest with that: and to use the other things that we mentioned in the division in the chapter on syncope from evacuation.
However, if one wants to heal his arm and dissolve his blood secondly: then it is necessary for him whose phlebotomy is for much evacuation, and whose virtue is weak, that he dissolves the blood gradually through the quantity of virtue in continuous days.
However, if one wants to heal his arm and dissolve his blood secondly, and his body is strong: then he should do it after seven hours, or nine from his first phlebotomy.
However, if one wants to draw blood from his body to the opposite part of which he leans: then it is necessary for him to heal on the second or third day.
In whose body indeed the blood is already much heated, and sharpened, and makes fever to happen: then it is necessary for him that the blood goes out from him in one draft, and a large quantity is taken from him: and the opening is amplified until it happens syncope: after you have been saving all the conditions of phlebotomy: and that you place your hand on the bleeding at the course of the blood, so that death does not happen in the place of syncope. For often it happens when the phlebotomist is unaware, and negligence falls.
And it is not necessary when one wants to heal the arm, and dissolve the blood secondly, since already the opening of the vein is closed, and difficult exit of the blood is made, that it be hastily put on top of him with force, and the cure be extended quickly. For that is a great evil, but let it go until it is bled again in the second place.
Or remove with sharpness of the bleeding instrument that which has coagulated from blood in the vein's opening, and place on it something salted in water. And place on it something from the Tyrian alfarech, or sagzenia, and place it with gentle compression until the blood comes out.
But if indeed the vein has already become an abscess, then let it go, and do not bandage it until the abscess is formed.
But if necessity provokes to dissolve blood again in the second place, and there is no excuse, then either by bleeding instrument on that place, or in another arm in another vein.
But the arm's vein is bled at the place of the Fusca, and the Basilica, since they are not found, and are hidden, because it is composed of them.
And the quality of its bleeding is that the weak hand inserts itself in hot water, until it reddens easily, and the vein appears clearly.
Then it is bandaged over it with a bandage of moderate compression. Then the bleeding instrument is passed according to transudation gradually, not horizontally, nor according to length: and let the opening be wide, and let your bleeding be on the junction of the hand for a moment.
But if the exit of blood is forbidden, then repeat the hand in hot water, and let the blood run in the water, until you achieve your necessity.
But if you are in days of summer, then you will be excused from repetition of the hand in hot water. Indeed, the course of blood is particularly emphasized in warm water during wintertime.
And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than all other veins, as there is no pulsating vessel nor nerve under it.
In fact, the phlebotomy of the left hand's palm is beneficial for liver ailments.
And the quality of this phlebotomy is such that you should tie the arm with a bandage or your hand, after you have inserted it into warm water, until the vein is punctured and a significant sensation is felt. Then, the phlebotomy should be continued by turning the arm. And if you completely puncture it, it will not harm it in any way.
And do not save, but with your last hand and the phlebotomy. For under it are the nerves of the fingers exposed from the flesh.
Then repeat the hand to warm water, and let the blood flow in it. For if you do not repeat it in warm water, the blood will coagulate in the vein opening and prevent its flow.
When therefore you have extracted a quantity of blood necessary from the vein, then place oil and salt on it: so that it does not coagulate quickly.
And similarly, it is necessary to do with every tightly bound branch.
The remedy of this phlebotomy from the left hand is: because it is beneficial for spleen ailments; and similarly do in its phlebotomy, as you did in the second equally.
The remedy of the saphenous phlebotomy is for ailments that are in the lower part of the body, such as uterine ailments, retention of menstrual flow, and kidney weaknesses, and ancient ulcers of the hip and thigh, and similar ailments from ailments.
The quality of the phlebotomy is that the sick person should put his foot in warm water and perform friction on it until the veins are full, and then tie above the joint of the foot with a bandage. Indeed, the veins are located near the heel, facing the big toe, and branch out from there into many branches in the face of the foot.
Therefore, perform phlebotomy on a larger branch of it or near the heel in its collection, as it is better and safer.
If phlebotomy is performed on the face of the foot, then be careful of the nerves that are under it on the face of the foot.
And place your phlebotomy where the phlebotomy is from the transverse, as if you wanted to cut it: and let the phlebotomy be Nesil.
But if the outlet of the blood is forbidden, then repeat friction on his foot in warm water: and let the blood run into it until it is evacuated.
If the vein is missed by the phlebotomist in the first attempt, then repeat with phlebotomy to the upper part, for the place is safe, and you do not fear harm from it when you are careful of the nerves, as we said.
And similarly with the other Saphena of the foot equally.
But the veins of the Sciatic are, as we said, located near the heel on the lateral side.
And the indication for phlebotomy of it is for pain in the ankle, when it is due to hot blood.
And the quality of phlebotomy is that the sick person should enter the bath quickly and firmly, and bind his leg from the side of the ankle up to above the heel with four fingers, with a thin strip of cloth: for it does not appear otherwise than because of this.
When it is visible, then the lancet should be used according to whatever skill is possible for you, or according to transversion: and it is better, either by incising it with an incision, or by separating it with a section. For its place is safer, and it is hidden to a great extent in many people.
For its place is safer, and it is hidden to a great extent in many people. If you do not find it and it is not at all visible to the senses: then the lancet should be used on some part of it, and that is the one which appears in the back of the foot, and towards the auricular: and beware of the nerves, and make it bleed from the quantity of blood that you wish.
Then dissolve the constriction, and place the skin on the place of lancetting, and tie the place. For it is healed quickly.
Concerning ventilation, and the quality of its use.
Ventilations are made from horns, and from air, and from glass.
And ventilation is indeed done in two ways. With incision, and extraction of blood: and the other is ventilation without incision.
And this ventilation which is without incision, is according to two ways. For indeed it is with fire. Or it is without fire.
And the ventilations which are administered with incision and extraction of blood, are fourteen places of the body. Of which one is the ventilation of Alnocrati, and it is the last of the head: and Alkehel, and it is in the middle of the neck: and the ventilations of Alhagdahim, and they are two layers of the neck from two parts at the same time: and the ventilation of the mouth, and it is under the jaw in the lower part of the mouth: and the ventilation of the two spatulas: and the ventilation of the Alachosos on the end of the tail: and the ventilation of the two focilium, and they are in the middle of the two arms: and the ventilation of the two crura: and the ventilation of the two cauillarum.
Indeed, suction (ventosatio) does not draw blood from your wounds, which are scattered in the flesh, and for this reason, its power does not diminish, unlike the case of phlebotomy. It is not necessary to apply suction (ventosatio) whether with or without fire in any ailment that arises from overfullness, until the entire body is evacuated.
If necessity arises from an ailment or custom to apply suction (ventosatio), we administer it at every hour of the first day of the month, at its end, and in the middle of it, and at whatever time it may be.
Because there are people who when their blood multiplies within them, until they need its extraction through suction (ventosatio), find in their head heaviness and sores.
And from them is found overfullness and redness in their face, on their head, and on their neck. And from them is found itching in their face, and on their forehead, and darkness, and dullness in their eyes.
And from them is found sweating at the place of their suction (ventosatio). And from him is found increased laughter. And from them is found a taste of blood in their mouth: or their tongue swells and discharges blood. And from him is found increased sleep. And from them is seen in their sleep blood and redness, and killed, and wounds, and things similar to those.
When therefore we see something from them, and it is properly in the middle of the third month: we command then that suction (ventosatio) be done after they have passed two or three hours past midday.
The remedy for ventosation of the neck is: since it contributes to heaviness in the head, and what is poured out affects the eyes. Indeed, it should be done after complete evacuation of the entire body.
This is indeed the place for cephalic phlebotomy.
And it is not allowed to use this for those who have a cold constitution, or in one who has a catarrh. For it causes them great harm.
And therefore, it is not appropriate for the elderly, and those in whose head there are cold complaints.
But he who becomes too accustomed to it, develops a forgetfulness upon him.
And therefore, you should advise the ventosator to put his hand with the ventosa briefly on the lower parts, fearing from the generation of forgetfulness.
Ventosation or alcohol, is the place for phlebotomy of the femoral vein, and phlebotomy of the basilic vein, and because of this it causes asphyxia, and constriction of breathing, and tearing of the instrument of breathing, and coughing, and repletion.
And it should be applied briefly, because if it is placed lower, it causes weakness in the heart and stomach.
Ventosation of alhagdahim indeed, causes pain from accidental headaches, and obtalmiae, and hemigraneae, and perforation, and pain in the roots of the teeth: and it is the place for phlebotomy of the basilic vein.
And you should advise the ventosator not to press his hand on the scarification: so that he does not puncture the artery, and cause bleeding.
Ventilation under the chin, applies alcohol to the mouth, and prevents corruption of the jaw and similar afflictions that occur in the mouth: and it is a suitable place for bleeding, which are in the two lips.
Ventilation of the spoons, applies to alcohol, which is made by folding and heating.
Indeed, ventilation of the inner parts of the two arms, applies to the bandage of bleeding from the three veins, Basilicae, Fuscae, and Cephalicae: because it attracts blood from all the small veins that are in the flesh: and the small veins attract from other larger veins until the attraction reaches the three veins.
And it is necessary to command the Ventosator not to proceed too far in incision: because the place is denuded of flesh, and under it are nerves and arteries.
The Ventosator that ventilates on the spoons, applies to hemorrhoids of the anus and lower ulcers.
And it is necessary to command the Ventosator that it be large and made of air: because the place requires strong suction, and perhaps the thin Ventosae are broken: and incision is made with a large incision.
The Ventosae of the legs reduce manifest diminution: because they attract blood from the whole body, and apply to old pains in the kidneys, and matrices, and bladder: they provoke menstruation, and apply to bothor, and ademenul: and they stand in the place of bleeding from the two saphenar veins, and alhorcobeni.
However, they weaken the body a lot, and cause syncope to occur in many people.
And the joint of the thigh is close to the joint of two legs.
The position of the thigh is such that you should place the thigh in a first vacuum and with controlled suction: and do not prolong the position of the thighs, but place them quickly and remove them quickly, so that the humors come to the place with equal approach: and do not cease to repeat this and continue until you see the place already red and inflated, and the appearance of blood redness: then therefore scarify, and repeat suction gradually. Then consider the position of the bodies.
For who is of the men is of tender flesh, rarely porously, it is necessary that you scarify him once, not more: so that the place does not hurt.
And command the thigh to enlarge the scarification and to penetrate slightly: and regulate suction in facility, speed, and gentle movement.
If there is a swelling in the blood, then it is necessary that you scarify him twice. In the first juice indeed opens the narrow way of the subtlety of blood and its humidity: and in the second indeed the exact investigation of the extraction of thick blood.
If indeed the blood is very foul, then a third scarification should be made: so that it follows the last.
And at last, when we want to extract blood gradually or slightly, one scarification is enough for us. If indeed we want the extraction of blood many times, we should scarify with many scarifications.
And if we measure that the blood is thick: then it is necessary that he be scarified with a deep scarification: and the equal end in the scarification is the depth of the skin.
What is that which should be administered from oils at the position of the Winds, and what should the one winding up avoid?
Indeed, if the skin is rough, hard, dark, and its pores are narrow, one should anoint the areas of the Winds with open, gentle, and resolving oils at the position of the Winds: if it is in the time of summer, as is the oil of aleppo, or the violated oil, or the oil of sweet apricot kernels, or the oil of cucurbita seed.
And if it is in the time of winter, then the oil of narcissus, or the oil of lily, or the oil of camaelle, or sarbatin: and similar to these.
If indeed the excess is rough and cold, then the oil should be amaracus, or the oil of balsamita, or the white oil, or the oil of aneth: and similar to these.
If indeed the one winding up is of large pores, and of tender flesh, then it should be prohibited from oil, and these should clean the areas of the Winds with rosewater, or with cold water, or with the water of solatria, or with the water of cucurbita, or with the water of portulaca: and similar to these.
But the one whose blood is of much moisture, should clean the areas of the Winds with vinegar, or with the water of myrtle and sumach: and similar to these.
But the one whose excesses are rough, should clean the areas of the Winds with old wine, or with the water of sambucus, or the decoction of aneth, or chamomile: and similar to these.
And it should be avoided that winding up is in the bath, or at the foot of the bath, but it should be administered after exiting from the bath for an hour, or for two hours.
And it is not necessary for someone to sleep after sneezing.
What is the reason why one should be bled or undergo venesection before sneezing?
And after that, it is necessary to consider first of all: if the person has been bled or undergone venesection and is choleric, then sharpness and inflammation are added to their blood: then they should take cooling remedies, such as pomegranate bark: and also with vinegar and lettuce, and soda and juniper: and similar remedies.
And they should take their food in the form of chicken eggs, and meat of young animals, and condimented foods with asafetida: and similar remedies.
And if their constitution is cold, they should take in a drink syrup of honey, or of almonds, or of juniper made from seeds: and they should take aromatic wine of medium strength, which is between old and new: and they should be advised to use little food. And they should take their food in the form of chicken eggs, and cane sugar: and small birds, that is, little birds: and young pigeons.
And it is necessary that the drink on the day of sneezing and bleeding should be more than the food: and it is necessary to give in the drink to some people at certain hours tyrian alfaroch, or medicine made from musk, that is, musk, or aleselith before sneezing: and before bleeding, or after: so that the main members are strengthened, and the blood is thinned. And it is not necessary for them to take it in a warm drink.
¶ On Sneezing without Scarrification Wounds that are not accompanied by incision, are ventosae wounds which are placed on the ear, spleen, podagra, abdomen, umbilicus, and areas of the kidneys, and the perineum: because these parts do not allow incision to be made on them.
And nothing is sought through them, except for the contact of blood from a member to a member: as we place ventosae on the breasts in illness of nasal bleeding. And we use them to drain cold ventosity from a member that has become cold and wet: as we place ventosae on the abdomen, and umbilicus. For indeed they rarefy the member, and warm it, and remove pain because they have dissolved that ventosity.
They are also placed on the kidneys when there is a stone or rock in them. For indeed by their own attractive power perhaps they open the obstruction, or remove the stone from its place.
And similarly it does when it is placed on the ear, and spleen, for draining ventosity from both of them.
And these ventosae are administered empty with incision alone. And sometimes they are administered with fire.
And sometimes they are administered full with warm water in pleurisy: and this is so that the ventosae be filled, and be large, with hot water alone, or water in which herbs have been boiled that are suitable.
The form of ventosae administered with fire.
Let the width of its mouth be two open fingers wide, according to how we have shaped it: and let its depth be half a palm: and on its side in a place that is roughly in the middle of it, there should be a small hole, according to the size that the needle goes through: let it be made of air, or yellow wax, of rough edges, of linen, of equal thickness, of cleansed: so that it does not harm the member at its position on top of it: and let there be in the middle of it a transverse rod of air, or iron, where the candle is placed with fire.
And now this sponge becomes very large and much larger than we have described, and somewhat smaller than the previous one, according to the illness and age of the person who uses it.
For boys and thin people, there are other sponges that are not as large as those for men and people with larger bodies.
The quality of placing this large sponge on the burnt member with fire is as follows: one should light the linen cloth with fire in a decent manner, or a small candle made of clay: and place it on the middle of the twisted rope that is in the middle of the sponge, so that the fire may be placed around the lower part of the sponge, so as not to burn the body of the weak.
Then place it on the member: and the finger should be on the hole that I said, until we hold the sponge: while we need it, we remove the finger, and steam comes out of that hole, and the sponge dissolves immediately.
Then light the linen cloth according to its usual manner, and repeat it if you need it.
In the sponge that is administered in the illness of pleurisy with water, there is no twisted rope, nor hole: and it is not administered unless because the water is full, and it is placed on the member only.
And this is its shape.
And this sponge, the larger it is, the better it is to hold much water.
¶ On the suspension of Bloodletting Cups.
Bloodletting cups are not administered in many places, unless in those where it is impossible to place the sponges, due to their size, such as the lip, and the jaw, and similar things. Or in the member bare of flesh, such as the finger, and the nose, and similar things.
And the quality of using them is: that you go from bloodsuckers which are in sweet waters, clean from corruption.
Then they should be released day and night into sweet water, until the bloodsuckers are hungry, and nothing remains in their belly. Then the body will be purified first with bloodletting, and with vomiting. Then wipe the weak member until it reddens. Afterwards they will be placed on top of it.
When they are full and fall, and it is possible to suck the location with vomiting, then it is more final in the cure: and if not, then wash the place with vinegar. Then with much water, and rub, and express.
If the course of blood extends after the death of bloodsuckers, and it is that dripping: then pour linen cloth into cold water, and place it on top, until the dripping is cut off.
If the blood increases, then powder on top of it sage leaves crushed, or galbanum, and similar things from stoptics: until the blood is cut off.
Or they will be placed on top of the location of half-peeled beans: and they will be released, until the beans stick in the place, because the blood is cut off.
And it is necessary if it is necessary to repeat the bloodsuckers, when it is possible, to change them.
But if bloodsuckers are prevented from hanging, then wash the place with fresh blood. Or fix a needle in the places, until something comes out of the blood. Then they will be placed, because when they feel something from the blood, they stick immediately.
When you wish for them to fall out, sprinkle powder on them from a crushed aloe, or salt, or ash: and they will fall out immediately.
This chapter is also often necessary in the art of medicine, and it is the restoration of fractures and dislocations that occur in bones.
Know, O children, that foolish physicians and the common people, and those who have never examined the ancient book nor read a letter from it, boast about this chapter.
And for this reason, this method is deprived of our knowledge on earth. And I have never boasted in it at all, and I have not obtained from it that which I have obtained unless for the length of reading ancient books and the study beyond understanding them until I extracted the knowledge of it from them.
Then I adhered to it by experience and study throughout the length of my life.
And now I have described to you in this chapter all that it contains of my knowledge: and after my experience passed over it, after I abbreviated it for you, and freed it from the burden of length, and abbreviated it at the end of abbreviation, and showed it at the end of declination: and I formed many forms in it from the forms of instruments that are administered in it, since it is from the addition of declination, just as I did in two preceding chapters.
Chapter II.
In the prologue of this chapter, we must say some basic words and headings that require understanding in order to reach the truth of these matters: namely, so that you and those who are ready know, or learn, this noble art, and others from us.
I say therefore that when a fracture, or dislocation, or twist, or accident happens to someone: then it is necessary to proceed first to bleeding him, and to dissolving him, or both at once: if nothing prevents, such as weakness of strength: or he is one of those who are very old, or decrepit: or it is a time of very intense heat, or very intense cold.
Then he should be content with his food, with cool spices, and meat of birds, and of sheep: and prohibit wine, and coarse meat, and to be filled with food and all food that fills the veins with blood. Until when he is secure from the hot abscess, and does not fear the flow of matter to the member: then the sick person should return to his first diet with which he was used to custom.
When therefore the broken jaw begins to be restored, then it is necessary for the sick person to be fed with nutritious food in great abundance, coarse, heavy, in which there is viscosity: such as food made from cooked wheat with water, and rice, and meat, and feet, and bellies of cattle, and eggs, and fresh fish: and thick wine, and similar to those. For this diet makes the healing of the fracture faster, and better.
And know that when bones are fractured in men who are in their first old age, and the decrepit, it is not possible for them to be continuously and consolidated according to their natural nature always, because of the dryness of their members: and they are consolidated and continued what is from them at the end of lenity, as bones of small children.
However, nature attaches something similar to glue to the fractured bone from all parts, which contains a certain thickness that adheres and binds it together, until they are gradually united and bound together again, until it comes to the end of its strength and firmness, just as it was in the beginning, until something does not prevent it from performing its functions: for this reason, it is necessary to place nourishment for the weak foods, in which there is heaviness, viscosity, and thickness, as we have said.
And you should know that the appearance of fractures is different according to the diversity of the members: for a fracture of the leg is different from a fracture of the skull, and a fracture of the ribs is different from a fracture of the backbone: and similarly, all other members are different from one another: and I come with the remembrance of all the species of fractures explained in their respective chapters distinct from one another. The species of bone fracture also vary within themselves.
Since it can be broken into a curved shape, apart from what happens to it in the form of stars. And sometimes the fracture of it is according to the length of the bone: and its splinters, that is, stars, and additions proceeding, as are in a reed when it is fitted with a knife for writing. And not proceeding: and there is a fracture with a wound and disruption in the head: and it is a small crack.
And there is a proper skill or tool for the restoration of each species, according to which the remembrance of it will come, distinct in its own places.
And from the fact that the fracture of the bone is known, there is its crookedness and its prominence: and its appearance to the senses, and its sound when you grasp it with your hand.
When there is no apparent twisting in the location, nor does a noise occur when you touch the bone with agitation, and no significant pain is found in the weak person: then there is no fracture there, but it is possible that there may be a slight crack or twist. Therefore, it is not necessary to move it with your hand and compress it entirely, but rather place something soft on it from the medicines, of which mention is made, that fits the location: then it should be bound tightly with a thin bandage.
And know that when the location is bent and torn into two, apart from what happens to it, nevertheless all part of its own is removed: then it is necessary for you to begin from your hour to rectify it, equaling it before it occurs to it a hot abscess.
But if a hot abscess occurs to it, then let it go for several days, until the abscess is quiet. Then equal it according to whatever way can be done from the alleviation and skill.
And know that the restoration of it, and its equaling, is easier than bone, in which happenings occur to it.
Then bind it, according to what comes to your memory of it.
But if the happenings are in the bone, then it is necessary to extend this member of the broken one from two parts, if the hand is, or the foot: or with your hand, if the member is small: or with two ropes, or with a rope and a hand.
And your position should be where you place the member on the equal location, according to its natural shape, until when the parts of the broken member are extended: then try to make those additions all with skill, and according to whatever way you can in their places: and beware according to your strength, so that pain does not occur to the weak person through your operation, nor injury: and try according to your strength, to apply one of two bones with its joint, according to better forms.
In that hour, you must attempt and touch it with your own hand. If therefore you see something different there, correct it, and make it even by the amount of your virtue.
And beware of strong extension and strong compression, as many fools do. For they often cause harm by their operation, a hot abscess or contraction in the limb: as we have already seen from their operations many times.
Then connect after the equalization and proper operation, the tightness of that limb, and its quiet and tranquility: and warn the weak one on it. And make him be careful, not to move it in his own hours of vigilance, and his sleep, its rotation, its agitation, and its emission, and all its movements by his last virtue. And let him be careful, that the position of the limb is not a position from which pain will follow. That is, because when he feels pain in the position of the limb, or injury: then it is necessary to change it to a different position from which he does not feel pain.
And let him be careful with it, that that position is equal, straight: so that when the limb is restored, twisting will not occur in it.
And the quality of the tightness of the broken limb is as I say.
You know that broken limbs differ in their size, and their magnitude, and their form.
Which therefore from them are small, such as the arm, and finger, and foot, and similar to them, then it is necessary to be a wrapping of soft cloth, thin. But which from them are large, such as the thigh, and leg, then it is necessary to be a wrapping of wide, hard cloth.
Because the broad ligament connects the large member and binds it from every part with equal tension, so that it does not enter it with a stain.
Then after your evacuation, place a suitable liniment on the equation after it, on the soft towel over the place of the fracture itself. Then begin to roll the ligament over the place of the fracture itself with three or four rolls, according to what the member deserves: and bind your hand a little with the ligament.
Then go with it to the upper part from the place of the fracture, and bind less than your previous binding, by which you bound the place of the fracture. Then lengthen yourself with the roll from the place of the fracture for a little, and soften the binding gradually, until you take out a great thing from the healthy place.
Then take another clean one, and roll it again over the place of the fracture with rolls. Then go with the roll to the lower part from the fracture. And your operation should be in the binding of the roll and its softening, according to what we said in the first roll above.
Then place between the rolls a soft towel or cloth with which the twisting of the fracture is equal, if there is twisting in it: and if not, you will not place anything on it.
Then roll over that other clean one. Then immediately after these well-made stars, if there is no inflation or hot abscess in the place.
But if there is inflation or abscess in it, then place on it what sits that abscess and removes the inflation: and leave it for several days. Then tie around that one star.
And the stars should be made from the flat, smooth pieces of bamboo, or from the cribbas made from pine or palm branches, or calingi: and the size of all the stars should be according to this form, and in this same shape.
However, it is necessary that the star placed on the tractus should be slightly thicker and wider than the other stars, and the length of the star should be according to what fits the member in terms of size and shape.
Then tie around the stars with another thread, according to the first tightness. Then tie over it with threads in a proper manner, as we said about the tightness: and it is that your tightness should be more above the place of the fracture: and the further it is from the fracture, the less the tightness.
And it is necessary that the threads should be of medium thickness and thinness, and they should be made of soft linen.
For if the threads are thick, as I saw from the operation of stupid people who use their own threads made from twisted linen, it is a great mistake: for the tightness falls outside of its quality with them.
And thin threads do not come together again: for you will not gather through the tightness with them what you want.
And it is not necessary that there should be less than a finger between the stars and the stars.
If the weak one is injured by the ends of the stars after the tightness in healthy places, then put under them soft wool or dyed wool until nothing is injured from it.
But when there is a fracture with a wound, and disruption in the skin occurs, I will come back to it with a remembrance of it in the chapter according to its singularity.
And know that not every broken limb should be bound with stitches from the first day. Because when a limb is large, it is not necessary to place stitches on it, unless after five days, or seven, or more, according to your caution from the occurrence of hot abscesses.
And this is the method of plasters used by ancients, which are placed on a fracture and dislocation.
¶ The common method of the plaster, restoring a fracture, suitable for many constitutions, especially women and children, because it is made of that which does not bind with heat, nor cold.
And it is that you take from the dust of the millstone, and it is the marrow of the flour which hangs in the walls of the mill by the movement of the millstone: and make it thus, except that you grind it with the husk: and place the confection of it not thick, nor thin. Then use it.
¶ Another method of the plaster, restoring a fracture, and dislocation, and twisting. Take of almess, and laudanum, and acacia, and enulae, and mugath: and suc, each ʒ X myrrhae, and both aloes ana ʒ V and alethil ʒ XX they are all ground, and sifted, and mixed with water alethil: or with the husk if the constitution of the patient is heated. Then use this plaster. For indeed it is of good composition, it restores broken bones quickly, and it binds to many people.
¶ Another method of the plaster, which also binds a fracture and twisting. Recipe for mugwort, and mess (a type of herb), and white alum, of all equal parts 10 grains of myrrh, and of both kinds of aloes 5 grains, of acacia 6 grains, of Armenian bole 20 grains. They should all be well ground together, sifted, and made into a powder with water, or with egg white: and they should be administered.
Method of applying a plaster to joinings, and separated bones from their places: and it soothes the pain caused by them, and the wound of the bone, and the fracture. Take cut wool, and immerse it in vinegar, and boiled oil: and place it on the spot.
And in this plaster there is no power of healing, but it is good for the sedation of hot abscesses: and it expels pain properly.
Method of applying a plaster to heal a broken bone. Take the leaves of a wild fig, and the leaves of a wild papyrus: and grind all of them, and make a plaster from both.
Method of applying a shortened plaster to heal a broken bone: and when you want the resolution of the remaining abscess. Recipe for the root of white alum, and chamomile, and flowers of violets, and flour of herbs, of all equal parts 1: they should all be ground together, and made into a powder with wine, if it is not a heated member.
But if indeed it is heated, then make it into a powder with water of coriander, or with water, and use it.
Another method of applying a stronger plaster for the resolution, than this first one, when an hard abscess occurs at the healing of a member. Recipe for the roots of althaea, and the seeds of linseed, and balm, and melilot, and safflower, and violets, and chamomile, of each one ounce, they should all be pounded, and then mixed with either willow water, or sweet water, or wine. All of that according to the warmth of the member, and the peacefulness of its heat.
Hippocrates indeed did not say in his book that a plaster should be placed on the broken member during its restoration, unless it is made from pitch and oil: nothing else; and he narrated that it should be between the thickness and subtlety.
Galen indeed saw that things should be placed on the broken member during its restoration, in which there is the drying of heat, such as myrrh, and aloe, and frankincense, and similar to those which we have mentioned.
The method of the plaster that brings healing and pain relief. Recipe mugwort, and chickpeas, and the hairs of a man's teeth, or the feathers of a bird, and althaea, and equal parts of salt: they should be pounded, and sieved, and made into a plaster.
However, the quantity that should be made so that it remains a bandage, then dissolved, is such that you consider at that time, if no pain does not occur to the sick person, nor itching, nor move the broken member from its place: then do not dissolve it for many days. However, if it happens to him in the place of strong itching, or painful disturbance, or inflation: then hurry, and dissolve it in the hour itself, and remove the plaster from him: and take a soft cloth, or a sea sponge, soft: and immerse it in warm water, and wash with it the place, until the itching is quieted, and the pain sits.
However, if it happens to him in the place of strong itching, or painful disturbance, or inflation: then hurry, and dissolve it in the hour itself, and remove the plaster from him: and take a soft cloth, or a sea sponge, soft: and immerse it in warm water, and wash with it the place, until the itching is quieted, and the pain sits. Then let the limb rest for one hour. Then place on it a piece of clean linen soaked in vinegar and oil, or rose oil: and bind it overnight, until you are sure that the hot abscess has been drained, and the inflation of the member has subsided, and the pain has been removed.
Then repeat this process gently and apply a small plaster: and do not bind it tightly with your first bandage, and the thin ones with it, until it is healed.
If you see that the abscess, and redness, and pain, and inflation, and all the other symptoms have been completely removed, and you need a plaster and bandage, then repeat this as you did in the first place, equally.
If none of these things happen to the member, then do not unbind it, unless after three days, or four, or five, or seven. And when you unbind it after twenty days, all of that, according to what appears to you from the solution of the member, as we said, until whenever the fracture sticks and the coagulation of the flesh on it: then also add in the bandage more than your first bandage entirely: and also add in the feeding of the sick person, according to what preceded the memory of it.
But if you see that the place of the fracture is already dry and thinned out more than necessary: then know that food is forbidden to reach it. Therefore foment it with warm water at every place where you bind it, and let it be in all three days, and relieve the bandage a little.
Through this operation, food reaches the member, and it is healed quickly.
But that which the ignorant restorers do from the fracture of the member, when it is not restored in the first place, according to what is necessary, and is restored according to its twist, is an error from their operation, and great fear: and if it were right, they would have said this in their books, and operated with it.
I have not seen any trace of that among them at all, and it is indeed better that it not be done.
On the formation of an accidental deformity on the head.
The species of fractures are diverse, and their shapes are many, and their causes are distinct.
For a fracture is that which is caused by impact with an axe: and the impact removes the entire bone until it reaches the periosteum, which is beneath the bone, just as it does in wood: and because of this, this species of fracture is called Axial.
Or the sword cuts something of the bone, and it cuts its face, and the cut does not penetrate to the end of it: and this species of fracture is called Kalán, that is, Luxation absolutely.
And there is a wound of two fractures, either large or small.
And there is a fracture that is crushing or grinding: and its cause is impact with a stone, or a fall on a stone, or similar things.
And this fracture is also penetrating, which approaches the periosteum, which is beneath the bone: or it is on the face of the bone: and this wound is of two fractures, either large or small.
And there is a fracture that is hidden in the bone in its thinness of hair: and it is a small crack, and because of this, this species of fracture is called Capillary.
And there is a fracture that is caused by an accident, or by impact with a stone, and similar things, which cause the lamina of the bone to enter its interior, and it forms a concavity in the place: just as happens to copper pots when they are hit, and part of them enters their interior.
This happens most frequently in the heads of wet bones, such as the heads of children's bones.
All these species of fractures are separate, and I will come back to the memory of all that in its place.
We know all these types of fractures by examining them, and inquiring about them with probes, and removing the rotten flesh that is on them.
The species of the capillary is known by this, that it is scraped over the bone, and cleaned, and smeared on top with cauterizer, for the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of fractures, first consider the symptoms of the infirm: then if you see from the symptoms that it clearly indicates fear, such as vomiting cholera, and extension, and loss of understanding, and loss of voice, and syncopis, and acute fever, and outflow of the eyes, and redness of them, and similar to these in many positions, certainly not healed: and if you see symptoms that do not frighten you, and you hope for salvation, then begin its treatment.
That is, if he comes to you wounded at first with the wound: and it is in the days of winter, then it is necessary that you strive for the removal of the bone on the fourteenth day according to every disposition.
And if it is in the days of summer, then it is necessary that you remove the bone before the seventh day, before what is under the bone from the cloth rots, and those symptoms occur that we have mentioned.
That if the fracture of the bone has already reached the cloth touching the brain, and is small, and attracted: then it is necessary that you cut the broken and worn part according to what I tell you.
And it is, that you should lance the wound of a head: and remove the cloth from over the mouth as much as possible for you: and according to the shape of the wound, and what is light on the weak.
If it happens to you at the detection of bone bleeding blood, or hot abscess: then place it with what is necessary. And it is, that you fill the place with infused cloths in vinegar and rose oil: and make the wound rest, until the abscess sets, and you are secure from bleeding. Then begin in the healing of the bone, and removal of it.
And that is done according to one of two ways.
One way indeed is, that you cut the bone with an Incisor with a sharp edge: and this is its form.
Another way is, that you administer another Incisor after the first one slightly wider: and this is its form.
Then also administer another Incisor even wider than the second.
And the second way is, that you have a number of different Incisors with you: some of which are wider to certain ones, and some of them shorter to certain ones: and they are in the last extreme of their sharpness, and they are from iron or steel: and use ease in percussion on the Incisor, so that it does not shake the head, and it does not hurt it.
But if the bone is strong and hard: then it is necessary, that you make holes in its circumference before you administer Incisors, with drills which are called Terebra not penetrating deep: and they are not so called unless because they do not pass beyond the end of the fleshy part to that which is after it: because the tip of the Terebro is round on top of that which is under his sharp head, like a margin, and a small circle prevents submerging and passing through the density of the bone.
And it is suitable for you to take from these drill bits a large number, each of which corresponds to the thickness and density of the bone, until you have every possible skull drill: whose sharp end length and brevity in length should correspond to the thickness and density of that skull.
And this is the form of three types of drill bits or trephines.
However, the quality of drilling around a broken bone is: that you place the drill on the bone, and rotate it with your fingers, until you know that the bone has been penetrated. Then change the drill to another location, and place what is between all the holes in the thickness of the radius, or approximately that.
Then cut with the chisel what is between all the holes from the bone: and make it as thin as possible on that from the fine end, as we said, until the roots of the bone, or by your hand, or with some other of those instruments which you have prepared for that: such as thin tenaille chisels and fine forceps.
And it is necessary to guard against all cautions, that the drill or chisel does not touch anything from those.
When therefore you are drilling around the bone and it has been separated from those, if it is continuous with that, and you have extracted it, it is necessary to cut, and equal the end of it which remains in the bone with another similar chisel. However, it should be thinner and more delicate than other chisels.
If there remains anything small from the bones and fragments: then take them with ease, with that which is at your disposal from among those instruments. Then care for the wound after that with lint and ointments which we said.
Here is another method of operation, entirely different from the previous one, which is quite distant from causing fear: this method was mentioned by Galen and highly praised by him, and this is his statement about it. It is necessary for you to begin by carefully exposing the part of the bone where the fracture is more severe and more apparent: until you have exposed that part and placed the end of this lens-shaped incisor under it, whose shape is as follows.
The lens-shaped part does not cut anything, and the sharp part of it advances on both sides of it in length, as you can see: so that the lens-shaped part is pressed against the bone, with its sharp part facing the bone.
Then strike on the incisor with a small mallet from one side until you have cut through the entire bone with ease, as it rolls: and you will be secure from any accident that you fear entirely.
And if the healer were not more foolish than other people, and less knowledgeable about it, and not asleep, then if there remained any part of the bone attached to the cloth in certain places, he would cut it off from it with the end of this lens-shaped incisor, and free it from it with ease. It is freed from it without harm, and without fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate to the cloth, and what is cut off from the bone is its face, and there remain in it roughness and fine splinters: then you must scrape off that roughness, and remove those fine splinters with small rasps of various sizes, which you prepared earlier, so that it is possible for you to administer to them in every suitable place, and to make them straighter and more suitable according to the purpose of the operation, and the fractured bone, and its shape. And it is necessary that your assistants, in the ratio of your first cutting of the root's mouth, should shave them wider than those of the other razor-makers. Then use after him with a more subtle one.
And it is necessary that your assistants, in the ratio of your first cutting of the root's mouth, should shave them wider than those of the other razor-makers. Then use after him with a more subtle one. And do not cease to do that according to continuity until you reach the administering of their thinner and more subtle ones.
And in each of the remaining cracks of the hair-like parts and the subtle fracture, it is necessary that your assistant should take care, according to that which leads to its rectification.
And there is a thing that does not hide over every one, which in this art is whatever study, and it has stood on that which we wrote and showed in the great fractures.
But if the piece of cloth is detected and retained when you eradicate the mouth: then it is necessary that you should take the linen according to the quantity of the wound, and submerge it in rose oil, and place it on the opening of the wound. Then take another linen doubled or tripled, and submerge it in wine and rose oil, and place it on the first linen: and do that as easily as you can over it, so that it does not weigh heavily on him.
Then administer above it the wide bandage: and do not tie it unless by the quantity which holds the wound only: and let it go with this care on one day or two days, until you are secure from hot abscess. Then dissolve it, and administer after it the medicines with which there is excessive dryness: such as the roots of lilies, and flour of herb, and powder of frankincense, and aristolochia, and similar to them: and it is that you should make from these medicines a powder which is powdered over the wound as they are dry.
And it is universally applied in that, it administers every medicine of its property so as to cleanse, and not to bite. And it is applied according to your virtue, so that the wound in your healing be clear: nor is there in it the dirt of ointment, nor filthiness.
And it is applied according to your virtue, so that the wound in your healing be clear: nor is there in it the dirt of ointment, nor filthiness. Nor do you dismiss the virus to gather in it at all: for when the virus gathers on the cloth of the brain, it corrupts it, and rots it, and there is a great evil after that on the weak one: and now it happens in the head, when the mouth is cleaned by it, especially when the care of it is neglected, blackness on its surface.
Therefore consider then, if such things happen to the weak one which we said, know that it is certainly harmful.
And if blackness does not happen, unless from the medicine which is placed on it, and is in the virtue of that medicine, so as to make that blackness: then it is necessary for you to take from the honey one part, from the red oil three parts, and linen with them cloth. Then place it on the head: afterwards care for it with the species of healing which come together, until it is healed.
¶ On the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Know that they are not broken from the nose except two of its upper parts at once, or one of them: because they are two bones: since below it is cartilaginous, it is not broken, and does not happen to it except wear, and twisting, and swelling.
If one of the two parts is broken, then it is necessary for you to insert your finger slightly in the nostril, and equal that fracture with your index finger, and thumb deformed, until the nose returns above its natural shape: and do this artfully, with ease. And beware, lest that pain of yours occur through your operation on the sick person.
But if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose, and your finger does not reach it, then it is necessary to equalize the end of the radius, where the swelling is small.
But if indeed the fracture is in two parts, then do the same as that: and hasten with its restoration on the first day of the fracture, if it is possible. And if not, then after the seventh or tenth day at the heat of pus-filled abscesses.
Then introduce a linen strip into the end of the nose, if the fracture is in one part: or introduce two strips if the fracture is in two parts: and let the swelling be of such quantity as to fill the nostril.
And some of the ancient restorers said that linen strips should be soaked in butter and changed every day. But that does not seem to me, rather it is necessary, that the linen strip be soaked in a white powder made with flour of moldova. Then let go of the linen strip, until the bone hardens and the cartilage becomes tough.
And sometimes a goose feather is introduced into the place of the linen strip in the nose, after it has been covered with a soft cloth: and it is made so that it holds the broken nose more strongly, and so that the sick person is not hindered from breathing.
And this matter is not necessary. If you wish, do it: and if you wish, make the linen strips.
But if it happens to the nose again while you are operating on the hot pus-filled abscess, apply nasal plasters with charcoal, or dissolved cotton in rose oil, or a little from dayquilon.
If however, a hot abscess does not occur, then it is necessary to apply a plaster made of the same with wheat flour, and a powder of turpentine, mixed with egg white. Then place a soft bandage over it, and do not bind the nose at all.
If indeed the bones of the nose are broken or crushed, then it is necessary to split them and remove them with the tools that are suitable for them. Then cut the wound, and care for it with what covers and heals it, and strengthens it with suitable plasters or ointments.
If however a wound occurs between the nose, then it is necessary to care for it with leeches: and administer a lead tube until it heals.
Concerning the restoration of the lower jaw when it is broken.
When the lower jaw is broken, and its fracture is not accompanied by a wound: if it is deformed only, and not broken into two, and care is taken to its insides: then its knowledge is easy.
Therefore, if the fracture is in the right part, then insert the index finger of the left hand into the weak bone: similarly, if the fracture is in the left jaw, then insert the index finger of the right hand: and push with it the swelling of the fracture inside with ease to the outside with your other hand from the inner part of the bone properly, and with it make it even.
If however the fracture of the jaw has already been separated into two, then it is necessary to administer extension from both parts, according to straightness: until it is possible to make an evening of it.
If, however, the commotion or disruption has already occurred in the teeth, then bind them with thread made of gold, silver, or silk, hoping that they will remain intact. Then place a broken ceramic over the fractured jaw. Then place a double layer of cloth over it, and place a large, well-made stomach button on the cloth: or an equal piece of leather from the sole of a shoe, in the length of the jaw.
Then bind it from above, according to how the bandage of that type is prepared for you and its application fits, until it is not destroyed: and instruct the weak person to use it with tranquility and quietness: and place his drinks with gentle sips.
If, however, you estimate that something is already changing the shape in some ways: then hasten and dissolve it on the third day. Then correct what has been changed from it, and make plasters of it from the flour of the millstone, with egg white, or with sisami flour, after you have removed the broken ceramic: and place a soft cloth on the plaster.
While therefore it remains attached to that plaster over it, and the disposition of the bone is not changed, leave it, so that it does not dissolve, until it is healed: or bind the fracture. For often this fracture is bound for three weeks.
But if meanwhile an inflammation hot occurs, then administer to it what we said is often used in the sedation of it, until that inflammation is removed.
And if the fracture is with a wound, consider. For now a piece of bone is already separated from the bone, or from the splinter: then carefully take it out with you that suits you in the removal of those from the tools.
If indeed the wound opening is constricted, then enlarge it with a lancet according to the amount of your need.
Then when you have removed that bandage, and there remains none of it, then sue the wound opening, if it is wide: and if not, place upon it some of those plasters which are suitable for that, and cover it, until it heals.
¶ On the restoration of the clavicle, when it is broken.
The clavicle is most often broken from the anterior part on the side of the shoulder, and its fracture occurs in one of three ways.
For indeed it is broken and separated into two, except that some bandages occur in it: and it is easier for its restoration.
Or thus, that some bandages occur in the bone of the bandage: and it is more difficult for its restoration.
Or thus, that it is a fracture with a wound.
And operation in it when the fracture is without wound, is, that you make present to be two assistants, that one of them holds the following instrument which follows the clavicle broken, and the other extends the neck towards the part.
Then equal the fracture with your fingers, until it becomes its form, according to what is necessary: and there is not in it protrusion, nor hollowness.
If you need more extension, then it is necessary, that you place under the infirm sphere of the tip a ball of cloth, or of wool: and its size should be according to the amount of your need: and extend, and elevate the clavicle, and cut the ball with your hand, until equal the fracture, according to what is necessary.
If you cannot draw the tip of the fork to the outside, because it has reached the depth, then the weak one must be bent over his shoulder and you place a pillow under his arm in the size of a medium, and press his helper's arm downwards until the tip of the fork that is at the depth is lifted upwards. Then straighten the fracture and make it even with your fingers.
But if you feel a broken piece of the fork and it moves, then you must drill into it and extract the broken piece of the fork with ease.
But if it is stuck in the bone, then use your skills in the incision and one of the prepared incisors to hold the instrument that will support the saw under the fork, which is a tool made of wood or iron. And this is its shape.
It resembles a spiral that does not have a concavity.
Its width should be according to what you need from the size of the bone and its shape. The length of it, however, should also be according to what is possible for you in the operation.
It should have two ends, as you see: and one end should be wide and the other narrow.
But if the wound that you cut when you extracted the broken piece of bone is wide and you want to prevent infection, then gather two lips of the wound with stitches.
But if the wound is small and you fear infection, then fill the wound with cloth and cotton according to the size of the cut.
But if an infection occurs, then pour oil with roses, vinegar, and wine over it and place it on the wound.
When the fracture of a bone is without wound and without incision, it is treated by applying a plaster made from flour milled from grain mixed with egg yolk onto the bone. And place a soft bandage on top of it. Then place a sphere under its splint, if you have one. Then take a hollow reed, that is, the one held by the Saracens, which is very long: and its width should be the size of one palm or about that. Then place a double-layered pad and plaster on top of it. Then take a thin board, the width of which is three fingers and the length similarly. Then wrap it in cloth. Then wrap the cloth with the board in the place where the hollow reed falls on the fracture and the affected area. Then place the hollow reed on the fracture as it was wrapped, and wrap it around his neck, and under the splint of the healthy person and under the splint of the sick person: and reduce it over all parts, and however you see that the bandage holds the fracture, that is the correct bandage: and this should not be hidden from you, and the whole, so that the board does not move above the broken bone. And for this reason, it is necessary to look at the sick person every day. Whenever the ligament becomes soft and you see the board already moving away: then correct it and tighten the ligament.
Then place the sick person's pillow on his back, and place a small pad under his splint at night, so that when he is lifted up with his aid, it is on his side. Therefore, the fracture of the clavicle is raised by elevating the arm.
Tie his arm to his neck: and do not untie the bandage, unless it is necessary due to an emergency, such as skin irritation or an abscess, up to twelve days.
Then reapply the plaster, if you see his face towards that direction. And add to the constriction, and let him go, until he is restored and coagulated.
And the broken clavicle is bound and strengthened as much as possible in twenty-eight days: and sometimes it happens in some people in less than that.
¶ On the restoration of the broken clavicle.
The clavicle is rarely broken, and in the side of it: and they are not broken from it except its edges.
When therefore it is broken from that place, and it is broken in the middle of it, and it is not known except by touch: then according to what is the shape of the fracture, try its preparation. And reduce it to the natural shape in every way possible, which is possible to you.
Then place it on the place of powder from the mill with white chalk, and lint, and place above a pad made of doubled cloth. Then place on it a wide flat plate from thin board according to the size of the clavicle, or a little larger than that.
If indeed there is a hollowness in some place of the clavicle, then fill that hollowness with soft lint, until the plate descends according to equality.
Then bind above with long adhesive tape, with a proper constriction, and the strength of the plate, until it is not removed from its place.
And consider the ligament every day. Whenever the ligament is softened, tie it up and place an equal weight if it moves from its place: and let the sick person lie on his sound side.
And the spatula is restored in twenty days, or in twenty-five days.
When this number is completed, then untie the ligament: and you will be in safety. For it is from the bones of which the union is not to be feared, nor their dissolution.
But if a fragment of bone proceeds under the skin: then cut above it, and remove it. And do as we said in the fracture of the rudder from the suppression of abscesses by heat, if something happens from it.
Of the restoration of a broken chest.
The chest sometimes breaks in the middle of it, and this rarely happens. Its extremities are broken very much, and they are crushed from its accidents.
When its middle is broken, which declines to the lower parts, and pain happens to it, and difficulty in breathing, and coughing: and perhaps vomiting of blood, and the hollowness in the bone fractured is not hidden from sensation, its restoration is, that he should lie propped up on his back: and place between his spatulas a pillow.
Then press his shoulders, and gather his ribs from both sides with his hands: and make it smooth in its equilibrium, according to every mode as possible is and fits, until it returns to the shape of the bone, according to what it should be.
Then place a plaster on top of it and a bandage, and place an astellum above it from a thin board made of willow or chalingi, and similar ones in lightness, after you have wrapped it in cloth. Then thinly spread the bandage when binding it over the broken jaw, so that it does not move: and go with the bandage according to its roundness towards the back several times, and tighten it with a suitable constriction.
Then consider the bandage every hour, and whenever it becomes soft, tighten it: and if necessity provokes its dissolution at a prurient place, or corrosion that happens in the area, or pain, or abscess: then hurry, and dissolve it, and remove the plaster, and correct what happens with the mode of its cure.
Then reduce the plaster, if you see that it faces that form: and connect it to a constriction, until it heals.
¶ On the restoration of the ribs, when they are broken.
Know that the fracture of the ribs does not happen, except in places that follow the back and from the ends of them from the front part. And they do not break, except for this reason, because they are cartilaginous. And knowledge of it is not hidden from the sense with inspection with the fingers.
And its restoration is made in such a way, that the fracture with the fingers according to the possible mode, until it equals the figure, as it should be. Then plasters, and bind the broken jaw with an astellum, if it needs it.
And if the fracture of the ribs is declined towards the interior: then it happens that a painful and puncturing pain occurs, like that puncturing which happens to him who has pleurisy: because the bone presses the membrane, and also difficulty of breathing, and cough, and vomiting of blood many: and this is difficult of cure.
And already the ancients were skilled in this with many ingenious methods: and from them are those who say, that you should place foods for the sick which will generate inflammation and softness, so that the belly becomes inflamed, and stretches, and drives the fracture to the exterior.
We indeed abhor, that there not be a quick cause for making an abscess hot, if it does not happen. But if it has already happened, then you add to it.
And some of them said: place it on a soft spot, then suck it with strength, and it is similar to reasoning. However, one should be afraid that the soft spot will draw excess fluids to the place, due to the weakness of the body.
And some of them said: it is necessary that the spot be covered with wool which has already been immersed in warm oil: and they place feathers between the ribs, until it is filled: so that it will be a bandage equal when you roll it according to its roundness.
Then the sick person is healed by purgatives from food and medicine.
If the persistent thing binds the sick person, whom he does not tolerate, and the mouth pierces the bandage by a wounding puncture, and we fear for the sick: then it is necessary, that we cut over the spot, and remove from the broken rib. Then we will place on it an instrument which will save the sick person, of which the memory preceded: and we will cut the mouth with ease, and we will cut it.
Then we will gather two wound lips, if it is large with a suture: and we will heal it with plasters, until it is healed.
If however an abscess hot happens in the meantime, then hurry, and pour feathers in rose oil, and place on the spot: and the sick person is healed with it which is suitable for the abscess.
Meanwhile, let it be bandaged on the side where it lies when sleeping, until it heals.
On the restoration of a fracture of the spine in the back and neck.
Sometimes a fracture occurs in the bones of the neck, and rarely wear and tear; similarly, in the spine. When therefore it happens to someone, and you want to know whether it will heal, or not; then consider. For if you see his hands already softened, and stupefied, and dead; and he cannot move them, nor extend them, nor contract them; and when you contract them with your fingers, and prick them with a needle, he does not feel it, and does not feel pain in them: then you know that it is not healing, and in many positions it is mortal.
But if he moves them, and feels contraction in them with your fingers and pricking: then you know that the neck of the bone is saved, and that the weak one will heal with treatment.
But if he also damages the spine in the back similar to that, and you want to know whether it will heal, or not; then consider at his feet: then if you see that they are softened, and that it happens in them as in the hands: then when he lies on his back, wind and evacuation without volition; and when he lies on his belly, evacuation without volition; and when he lies on his back, and wants to urinate, and cannot: then you know that it is mortal. Therefore do not give efforts in its treatment.
But if nothing happens to him from that, the matter is lighter.
And the cure for what happens from that is, you should try to sedate hot abscesses: thus, you should place on the Spondylus (spine) worn-out rose oil alone: or with a cloth moistened with warm oil.
Place on it several times a day until the abscess becomes sedated: then place one of the strengthening, drying, and binding plasters on the spot, and bind it with a bandage: and instruct the sick person to use it with rest and tranquility. And he should not sleep on the side where he found the pain until he is healed.
If it happens on the worn-out Spondylus (spine) or something that is already separated from it: then you should leave it alone and remove it. Then gather the two wound lips, if it is large, with a suture. Then care for it with some fleshly (flesh-like) substance, from the ointments, until he is healed.
If indeed the last of the broken bones of the tail, and it is the end: then you should insert your left hand's finger into the anus, and equalize the fractured bone with your other hand, as much as possible, and with the second equality.
Then place on it, and remove it: and care for the wound with the cure that preceded, until he is healed.
¶ On the restoration of the Ankle.
Chapter 11.
The bones of the ankle rarely break. If they break, then the fracture of them is not, unless the comminution in the extremities of them: and they are broken in length, and decline to the insides: and the sick person feels pain in the spot, and puncture: and the leg that breaks is astonished.
And indeed its restoration is, that you extend your hand upon it, until you stand over the fracture as its figure is.
But if the fracture is only in its extremities, then make it equal to the fracture, according to what is prepared for you from equality, until it resembles its natural figure.
But if the fracture is in its length, or already inclines to the interior: then make the injured one lie on his belly, until preparation for the restoration of that fracture is made for you. Then when you have made it equal, place a plaster upon it: then place an splint of wood, or of skin, upon it: and bind it with a bandage over which you do not fear the exchange of the fracture, nor the removal of the splint.
And make its hollowness equal to that which fills it, until the bandage takes it according to equality: and command the injured one, that he sleep on his back, or on his sound side.
But if an hot abscess happens to him: then cease from its extension, and of his restoration, until the hot abscess sits: and place upon it what sits upon it, according to what preceded, then return to its restoration: and bind it as it should be.
But if indeed it happens in the bone of a fracture, or is crushed, extract.
¶ Of the restoration of the fracture of the Supporting-bone.
The support is that which is between the elbow and the head of the Spoon.
But if it breaks, then its restoration is according to one of two ways.
One of which is: that you take a flat piece of wood of medium thickness, according to this form, which follows.
And two ligaments are tied at both ends.
Then it is hung from a raised place: and the weak one sits on a seat. Then he throws his broken arm on a piece of wood, until he reaches the label of it, in which the middle is attached to the flexible wood.
Then he hangs something heavy above him, so that he stretches himself downwards. Then the doctor balances the fracture with his hands at the same time, until the fracture returns, according to what is necessary.
And another way is that the weak one bends over his shoulder: and hangs his hand from his neck with a ligament. Then command two assistants, that one of them holds that which is above the fracture with his hands: and that the other holds below him, and each of them stretches himself to his part.
And if you want, that the extension be stronger, then tie under the fracture with a ligament, and above it with another ligament: and each of the two assistants stretches himself to both parts.
Therefore if the fracture is near the end of the arm, then it must be placed that one ligament under the label, and another under the fracture towards the elbow.
And similarly if the fracture is near the elbow: then it must be placed that ligament on that place, and on the elbow itself.
Then balance the fracture with ease without labor, until when the fracture is balanced according to what is necessary, and applied with good application: then tie it, if not an abscess of hot water happens.
But indeed if an abscess of hot water happens, then let go the tie until the seventh day. And place on it a piece of lint soaked in vinegar and rose oil, until the abscess rests: then bind it: and the way to bind it is, as you would place a plaster on a fracture.
Then place a new cloth bandage over the plaster. Then attach the arm to the support itself, and place her hand open on her shoulder.
And place a cloth, and bind over the support of the arm, so that the arm stays in the position of the stars: if he does not forbid you from him anything, neither anything is changed on you from the broken bone.
But if you fear, that something is changed on you from the broken bone, then use stars: and it is, as you place over the fracture itself the star which is wider and stronger than the other stars. And place between every star width of a finger: and the length of the stars according to the fracture with addition of three fingers from every part.
Then bind over the stars with the binding I said at the beginning of the chapter.
And it is, that your binding be over the place of the fracture tighter. And as much as the fracture lengthens, the binding should be looser.
If therefore you see the position of the stars and the binding, as we said, at the hour when you restore the member immediately, then do: and if you fear the abscess hot, then release the binding and the stars until the seventh day, as we said.
Then consider the bandage in all three days, so that it does not happen in the place of itching, or inflation, or food is prevented from coming to the member, because of the disposition of the excess of the binding. Then correct all that, according to what we said.
If indeed you are confident that nothing will go wrong from it, then do not untie the ligature until after three days or more.
And let the patient sleep on his back, and his hand on his stomach: and place under his support a cushion filled with equal wool.
And consider at every hour of the night or day, so that the broken limb's figure is not dissolved, nor the ligature softened. Therefore correct all of it with your skill.
And place the food of the sick according to the order that we prescribed, so that the food is delicate in the first place, until he begins to swallow: then it is necessary to thicken his food.
For the custom of the support and leg is that it is swallowed in forty days: therefore then it is necessary to untie, and give a bath, and treat with ointments which correct it.
If the fracture is foul and worn: then do not untie from it the ligature and stars until fifty days, and until two months.
¶ On the restoration of the fractured Arm.
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called two humeri.
One of them is small: and that follows the thumb. And the other is large, and that which is placed under the small one from the lower part.
Perhaps it breaks only the larger humerus, or the smaller: and perhaps both at once.
When therefore the smaller upper humerus is broken, then its restoration is easy, and its healing is easier.
And when the lower humerus is broken, its fracture is bad, and its healing is difficult.
And it is worse when two bones are broken at once.
Therefore, if the broken bone is slightly displaced upwards, it is appropriate for the physician to apply gentle traction until it is restored to its original position.
However, if the displacement is significant, then a stronger traction should be applied.
And it is necessary to place the hand's shape at the restoration and extend the traction above the bed. And the thumb of the hand should be higher than all the other fingers: and the joint below should be lower than all the other fingers, or the rest: and the weak person should sit squarely on himself, and the bed should be in front of him, or directly in front of him, at a height, so that the weak person does not encounter unnecessary labor.
Then the servant should extend the arm from the lower part, or with his hand, or with a bandage. And another servant should extend it from above similarly.
Then the physician should restore the bone until he can restore it to its best possible shape.
If there are splinters in the broken bone, then try to reduce all the fragments to their original place by your strength.
However, if it appears to be a separate splinter that is sticking out and piercing the skin, and there is no hope of its restoration, then cover it and remove it according to the method that was mentioned in the things that were previously mentioned.
However, if the fracture is accompanied by a wound, I have already dealt with that section separately, so take the treatment from there.
However, if an abscess with heat occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then make a linen cloth with a thick layer of rose-colored oil, and a white clay, and it should be in the middle between thickness and thinness: and tie the cloth over it with a fine traction until the abscess is soothed: then remove the clay, and place a prepared plaster made from mill flour with egg white on it. Then place a splint, and let the splint that is placed on the fracture itself be slightly wider and stronger.
And know that the number of splints for the arm is six in many arrangements: whether it is a fracture in one fossa, or in two fossae at once.
Then place your bandage on the stronger and more vehement spot over the fracture, and a little more with the bandage to the superior or inferior part of the fracture: or place a softer bandage on it for a while, according to what was previously mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
And let the bandages that cover the fracture be soft, moist cloths: and they should not be hard, rough. And let the thread that is used to tie it be a linen thread, medium between thin and thick, as we have mentioned.
And consider the limb and ligament after days. If something occurs that requires correction, such as itching that occurs in the limb: then it is necessary to soothe the limb with warm water until the itching subsides, and do not bind the limb until it is calm, then repeat the bandaging.
If the bandage is already softened, and the bone is already removed, and similar things: then correct all of this by your virtue, and consider again.
For if nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb because of the excess of the bandage, then it is necessary to soften it a little, and leave it for a few days until the nourishment reaches it, then bind it again.
But if nothing of the above happens to the sick person, then it is not necessary to dissolve it, unless after twenty days, or about these.
Then hang the hand of the sick person around his neck. And let his neck be level, and guard it by its strength from being jolted. And make him sleep on his back.
And know that this fracture is healed in thirty days or in thirty-two days, and perhaps it will be healed in eighty days. All of this is according to the dispositions of the humors and the dispositions of strength.
On the healing of fractures in the hand.
Know that fractures of the hand and fingers rarely occur in the palm. And it does not happen to him, unless by frequent rubbing.
When therefore the fracture or rubbing occurs in the foot, then it is necessary for the sick person to sit squarely, and there should be a seat of equal height before him. Then place his hand on that extended one.
Then the servant should extend the broken bones, and the physician should equal them until they are joined together in good union.
Then it is necessary to place a plaster and bandage on it, unless there is no hot abscess. Then place a splint above according to the size of the wound, and you have already wrapped it in linen cloth.
But if the fracture is to the lower part of the foot, then make a similar sphere from the cloth, and command the sick person to cover it with his broken foot, and then bind it with a long cloth.
And the splint should be made of leather, in which there is softness, so that the leather can be applied to the body of the foot: and bind it as necessary.
If the fracture is to the outside, then it is necessary: to place a splint above, and another splint from below in the plantar area, and the hand should be open and straight. Then place a bandage, as the hand is bent, and extend it between the fingers with a ligature.
If a fracture occurs to one of the joints of the fingers, then if it is the thumb, it will be treated accordingly. Then it will be bandaged with the plantar area: and if it is a small finger, place a straight splint on it, a parva, to elevate the fracture and not move it.
If the fracture is to the other fingers, such as the middle, and index, and auricular, and anular, then it will be treated and bound with the healthy finger that follows it, or all will be bound according to continuity, and this is better. Or place a small splint on top of it, as we said in the thumb.
And consider in your restoration, and after the arrangement of abscesses with hot compresses: and place it with what is necessary, when something happens from it, according to its narrative.
¶ On the restoration of a fracture of the hip.
The hip bone often breaks, and is felt, because it turns to the inner and posterior part.
And its restoration is done in such a way that the ligament is bound above the fracture, and the other ligament below the fracture. And the sick person is stretched out on their face.
Then extend all the assistant's ligament to its part according to equality: and this, when there is a fracture in the middle of the bone.
If, however, the fracture is near the root of the thigh bone, then the ligament should be tied to the part of the thighbone above the fracture, so that the extension force goes upwards: and another ligament should be tied under the fracture.
And similarly if the fracture is near the knee, then the ligament near the knee should be tied so that the extension force goes downwards.
Then the surgeon should adjust both hands to set the bone back into its natural shape, until it is reduced to its natural form: and he should join the bone with a good union.
Then one should apply a plaster and bandage, unless an abscess has occurred in the limb. If however an abscess occurs in it: then leave it for several days, until the abscess becomes hot, then return to your treatment.
The bandage should be applied thus. One should cover over the fracture above with a soft cloth, that is, a bandage: and double it twice, or three times: and there should remain some excess from it. Then cover the leg, until it reaches the calcaneus at the root of the buttocks.
And insert a long thread between the thigh and the leg near the knee, and let the ends of the thread come from the upper parts of both parts. Then roll up the excess from the bandage on the thigh and leg.
Then place on the thigh in the place of the fracture some small pieces, and place one piece above the knee bone.
Then fill the spaces between the leg and thigh with soft cloths, so that the bandage is even.
Then begin with a strong bandage from the middle above the place of the fracture, with three or four turns. And the more you lengthen with a ligature from the place of the fracture, the narrower and softer and gentler your constriction should be.
Then draw the thread to both ends, which you inserted between the thigh and leg. Therefore tie with both ends three small knots that are above. Then go with both ends of the thread downwards, until you reach the heel of the foot. And tie also both ends of the knots from the other side: so that the thread is not removed from its place.
Then release the constriction above that, while it remains, so that no corrosion or abscess or swelling or similar things occur to the limb. If anything happens from that. Therefore immediately with the removal of it, and correct that which happened from it all, according to what we said many times.
But if indeed a piece of bone is in the bone that pricks: then it is necessary for you to make them equal, if it is possible for you. And if not, find over that, and remove it: and care with him whose place it preceded, until he is healed.
And sometimes this fracture of the hip is bound, besides what knots are added to it, as we said in the aid and arm.
But indeed in the restoration of a fracture such as this, no lameness occurs to the weak. And if it is restored alone, besides what is applied to him the other leg, then it is necessary that he who owns it always limps.
And know that the hip is bound in fifty days, or a little is added to it, or a little is subtracted from it: all of this is according to the diversity of the constitutions, and the other arrangements.
Translation: On the Restoration of a Fractured Knee Cap.
You should know that a fracture of the knee cap is rare, but it often occurs due to wear and tear.
If indeed a fracture does occur, then it will be either a crack or a hole in its parts. And there is the wound with and without injury. And it is treated as a whole with sensibility.
And its restoration is such that it should be made equal to what was broken off from its parts with fingers, until it is gathered together and joined according to what is possible from equality and ease, and craftsmanship.
Then place a plaster made from semolina or malt flour with egg white on it: and place a round bandage on top of it if you have one: and bind it above with a suitable bandage.
Then consider all the positions that we have mentioned for other fractures: as hot abscess and similar to it: so, place everything that is suitable with it until it heals.
Translation: On the Restoration of a Fractured Leg Bone.
You should know that the leg bone is made up of two bones, one of which is thick and called the leg bone, and the other is thin and called the fibula.
And it happens that both of these species of fracture can occur in both bones of the arm: and because of this, its restoration is made like the restoration of the arm equally, and the operation is one.
If both bones are broken at once, the leg is turned in all parts.
And if the thin bone is broken, the leg is turned towards the front part.
And if the bone is broken coarsely, you will find it below: and among them are those that do not conceal themselves from you.
Then apply the extension, equality, and tying of the stars according to that equally.
However, if the fracture of the leg is a filthy fracture, having many splinters, then the extension should be less and gentler in your relief.
And in the thigh there is something from the operation on the arm: and it is, that when you make the stars equal and complete all your operation, then take two bands of pine wood, which are administered in the manufacture of sun dials, which are placed under the tiles: and they are made from the fronds of the palm tree: and choose from them those which have a small thickness, and are not from the small ones: and let their length be according to the length of the thigh from the knee downwards.
Then roll up on each cloth two folds according to its length. And place one part of the leg from one side, and the other from the other side: and they should be from the knee down to the foot.
Then tie two bands in three places from the two ends and the middle. For when stricture is prohibited, the leg leans to the right and left, and stands in a good position.
And indeed the cradle is applied according to the length of the thigh, and is placed in it the leg, so that it keeps it from moving.
Indeed, it is very important to do this in a fracture when there is a wound properly with it.
Then consider the leg every day, and work with it with the utmost effort to avoid suppuration, or swelling, or other things. If something happens from these (remedies), then apply to him with that which is appropriate, until he is healed, if God wills.
Of the Fracture of Bones in the Foot and Toes.
Fracture does not occur completely in the heel.
Fracture does occur sometimes in the bones of the foot and toes, and it does not occur to them unless there is wear in many positions.
If a fracture occurs in the bones of the foot and you see those bones raised above each other, then place the weak person's foot on prepared ground, as if walking.
Then stand up and place your foot on that which is raised from those bones: then press or step on it, and make it even, until it returns to its places.
Then place a plaster and bandage on top: and place under the sole of the foot a small board, which has two flat heads.
Then tie it with the foot with a proper binding, after you have wrapped it with cloths and other things that it needs.
When therefore it passes him three days or four, then loosen the bandage. For you will find the bones evened, whether they are fractured or dislocated. The operation in them is therefore as you see.
If however some fingers are broken, then restore them, and make them even according to what I have told you in the restoration of fingers hands. Then place your finger a splint according to the length of the finger, and it should be slightly wider: then place under the foot this board that I have told you, and tie it with a proper binding.
If indeed what is broken off from the bones is two or three or more, then place on each finger of your hand the amount corresponding to its quantity, wrapped in a linen cloth: and bind the table on the lower part of the foot: and let him stand on one end of the table outside the arch of the foot, so that he may hold it well with retention.
And it may happen that you will not forget, but rather consider all that I have told you about the other fractures from the accidents that we mentioned: and place against each accident with it what is necessary.
Concerning the fracture of the vulva of a woman, and the bone of the clitoris, and the virgin's bone.
When the vulva of a woman is broken, then let her sit squarely. Then lean her slightly towards the back of her own body, and let her be held from behind.
Then the midwife will fill her vulva with cotton, until she fills it: and let it be made into a sphere in the vulva from that.
Then the woman will be shaken, and her back will be raised gradually. For that is the way it comes out, until it becomes before the vulva as a sphere, and the broken bone returns.
Then place a pillow on her back. Therefore when she wants to urinate, she will remove the cotton with ease, then she will urinate: and she will return it according to the manner in which you introduced it first: then she will return to her pillow first.
Let her do this for seven days, or about, for that bone is restored.
And if you wish, take a catheter, and place it over the opening of the bone with a reed tube, and introduce the whole catheter into her vulva. Then blow into the cannula with force until the bladder is inflated inside the vulva, for the fracture returns otherwise.
Then it should be filled with cotton and left for several days, as we have mentioned, until it heals.
And when the tooth of a man or woman is broken, then administer for its restoration and its equilibrium that which we have mentioned in the bone of the anchor.
And the rectum should not be hidden in these close fractures, which occur less frequently, especially if there is some study or use.
And understand my book well, for the fracture itself signifies to you in many positions the right way of restoration and tightening of itself, so understand.
But in the penis of a man when it is broken, take the neck of a goose: and insert the rod into it. Then place a wrap made of cloth on top of it and wrap it up, and let it be dismissed for three days or about that, and it will heal if God wills.
About the restoration of a broken bone when there is a wound.
It happens to him who has suffered a fracture with a wound, especially if it is large, such as the thigh bone, or a helper, or similar to it, so that you may hurry and perform a bloodletting immediately: if the conditions for bloodletting are attested to you, as we have mentioned.
But if the wound is bleeding, then you should hurry to cut it open, so that powder made from zegea is sprinkled on top of it: if there is no other present for you.
Then begin to restore the fracture in that same day: and do not postpone it, unless an abscess does not occur.
If indeed a hot abscess occurs, then delay its treatment until the ninth day, until the abscess settles. And do not approach it on the third and fourth days, for you would be causing it to suffer bad accidents.
But if a broken tooth is sticking out above the skin and has been removed: then you must try to reduce it and equalize it with your hands with slight force and extension.
But if the extension of it is not prepared and its equalization with your hands is not possible: then reduce it with this tool. And there is a tool that is made of iron, whose length is the quantity of seven fingers, or eight: and its width is according to the quantity of the wound. And therefore it is necessary for the doctor to take from them three, or four according to the quantity that is needed for that from each kind of cure in every species of fracture.
And let it be round: and let there be a small bulge on it, so that it is not doubled up under compression on it in the hour of operation: and let it be sharp-pointed, with a margin at its ends. And let it be above its bulge from the middle up to the lower parts.
And this is its shape.
In this operation, it is necessary to place the sharp end of the tool on the edge of the protruding bone: and push it with that force, until when the tooth returns and is equalized by some equality.
Then try to equalize the ends of the fracture one after another.
But if its ends are thinly fractured, and the tool does not receive it with good reception, then you must try to cut the end of that bone until the tool has power over it.
If indeed you cannot reduce them with what we have mentioned, then you should use the incisors or a saw that is most suitable for you in any possible way.
Then smooth that which remains in the bone due to its roughness and small roughnesses.
When therefore the bone is reduced and it finds an infirm person after the reduction with a severe pain, then you know that the bone has not returned to its natural place.
Do this. For you give a strong support to the infirm when the completion of your restoration is made for the bone.
Then immerse the cloth in a styptic wine, black. And properly if it is in summer. And you will not place on the wound a poultice, nor anything in which there is oil: so that it does not cause decay and corruption in itself.
Then administer small portions at the time of the completion of your restoration of the bone. And let the wound heal: thus, you should cut with forceps a hole in the folds according to the size of the wound.
And beware of all precautions, so that you do not tie the wound with a fracture. For many times have the foolish doctors done this: and they have caused to happen to their infirm patients either death, or corruption, or zucchum, that is, a gangrene. And your bandage should be soft, gentle, different from the bandages of the remaining fractures.
But if the wound is evil, or is a large wound, and you fear some bad accidents that we have mentioned, and you find pain in the suspended place: then it is not necessary to place on it poultices. And make for them bandages from hard cloth in the place of the stars, and tie it up with them.
But when it is after one day, or two days, and you see the wound beginning to generate pus in it: then remove the cloth that you placed on it with wine. Then apply lint, and ointments with which it is our custom to treat wounds: such as TetraPharmacon ointment, and similar to it.
And it may happen that you need to untie the bandage. And consider the wound every day in the morning and evening, until it heals and becomes healthy.
And it is necessary to prepare the limb in such a way that the pus runs off from it easily to the lower parts.
But if many days pass and the wound does not heal, nor does the pus separate from it: then you know that there are small fragments of bone there. Therefore, it is necessary to examine the wound with a probe. But how many of those small fragments are separated, remove them, and extract them. And those of which are not separated, and which pierce the limb and cause pain, try to cut them and remove them in any way that is possible for you to do so.
But if it happens that the wound becomes putrid, or has a bad smell, or another sign of corruption and putrefaction: then it is necessary to apply to each of them with what is appropriate for their cure, as mentioned in its chapter.
And in the limb in which it is necessary for my speech to stand, and with which you direct your present mind when a bone breaks and protrudes from the limb, such as the hip bone, and the shoulder blade, and similar bones from large limbs: do not assume that it can be pulled back, for often death results from it, indeed let it go, until it putrefies.
Perhaps it will fall out by itself after twenty days, or thirty.
Then, if it seems to you that the wound needs care, you should care for it; otherwise, let it be.
On the treatment of nodulation at the site of a broken bone.
This nodulation often occurs at the site of a broken bone. Especially that which is near the joints, and it disfigures the shape of the member. And perhaps it prevents the member from performing its natural function.
Therefore, consider if the nodulation is recent: administer medicines in it that have astringency, such as aloe, and frankincense, and myrrh, and sarseol, and acacia, and similar to them.
Thus, you will take some or all of these: and mix them with astringent wine, or with albumen, or with vinegar: and place them on the nodulation in wool, and tie them over it with a good binding.
And let go of the binding, but do not loosen it for many days. Then loosen it, and repeat another one until the nodulation is removed.
Or tie over it a leaden strip properly. For lead is the property of removing everything that is feared from the members.
But if the nodulation has already become hard and is tightly bound, and urgently demands to be removed, then cut it from the top part of it, and cut off the projecting excess: or shave it with certain razors until it is removed: and care for it, until it is healed.
On the treatment when a member is restored, but remains underneath its natural form.
When a bone fracture is restored and the member remains after it, thin and weak: then it is not done except for many reasons. One of which is, the excessive solution and bandaging of the ligaments and its bandage: either because of the excess of the tightness of the ligaments, until it prevents the nourishment from running to the member: or because of the excess of the embrocation at an inappropriate time: or because of the lack of blood in the body of the weak and its weakness.
And its treatment is, to feed the weak: and to make its body tender, until the blood multiplies in it. And administer a bath. And introduce joy and gladness upon him.
Then place salt on the member: so that the salt attracts much nourishment to it. And frequently bandage it with warm water, until the nourishment runs, and returns to its natural shape.
§ On the treatment of bones that have been broken and restored twistedly.
When it happens to the member already restored after its healing, that twisting and projection of the bone broken, or knotting: and it is deformed by it, but the member is not prevented from its natural operation: then it is not necessary to receive the word of him who thinks that the member should be broken again.
And there have already been many foolish doctors and restorers who did this in our land.
And this operation is indeed very shameful, leading to death, or great fear, so that it may be mortal.
But if the limping and knotting are recent: then it is necessary to bandage with warm water, in which softening herbs have been boiled, such as high grass, and its root, and melilot, and similar ones. And let him make for her an adhesive plaster with a softening ointment, as dyachylon is properly made.
Or let him take the mucilage of the root of althea, and mix it with the fat of a hen, or with sesame oil: and let him apply it with that.
Or let ripe figs be taken, and crushed with the dust of a turtle dove, and with similar things which are called reducing agents for strengthening consolidation.
And when the contraction is solved with frequent and gentle friction, which is done with wet hands. And let motion be given to the limb to all parts at every hour.
But if the twisting has already preceded, and it has become strong, and turned into a stone, and necessity has been provoked to its cure with iron: then it is necessary that it be secured above it, and the continuity of the bone be dissolved, and that which superfluously protrudes from the twisting or the bone be cut away with fine incisors: and let facility be given in that with solicitude and study.
¶ Of speech in dislocation.
Dislocation is the escape of some joints from their place. Therefore it is prohibited from its motion, and the figure of the limb is deformed. And it causes to happen upon the weak pain, and severe injuries.
Therefore when it happens to someone, then one must hasten to its restoration: nor does it delay it at all.
For if it is delayed, the place becomes suppurated, and perhaps with it the reduction of the dislocation.
Therefore it is not necessary that it be moved, nor stretched in the hour of its suppuration. For it often causes spasms and painful wounds.
But when that happens, then you must hasten to perform bloodletting on the sick person. Then he should be dismissed until the abscess has healed.
Then the limb should be rubbed with warm water and oil. Then it should be returned with ease.
And every limb should be treated with that which its memory brings to its place.
Indeed, I have already arranged the chapters on dislocation, even according to what preceded in fracture, from the upper part of the body down to its lower part.
Chapter on the care of dislocation of the lower jaw.
The two lower jaws rarely dislocate.
And the dislocation of both occurs according to one of two ways. For indeed they are removed from their places by a slight movement, and they become somewhat softened. Or they are dislocated completely, entirely, until they become softened to the chest part, until the saliva of the sick person flows, and he cannot hold it, nor can he close his mouth, and his tongue is rolled out with his speech.
But when the dislocation of it is slight, then it returns to many positions by itself with little.
But if the dislocation is complete, entire: then it must be administered reduction of it quickly, and not delay entirely: and it is, that the attendant holds the head of the sick person: and the physician inserts his finger of one hand in the root of the jaw dislocation between his teeth, if the dislocation is from one side. If the dislocation is from both parts, he should insert two of his fingers simultaneously. And the other fingers of his hand should be outside, which he balances.
And command the sick person to clean his jaws, and make them ready for eating in every part. And the doctor balances the jaw, and pushes the jaw until it returns to its place.
If the reduction of it is difficult, especially if both jaws are together: then administer steam with hot water and oil until it becomes easy to reduce both: nor delay the reduction of both at all, as we said.
When therefore they return and are balanced, and the mouth of the sick person is closed, and they are not softened: then place on them cloths of cloth, with wax that is made from wax: and rose oil.
Then it will be bound with ease with soft bands.
And the patient's sleep will be on his back: and his head will be between two cloths, so that he does not move it to the right and left: nor will he try or be forced to chew anything: rather let him be given soft food, until when the pains are removed, and the jaw is bound: then he eats what he wants, and is given it with ease.
He will not labor over the operation of his mouth at eating and drinking, and talking, until the jaw is bound, and he is healed.
If the reduction of both jaws is difficult, when they are dislocated at any time, and they do not return to their places: then often fevers and constant diarrhea occur from this: and perhaps the belly of the sick person is relieved, and perhaps he vomitus pure choler.
When you see that, then you will know that it is a fatal condition and often leads to the death of the person who experiences it within ten days.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the Scapula and the extremities of the arms.
The scapula is not dislocated from the side within, because of its continuity with the chest. And it is sometimes dislocated to the outside, and this is indicated by sensation.
And its restoration is that the weak person should lie on his back and extend his arms. Then bind the place with your palm using strong binding, for it will return.
Then place a plaster on it and bandages, and bind it.
However, the extremities that follow the elbow are continuous with it and do not usually dislocate, except rarely. However, if it is dislocated on some day: then it must be reduced and adjusted according to what we have said, and that which is prepared for you.
Then place a plaster on it and bandages, and bind it. And instruct the weak person to adhere to tranquility and rest until he is healed.
And when the extremity of the arm is also separated from its place, it is reduced with the same cure.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the Arm.
You should know that the arm is not dislocated except in three ways.
One of which is that it is dislocated towards the part of the armpit to the lower parts. The second is that it is dislocated towards the part of the chest. And perhaps it is dislocated to the upper part of the arm: and this happens rarely.
And it is not dislocated towards the back, due to the spoon. And it is not dislocated towards the front, due to the nerves.
And it is very much dislocated and exits towards the lower part, especially in those where the flesh is little. Because it exits in them quickly, and enters quickly.
But in those where the flesh is much, it is the opposite of that, namely that it exits with difficulty and enters with difficulty.
And perhaps it happens to some men that the blow or accident, and the arm becomes suppurated with heat, and it is thought because it is already dislocated.
Therefore, one must try that, until you stand on the certainty of it, and then proceed to its cure.
And the dislocation is known when it is towards the lower part, and you distinguish between the arm dislocated and the healthy arm. For you find among them a clear difference, and you find in the arm pit, concavity, and under the arm at the touch of the head of the arm as if it were an egg: and the weak one cannot reduce his hand to his ear, nor move it in all movements.
And similarly, if it is dislocated towards the chest, or upwards: then you find a clear touch, and it does not hide.
And this dislocation is easily reduced when it is recent, or the boy is weak.
And its reduction is, as he raises his hand to the upper part. Then you place your thumbs under its arm pit, and raise the joint with force up to its place: and the helper raises his hand, and extends it upwards. Then place it lower down, for it quickly returns.
But if it does not return as we said, and there are many days since the dislocation occurred: then the sick person should be bathed in warm water, and an embrocation given that softens and soothes, as if roots of alteae, and foenugraecum, and melilot were boiled in water, and it is administered.
Then the sick person should be bandaged on their back: and place under their neck a sphere and wool, which is equal between softness and tightness.
Then the doctor should place his heel on the sphere, and lift the shoulder with strength, and pull the hand of the sick person towards the lower parts.
And if you wish, reduce him according to this method: and it is, that you make a man present who is longer than the sick person, and stands on the side, and puts his arm under the neck of the sick person: and lifts his neck towards the upper parts, until the sick person is suspended in the air. And another servant should pull the hand of the sick person towards the lower parts of his belly. But if the sick person is light: then it is necessary, that he be suspended with something else, that weighs him down: for the dislocation returns quickly.
And he is also reduced according to another method: and it is, that a long piece of wood be shaped on the ground, whose head is round in shape: like the handle of a mortar: which is not thick, nor thin. Then the sick person should be placed under him after they place cloths on the head of the wood: and the sick person should stand according to the length of the wood.
Then, his hand is extended to the lower part on the other side, and his body is extended from the other part with strength, for the joint returns to its place with speed.
If it is difficult to reduce all that we have said, then use this care: and it is, that you take a stick whose length is the quantity of two biceps, and its width is the quantity of four fingers, and its thickness is the quantity of two fingers: which has a round head, so that its insertion into the titillus is eased in depth, according to this form.
Then, clean cloths are tied over the round head, so that the weak stick does not hurt.
Then, the weak one is placed under the titillus, so that the hand or arm is extended over the stick until the lower parts: and the stick is tied to the aid and arm and the end of the hand.
Then, the arm is placed on the width of the steps of the ladder, and the hand is extended to the lower parts, and the remaining body is suspended from the other part. For the joint enters immediately.
When therefore the entrance of its joint is completed according to whatever possible mode is: then it is necessary that you place under the titillus a ball of equal quantity from wool. Then, place the prepared plaster from the flour of the mill with bdellium, and egg white on the whole arm, as it rolls above.
Then, tie under the titillus a decent bandage: and the ligament is rolled above the plaster: and the hand of his is connected to the neck of itself, and it is suspended, and it is not moved the hand of its seven days.
And it is necessary that you place food for the weak one, until the limb is strengthened: because it is faster for its healing.
Then place a larger one after seven days, or five, and exercise it with movement. Therefore, if it hardens but does not soften, then it is already healed.
But if the joint is frequently dislocated due to moisture that affects it, or for another reason: then it must be treated with a cautery with three holes, as prescribed in the previous chapter on cauterization.
If this is done and the ligament is dissolved after seven days, and the joint does not strengthen, and the plaster and bandage are applied again several times and it does not strengthen and falls, and cannot be raised to the upper parts: then you know that the nerves of his arm, which are attached to the shoulder, have been cut, or extended, or softened: and you know that the joint will never heal in its place.
However, for dislocations that occur towards the chest and nipple, or to the back, reduction is done with impulse and extension with the hands: until it returns, and the remaining bandage and care are applied, until it heals.
If a severe and slowness in its movement occur after healing, then the weak person should use the bath frequently until that severity is relieved, and it returns to its original nature.
Chapter on the treatment of dislocation of the elbow.
Know that the elbow joint is dislocated with difficulty, and it also returns with difficulty: and indeed it dislocates to all parts, and especially to the front, or to the back.
And its dislocation is not hidden from you: because it falls under sight, and under touch, in whatever shape it is dislocated. When you join a dislocated elbow with a healthy one, it is clearly indicated to you. For the joint becomes stiff, and it cannot double the arm, nor touch with it its own shoulder.
And you must act quickly and reduce the dislocation immediately before a hot abscess occurs to it.
For if a hot abscess occurs to it, its reduction becomes difficult: and perhaps it will not be healed at all, especially when it is towards the back. For it is worse in all kinds of dislocations, and more severe pain to them: and often death accompanies with it.
And its restoration when it is from those that can be reduced, is that the hand of it is stretched with two hands: and the arm of it is expanded, and the hand of the physician is above the elbow and under it, and he pushes the joint with his fingers at the same time, or with the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
Or indeed the dislocation is towards the front: then it returns so that he doubles his hand with his own hand, until he strikes with the root of his palm the elbow which is dislocated.
But if the dislocation does not obey reduction, then administer strong and very powerful extension: and it is that two assistants stretch the arm: and two assistants hold him also, so that he is not removed during the extension.
Then the arm is rolled back to all parts after it has been stripped over his hand a long doubled cloth, or broad ligament.
And when the physician touches the joint with his hand, he anoints it with oil: that it may be from those that help in the slipperiness of the joint with ease. Then he pushes the joint with a strong push, until it returns.
After reducing it, a plaster should be applied to it, which has the properties of stopping bleeding and drying with skin, and is bound tightly with an appropriate binding. And the arm should be suspended from the neck of the weak person: and let it be left for several days.
Then it should be dissolved. If therefore the joint is strengthened in its place, then the ligament should be dissolved from it, and let it be left.
And if you see the joint not well bound, then repeat the plaster and ligament, and let it be left for several days until it is bound. Then dissolve it.
But if a gravity occurs to it after the reduction of the joint, and the position is in motion: then administer moisture in bathing, and gentle friction, and compression, until it is bound, or put on the joint of the thigh, that is, the fat of the male goat. Then it should be bound, and let it be left on it day and night. Then take it off, and put it in the bath. When therefore it sweats, then friction of the joint with moderate friction. Then repeat on it goat's fat once, and second, and third with entry into the bath until it is soothed.
And if you wish, put on it manure of calf, moist, heated with butter, and bind over it.
Do this several times. For indeed it is soothed, and returns to its position.
About the cure of Albucasis' dislocation.
Albucasis' hand is often dislocated, that is, the joint which is between the arm and the hand.
The reduction of its dislocation is easy. Conversely, the remaining joints are different. However, it is necessary that the speed of reducing its dislocation should be in the hour in which it is dislocated, before the wound becomes putrid: or an abscess with heat occurs in it.
And the reduction of its dislocation is, that one places the weak hand of the Mahassem on the table, and extends the minister's hand: and the doctor places his hand on the prominence of the joint, and pushes it, until it returns.
However, it is necessary to consider if the palm of the hand has already withdrawn to the side of the hand: then the weak back of his own hand should be placed on the table at extension and reduction: and if the dislocation is proceeding to the back of the hand, then the position of his hand should be inside on the table, that is, the inner part of his hand should be placed on the table, so that the doctor's hand falls on that prominence of the joint.
If therefore it returns immediately, it is good: and if not, then bind it with plaster laid on the abscess: and leave it alone, do not repeat that.
For if it does not bear, and you cannot do the reduction of it after it has passed days over it, indeed the joint remains according to its tortuosity: and nothing harms the weak except that the hand is softened, and it cannot bind anything: then know that the nerves are cut or rubbed.
Therefore there is no skill in it, except that it should be bound with a hot iron near the place of its dislocation. And perhaps it does not restore anything.
When therefore Almahassem does not return, then place on it plaster which we have told you. Then it is tied and left for five days: afterwards it is dissolved and released, and the hand is exercised.
If, however, it becomes stiff and something heavy occurs to it, then it is soothed with warm water and friction several times until it is eased.
§ On the Cure of Dislocations of the Fingers.
When any of the fingers is dislocated from every part, or any finger is dislocated from the back of the palm or its belly: then extend the finger and push the dislocation with your thumbs until it returns.
Then support the head of the finger and suspend it against the part to which it is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
Then hang it up and extend it until it is straight on that day.
When therefore it is night, tie it according to the same account: and do not cease to untie it on that day: and exercise it with motion: and tie it at night.
Do this for several days until it is tied.
And do the same with it if it is dislocated to the palm of the hand: and tie it to that part, and do your first operation on it until it is healed.
And do the same with it when it is dislocated to the other parts.
§ On the Cure of Dislocations of the Sacrum.
When it happens to someone that the sacrum of the back or neck is completely dislocated, or many spines are moved from their places: then there is no cure for it, because death approaches the sick person quickly.
And the sign of this is that the discharge of the sick person goes out without will, and he cannot hold it: and often some of his limbs are softened from it, or both his legs, or both his arms, or one of them: or one spine is moved from its place.
Many times it is removed, which is often removed from four parts.
Therefore, that which is removed to the back, is called Humps.
The cure of it is indeed, that you consider at that time, if Humps occur from childhood: then there is no cure for it, and there is no healing at all from it.
But in that which occurs by chance, or by blow, or by similar things, the ancients have already spoken of various methods of cure in long speech. Of which very little returns with profit.
Indeed, I have already abbreviated from it, of which very little excuses from much of its proximity to my intention: and my explanation which I explained it, and formed an instrument of it in a different way from that by which they showed it, and explained it.
I say therefore, that in Humps which occur from the front part, there is no skill, and there is no healing from it.
And similarly in that which is made to two sides even.
And it is not cured from them, except that which occurs in the back properly, with that which I relate: and it is, that the weak one be stretched on his face on an equal footstool near the wall: and the wet bandage is spread under it, so that it does not hurt his chest.
Then place a straight wooden pole fixed in the fork in the ground, at the end of the footstool, about his head: and another wooden pole about his feet in the other end of the footstool: and the servant holds the wood, and it is not firm in the fork. And the other servant holds the other.
Then cover over the head of the weak one, and under his chin, a thin bandage, firm: and extend the end of the bandage to the wood which is near his head: and tie it in it.
Then tie a ligament above the ankle of that person, and above their knees, and at their hips. Then gather all the ligaments and tie them on another wood that is by his feet.
Then let every servant stretch to the part of the wood where the ligament is tied, and do not remove the two woods from their places where they are fixed; however, they should not be tightened as we said.
And the doctor puts his hands on the Spondylum with force, until he returns; or he puts a board on it. Then he attaches his feet to the board until he returns.
But if he does not return by this treatment, then take a board whose length is about three arms. And cut in the wall from which we said that it is near the sick person, the place where the end of the board should enter. Then put the middle of the board on the Spondylum. And the doctor puts his feet on the other end. And he ties well, until the Spondylus is bound and he returns to his place.
Then if you want, operate with the chisel that is wrapped with your hand: and it is, so that you carve in the ground near the head of the sick person at the end of his foot two woods, whose length is an arm: and at the head of his foot at the end of his foot two woods.
And let the length be what is between every wood a foot: and now it is made in every place a hole through which the chisel ran: and the wood is firmly fixed in the ground much, so that it does not move at all.
And the round wood is inserted: and there is a chisel in which the ligament is rolled on two holes of two woods.
And at its end is a hole, in which the wood is supported, whose length is a foot with that which bends back: and in two other pieces of wood there is similarly that one.
Then tie the cords that you tied in the chest of the weak person with a bandage that is at its head: and the cords that you tied in its legs with a bandage that is at its feet.
Then stand by every bandage minister, who twists his hand with the roller, with which the bandage is rolled: and the doctor balances the Spondyle, as we said.
This is the form of the bandage that follows.
Then when the Spondyle returns, and the place is balanced, then you should put on a drying plaster with egg white. Then cotton. Then put above the plaster a stall from the board, whose width is three fingers, or about them. And its length is the amount that will take the place of the Gibbus, and on the part of the healthy Spondyle.
Then it is bound with the cord that we said. And the weak person uses delicate food until he is healed.
If something remains prominent in the place at the end of healing: then you should give medicines that soften and relieve, with the administration of the board that we mentioned for a long time. And now it is administered in that lead sheet.
And sometimes a prominence occurs in the last Spondyle of the back: and it is thought to be dislocated through that, and that is the bone that already protrudes. Therefore it is not necessary to make a presumption about him with this medicine: perhaps he will cause death to happen.
Chapter on the treatment of a dislocated ankle.
You should know that dislocations of the ankle and elbow joints do not occur except from a dislocation alone, and they do not suffer from the same problems as other joints due to a slight removal or hollowing.
Indeed, the ankle joint is dislocated in four parts. That is because it is dislocated towards the front and back.
It is most commonly dislocated inward, and slightly outward towards the front and back.
The treatment for an inward dislocation is as follows: when you join the infirm leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and the knee of the infirm leg is higher than that of the healthy one, and it cannot double its foot near the groin. There is also a location following the groin that becomes swollen due to heat, because the hip joint has already reached there.
The sign of an outward dislocation is that its symptoms are the opposite of those mentioned above.
The sign of an outward dislocation towards the front is that it stretches the healthy leg to its full extent, but does not double it without pain in the knee. If it tries to walk, it cannot step forward, and it retains urine and becomes swollen in the groin, and there is a cracking sound when walking on the heel.
The sign of an outward dislocation towards the back is that it does not stretch the knee and cannot double it before doubling the groin. The leg is also shorter on that side, and the groin is softened, and the hip joint has reached there.
The reduction of this type of dislocation is as follows: you should consider whether it is an old dislocation that has already existed for a long time in the person having it. If you have administered reduction to it and it remains in its original position, then there is no treatment at all for it. Therefore, it is not necessary to make a complete assumption about it.
But in the case of a recent dislocation of one of the four types, you should act quickly to reduce it by rolling the joint, extending it to both the interior and exterior, and moving it with your right and left hands: perhaps it will return to its original position and not require any other treatment.
If it does not return to its original position in this way, then you must prepare a strong assistant and extend the leg from the lower part: with his hands or with a bandage that is tied above the leg over the knee: and another assistant extends his hand above, so that his hands can be inserted under the tissues. Then he should tie a loose bandage over the root of the thigh and hold the end of the other ligature.
And there should be extension from the front of the groin to the backbone or from the back to the spine.
And there should be extension of all of them with equal force until the injured person is raised up from the ground and remains hanging.
For this is the common form of extension among the four types.
If it returns with what we have said, it is good: and if not, then it is necessary to do the following for each type of treatment that I will say about its proper cure.
In the proper reduction of it when the dislocation is to the inside, the injured person should be laid on his sound side. Then he should place the bandage over the root of the thigh, in the place between the hip joint and the groin. Then he should extend the bandage upwards from the groin to the higher part of the body, to the backbone.
Then let another assistant take hold of her strong arms, and reduce the rough swelling at the weak hip, and extend it towards the outer parts with a vigorous extension. For now she returns to her place.
And this appearance is easier than the other forms of treatment that reduce this limb.
But if she excuses herself to you, and does not obey you to enter with this form of treatment at all: then it is necessary that two weak feet are tied together with a strong but gentle bandage, above the two heels, and on the two knees: and the length of each should be equal to four fingers from its opposite: and the weak leg should be extended more than the other by the length of two fingers.
Then let the weak one be suspended above the head of the beam, which is in the house: and its length should be equal to the length of two arms from the ground.
Then command the strong young man to protect the hip joint: and let the weak one be suspended with another assistant: and let another young man push him, protecting the hip with strength, for the joint returns to its place with speed.
But in its own reduction, when it is a dislocation to the outer parts, it is necessary that the weak one lies on the footstool, as we mentioned for him who has stiffness. And the ligament is tied above the weak leg, and on his chest.
Then two beams are placed, one by his feet, and the other by his head. Then a beam is placed added in the middle of his foot, fixed well: above which are wrapped wet cloths, so that it does not harm the weak one: and the beam should be between his hips, so that it is not pulled downwards during extension.
Then every assistant should extend to his own part, and the doctor should equal the reduction by his hand.
If therefore he obeys the return, it will be good.
And if not, put it on that table, and press it evenly, as we said in the lameness, equally. However, it is necessary that the sick person should lie on his sound side.
And when the dislocation is to the anterior, then it is necessary that the sick leg should be extended quickly: and it is according to this same story on the footstool: and the doctor should put his right hand palm down on the sick person's groin. Then he should enclose him with his other hand, and with that enclosure put him stretched out to the lower parts to the part of the knee.
And if the dislocation is to the posterior, then it is not necessary that the sick person should be stretched out to the lower parts, and he should be raised up on the ground: but it is necessary that he should be placed on something hard, as it is made even if his ankle is dislocated to the outside, according to what we said about his lying on two ankles: and it is on his face, and the tendons are stretched: according to what we said recently.
And it is necessary that compression should be given with the table even on the place from which he goes out at the joint, when the reduction is completed according to what is necessary.
And the sign of his reduction is not hidden from you: and it is, that you extend both sick legs: and when you see them equal, and the sick person draws back his leg, and he expands it without excuse: then you know that the member has already returned, according to what is necessary: then join two hips, and put on a plaster, and bind with imemati, that is, a wheel: so that the ankle does not move to any part: and the sick person should stick quietly for three days, or four.
Then dissolve the ligament, and the plaster, and compare the leg with the other: if you see them equal in state, then you will know that the dislocation has been restored: therefore complete the weak one for walking.
And if you see anything softening: then return, and apply the plaster to it, and tie it according to your first tension: and let it go for three days.
Then dissolve it and make it slow in walking on both sides for several days until it is well strengthened.
Concerning the Dislocation of the Knee.
The knee is dislocated in three ways. It is dislocated to the outsides, to the insides, and to the lower parts, that is, to the back.
And it does not dislocate to the front.
And the sign of its dislocation is that you command the weak one to apply his leg to his hip. But if it does not stick to the hip, then you will know that the knee is dislocated.
And the restoration of all its dislocations is to make the weak one sit straight, so that he can extend his leg if possible over it, and stick his back to his face: and put his foot between your feet.
Then stick the knee with your hands, and straighten them between your fingers over the knee. Then apply with your hand two sides of the knee with strength. And another servant extends his foot, until the knee returns to its place.
And the sign of its return is that the leg sticks to the hip in ease, not with labor.
Then plaster it, and make the leg stick to the hip. Then tie it together with the wound and the dressing for three days, or four. Then dissolve it.
And do not use weak walking for several days until he is healed.
But if he refuses to reduce it to you, then apply strong extension with bandages, of which the description is given in the treatment of fractures, until he returns.
¶ On the Treatment of Dislocation of the Heel Bone.
The heel bone sometimes moves slightly and sometimes dislocates completely. And its dislocation is to the inside or outside.
And the sign of its dislocation is that you see the heel bone inflated, protruding towards the part to which it dislocates.
But its treatment of removal is easy: and it is, that it is extended with ease with the hands, and adjusted, until it returns.
But in its treatment when it dislocates completely, you must do that the sick person sits straight up: and he holds him strong very from the back part of his back, in the middle of him.
Then hold you with your right hand your foot from the upper part of him, and with your left hand from the lower part of his foot in the place of the heel.
Then pull his foot towards you with your right hand. Then with your left hand twice.
Then extend with your left hand, and push the foot's chest with your right towards the leg without labor.
Do that twice, as we have said.
Then push the foot's chest towards the leg in the third pull, and you pull the heel.
But if it returns in the first pull, or in two according to this way, and you see the foot even, it is good: and if not, then repeat the operation on him: because he returns.
If, however, you are prohibited from reducing him with the method we have described, then let the sick person lie on his back on the ground, and firmly fix a staff in the ground, so that he falls between his buttocks; and you have already uncovered him above the cloth, so that he does not hurt the sick person.
Then let the assistant take hold of his buttocks: afterwards, let the assistant extend one foot, or with his hands, or with a bandage that ties around the neck of the foot. Then let all the assistants extend against the extension of their own counterforce: and the staff should stand between the two buttocks of the sick person, retaining him, so that his body is not drawn to his lower parts during the extension.
Then the doctor equalizes the dislocation with his hands, and the assistant holds the healthy leg towards the lower parts. For the dislocation returns quickly.
When therefore the dislocation returns, and its health is declared to you: then place a plaster and bandage, and bind it firmly with bands, and tie the foot with a bandage to the leg.
And it is necessary that you be careful of the hollows or fear the nerves, which are above the heel posterior, so that there is not a strong bandage over them, and they do not hurt them.
Then let him go for two days, or three. If the bandage becomes soft, bind him again: then dissolve it on the third day, or fourth: and prohibit the sick person from walking for forty days. If however he attempts to walk before that space, there is no safety that the dislocation does not dissolve on him, and it is corrupted, and he does not receive after that cure.
If however a hot abscess occurs to him: then it is necessary that the attendant in his sedation that preceded our narrative in another place from cure, and ointment, until it is removed.
On Dislocation of the Toes of the Foot and its Treatment.
It is necessary to put back into place what has been dislocated from among them with extension, a few without difficulty: and indeed this is not difficult, but rather easy.
But if the dislocation is in certain knots of the arch of the foot, then it is necessary for the sick person to sit with his foot on an equal level with the ground, or on a board: and he stands as if walking.
Then you stand, and place your foot on that which projects from among those joints. Then you step on it with your foot with strength, until it returns, and you see that it is now equal, and there is no projection in its place.
Then place under the sole of his foot a board which can hold the whole foot, with two heads. Then bind it with a decent bandage for three days. Then you loosen it, and make him rest from walking for many days, until it is bandaged and secured from the reduction.
On the kinds of dislocation with a wound or fracture.
When something happens to him and you try to cure him and restore him, death often follows: and for this reason it is not necessary for one to presume on the cure of his wound, which is of this kind, unless he is wise in the art of long use, merciful, pious, slow, not audacious, nor presumptuous: and that he uses in the reception of medicines which only calm inflammations hot only: and he leaves the sick for a long time to divine judgment. Unless you see or hope for health from the danger with the alleviation of pain, and in which something appears to be hope. Therefore, attempt the reduction of it immediately at the beginning of the matter, before a hot abscess occurs.
If therefore the member returns as we wish, then administer the regimen that calms the abscess: and care for the wound along with what is suitable for it from drying ointments.
If however the dislocation is with fracture, and it occurs in the separated bones of the jaw, then attempt the removal of them, and do in it what we said in simple afflictions from that which preceded in those places.
And beware according to your ability, and guard yourself from entering the way of fear: according to what preceded my preaching to you.
For that is better for you before your Creator, and more enduring to your glory, and more saving to your body among them in your time.
