After having completed for you, O my son, this book, which is the last of the knowledge in medicine with its complement, and having reached the end of it through its expositions and his declarations, I wished to complete it for you with this Treatise, which is a part of operation, that is, surgery with the hand.
For operation with the hand has been laid low in our region and in our time, and the knowledge of it has perhaps entirely perished, and its trace has entirely disappeared, and there remained from it only small descriptions in ancient books, which were changed by hand: and they incurred error and hesitation until its intentions were closed off and its vision was lengthened. It seemed to me that I should revive it with the arrangement of this Treatise in it according to the way of exposition, declaration, and abbreviation: and that I should come with the forms of Cauterii's tools, and the other tools of operation: since it is made from its declaration addition, and from its operation which is necessary.
The reason why a good artisan of it with his own hand is not found in our time is this: because the art of medicine is long, and it is necessary for its author to be exercised before that in the science of anatomy, which Galen narrated, until he knows the joints of the members, and their forms, and their conjunction and separation, and have knowledge of the bones, and nerves, and sinews, and their number, and their egressions, and the pulses of the veins, and the quieting of them, and the exits of the places of them.
And on account of this Hippocrates said that a name with a name is much, and with work is few, and especially in the art of hand.
Indeed, we have already spoken of that at the entrance of this book.
Since those who are not aware of what we have said about anatomy are not spared from falling into the error in which men perish: just as I have seen many of those who are formed from this science and boast about it without knowledge and without experience.
That is because I have seen a stupid doctor cut open a scrophulous abscess on the neck of a woman and cut some arteries in her neck: therefore the woman's blood flowed, until she died in her hands.
And I have seen another doctor who presumed to remove a stone from a man who had grown old, and the stone was large. Therefore he reached him and removed it with a piece of the bladder. Therefore the man died on the third day.
And indeed I had already been called to remove it: and I saw from the size of the stone and the weakness of the man that he would die.
And I have seen another doctor who received a bribe from a certain duke of our land for medicine: and it happened to the black eunuch who was with him, a fracture near the calcaneum in his leg: and the doctor hurried with his ignorance, and tied the fracture over the wound with bandages, and with strong bandaging, and did not let the wound breathe.
Then he healed him according to his own desires. Then he sent him away for several days, and told him not to untie the bandage: and it stood thus until his leg became an abscess, and his foot, and he came to destruction.
Therefore I was called to him: and I hurried to untie the bandage: and following this, there was peace, and he escaped from his pains.
However, corruption was already confirmed in the member, and I could not restrain it.
Therefore, corruption ceased to wander in the member until it died.
And I saw another physician who pierced the carbuncular tumor, and it became ulcerated after days, until its evil was revealed to its lord.
That is, because when cancer is pure from melancholic humor, then it is not necessary to approach it with iron at all, unless there is a member that can tolerate it, so that the whole of it is cut off.
And because of that, my son, it is necessary for you to know that the operation with the hand is divided into two divisions: namely, the operation with which safety is associated, and the operation with which there is danger in many positions.
And I have already awakened in every place of this book, in which operation comes, in which there is fear and fear.
Therefore, it is necessary for you to beware of that and abandon it, so that the fool does not find a way to speak and disgrace.
Therefore, take the measure with solicitude and protection, and your infirm ones with facility and firmness, and use the better way leading to salvation and praiseworthy succession through the grace of God: and leave terrible difficulties of healing: and remove your souls from that which makes you fear, so that doubt may enter upon you in your faith and your benefit.
For it is rather remaining to your glory, and higher in this world, and finally to your quantities.
For Galenus already said in some of his admonitions. Do not heal bad difficulties: so that you are not called bad doctors.
Now however, this Treatise has been divided into three Chapters.
Chapter One.
Of the Cautery with Fire, and the Cautery with Sharp Medicine, arranged from beginning to end, including the forms of instruments and tools for cauterization, and everything necessary for the operation.
Chapter Two.
Of Cutting and Perforation, Bloodletting and Phlebotomy, and Wounds: and Extraction of Arrows, and similar things: and the entire Chapter arranged according to the forms of instruments.
Chapter Three.
Of Restoration, and Dislocation, and Cure of Twisting, and similar things: arranged from beginning to end, including the forms of instruments.
However, before I remind you of the operation with it, it is necessary that I say about the quality of its Jaw, and the harm of that: and in which constitution it appears.
I say therefore, that the speech about the quality of the Jaw of the Cautery, and its harm, is a long and subtle speech, a knowledge, and a hidden secret.
Also many wise men spoke about it, and they disagreed in it: and to me indeed it is insufficient by the words of them, fearing the lengthening.
I say therefore, that the Cautery brings universally to every constitution, which is with matter, and without matter: excepting two constitutions, which are the constitution hot without matter, and the constitution dry without matter.
In a warm and dry compound with matter, they separated. For some said that the cauterizing iron of the juvenile was in it. And others said the opposite of that, namely that the cauterizing iron is not suitable for the illness which is from warmth and dryness: because the nature of fire is warmth: and unsuitable is it, that one should be healed from the illness of warmth and dryness with warmth and dryness.
And he who said the opposite of that said: that by cauterizing, a cure is made for every illness of warmth and dryness which happens in the bodies of men: because when you compare the body of man, and its moistures, to the compound of fire, you find the body of man cold.
And I indeed say by his word: because from experiment he has shown me that many times.
However it is not necessary to come to that, unless he who has already been tested, and exercised in the chapter of cauterization exercise last, and knows the diversity of human compounds, and the disposition of illnesses in themselves, and their causes, and the accidents of them, and the time of them.
And from other compounds there is not upon you fear: and especially in illnesses which are cold and moist. For now all physicians have gathered upon them: and they did not separate in cure with cauterization in them.
And know you children, that from the secret of cure with cauterization with fire, and its goodness above cauterization with burning medicine is: because fire is simple, whose action does not reach, except to the member which is cauterized: and it does not harm another member joined with it, unless a little harm.
The action of medicine reaches as far as to extend from the body: and perhaps it causes difficulty in healing a member, and perhaps it kills.
However, fire, due to its subtlety and goodness of its substance, does not do that unless it overflows.
Indeed, we have now become aware of that through experiment, because of the length of service and study with the art, and position above truth of things: and for that reason I excuse myself from the length of speech.
And if it were not, because it is not allowed for this my book, I would bring to you a secret hidden in fire, and the quality of its operation in bodies of its expulsion, which expels sufferings demonstrated by philosophical speech, which would be remembered by your minds.
And know, my sons, that they themselves disagree in the time when it is fitting to do cauterization, and they set a better time for the truth.
And I say, that cauterization is fitting at every time: because the accidental harm is sunk in the benefit, which is drawn with the cauterizer. Especially if cauterization is for pain from necessary pains, strong, urgent ones who do not tolerate delay: because it is feared that something evil may happen which is greater than the small harm that happens through delay.
And may not fall into your minds, my sons, that which they do not fear, namely that the common people and stupid physicians, namely that to the pain which is healed by cauterization, there is not always return: and they put this consequence, and the matter is not as they think: because cauterization is not, except in place of medicine, which changes the complexion, and dries moistures which are cause why pains happen.
However, the excessive use of cauterizing can be detrimental to the medicine due to its speed of healing, its effectiveness, and its strong influence over the body. It is possible for the sickness to return at a later time according to the nature of the infirm person, the location of their sickness, and its strength. Also, it can be caused by the accumulation of excessive substances within their body, or from foods and similar causes that led to the application of the cauterization unless the sickness returns.
A subtle sickness in a member with few excessive substances and moisture, such as a tooth cauterization due to pain and similar causes, is possible that this pain does not return in it. But this happens in few cases.
Indeed, the common saying that cauterization is the last of the medicines is correct, not as they intend in it: because they believe that there is no cure that corresponds with the medicine, nor with another after the fall of the cauterization.
The matter is indeed the opposite of that, and their intention, that cauterization is the last of the medicines, is not so, unless when we administer modes of cure in some sicknesses, and those medicines do not correspond: then we administer at the end of the matter cauterization, and it corresponds: then it falls, that cauterization is the last of the medical arts, not according to the intention which the common people and many foolish physicians understand.
The ancients indeed said that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron: and they did not say this unless because of the equality of gold, and the sublimity of its substance: and they said that it does not make pus in the place of cauterization. However, it is not absolutely true that I have already proven and discovered that it does not work in certain bodies without other things.
And a cautery with it is good, and better than with iron, as they said. However, when you put the cautery into the fire from gold, it is not indicated to you when it is burned according to the amount that you want, because of the redness of gold: and when it approaches the heat, and if you add more to it, it melts in the fire and turns into sheets.
Therefore, the craftsman falls from that into the occupation: and for that reason, the cautery with iron is made by us faster and closer, from straightness to the operation.
And indeed, I have already arranged this Chapter on Cautery, according to chapters: and I have arranged them from head to foot, so that those seeking it may find what they want from it.
Chapter 2.
This cauterization is applied to the dominion of moisture and cold over the brain: which two are causes of sweat, and multitude of discharges of humors from the head to the parts of the eyes and ears, and multitude of sleep, and pain of the teeth, and pain of the throat: and universally all kinds of distress, which occur from cold, such as paralysis, and sweats, epilepsy, and apoplexy, and similar diseases to those distresses.
The method of cauterization is, that you order the sick person: to be emptied at first with a cleansing solution, head three nights, or four, according to what requires the power of the sick person, and his age, and his custom.
Then instruct him to shave his head with a razor. Then make him sit between your hands in a square position, so that he has already placed his hands on his chest.
Then place the root of your thumb on the root of his nose between his eyes. Whenever your middle finger reaches that spot, mark the location with a pen.
Then heat the cauterizing iron of olive oil: its form is as follows.
Then place it on the marked spot with the pen, with a downward movement, as your hand is gradually tightened, and you turn it back. Then quickly withdraw your hand, and look at the spot.
If you see that the amount of bone from the skull is equal to the amount of alkali or zeuberg, then lift your hand. And if not, repeat your hand with the same iron, or with another if it is cooled: until you see the bones that I told you.
Then take some salt and dissolve it in water, and drink the solution with the wound, and place it on the spot: and leave it for three days.
Then place the salt water drunk on the wound on butter, and leave it on the spot until the scab of the fire is destroyed. Then care for it with the ointment tetrapharmacon until it is healed.
Now they have said that the more the wound remains open, the more pus is emitted: therefore it is better and more healing.
And some of them said that the skin should be cauterized until the bone: and the cauterizing iron should be held until something of the density of bone is burned.
Then it is scraped after what was burned from the bone, then it is cared for.
Some say that when the cauterizer reaches the last part, it should be pressed against the bone until an impression is made in the form of a crescent: or with an instrument like that which women place between their teeth for the purpose of learning the alphabet: and they believe that vapors from the head will escape through this place, and the wound will remain open for a long time.
Then it should be dressed until it heals.
To me, however, these two kinds of cauterizer do not appear at all except in certain men according to the way of fear.
And it is better to leave it alone with its own health, in my opinion.
For the head becomes weakened from the solution of its natural continuity, just as we have shown in other members: and especially when the head of an invalid is weak by nature: and indeed the first kind of cauterizer is more saving and better for me, and I use it: therefore, work with it in health.
Head III.
When there is chronic pain in the whole head, and it is prolonged in the invalid, and he uses hemlock, and coals, and head-cleansers, and oils, and plasters: Especially if he has already been cauterized with the one cauterizer which we have mentioned, and does not apply anything from them: then consider. For if the head of the invalid is strong by nature, and is not weak, and has found a violent cold: then cauterize with another cauterizer under it slightly. Then cauterize it on top of all the horns of its own head with the cauterizer, so that the skin does not pass through, and a quantity of bone is exposed, as we have mentioned. And cauterize it with a single cauterizing iron at the back of its head, in the place called the "uas": and it is the location where the windpipe is placed: and raise your mat (or blanket) in this, and do not uncover its mouth. For indeed it has found a remedy for that very severe pain, and different from the pain of all other cauterizations of the head.
And I will call this cauterizing iron in its place: and it must be a cauterizing iron by which the horns of the head are cauterized, and the back of its head more subtly with the cauterizing iron by which the middle of the head is cauterized.
HEAD IV.
WHEN PAIN AND SORENESS OCCUR IN A PART OF THE HEAD, AND THE PAIN EXTENDS UP TO THE EYE, AND IS CLEANSED WITH REMEDIES FOR CLEANSING THE HEAD, AND THE REST OF THE CURE IS ADMINISTERED, AS I SAID IN THE DIVISIONS OF ILLNESSES, AND IT DOES NOT HEAL ALL OF IT: THEN CAUTERIZATION IS DONE IN TWO WAYS: EITHER CAUTERIZATION WITH A SHARP MEDICINE BURNING, OR WITH AN IRON.
BUT THE CAUTERIZING IRON WITH A SHARP MEDICINE BURNING IS, THAT YOU TAKE ONE Tooth of garlic, AND REMOVE ITS SHELL, AND CUT OFF ITS EXTREMITIES FROM BOTH SIDES. THEN CUT THE PLACE OF THE PAIN AT THE TIME WHEN THE BROAD LANCET IS USED, UNTIL THERE IS A LOCUS UNDER THE SKIN, IN WHICH THE TOOTH IS CAPTURED.
THEN INSERT IT INTO ITS SKIN, UNTIL IT IS HIDDEN: THEN STRAP OVER IT WITH A PIECE OF CLOTH IN DECENT CONSTRICTION, AND LET IT GO FOR FIFTEEN HOURS, THEN DISSOLVE IT, AND EXTRACT THE GARLIC, AND LET HIM REST FOR TWO DAYS, OR THREE: AFTER THAT, PUT ON IT BANDAGE SOAKED IN BUTTER, UNTIL THE PLACE BECOMES PUS: THEN CARE FOR IT WITH OINTMENT UNTIL IT HEALS.
And if you wish to do this with certain burning medicines, which I have written about in my twelfth treatise on Burning Medicaments.
However, the cauterization of that with iron is done in this manner. The cauterization with fire, which has this form.
And it is called the Clavil, because its form is like the form of a claw, in which there is some curvature, and in the middle of it is a small elevation.
Then place it on the spot and hold your hand: and you will turn the iron gradually with speed: and the quantity that is burned from the thickness of the skin, is like its middle. And raise your hand, so that the artery, which is below, does not burn and there is no loss of blood flow.
Then take the wound and soak it in salt water, and place it on the spot, and leave it for three days: then place the wound with butter: afterwards care for it with ointment until it is healed.
And if you wish, cauterize this hemicrania with the second edge of the small cauterizer. And avoid the incision of the artery in this hemicrania, not the ancient one properly.
¶ On the method of cauterizing in the ancient hemicrania.
When you are treating the hemicrania, with what we said about the previous cure, and what we said in the divisions of ailments, and it does not benefit from the cure: and you see from the ailment, that what we said about the first cauterization with medicine, or with the cauterizer with fire, does not suffice for it, then it is necessary to burn the small cauterizer, until it becomes white after the sign of pain with a line, whose length is the middle of a finger, or something like that: and place your hand halfway, and hold it until you cut the artery, and go through to the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuation of the jawbone, which moves during chewing, so as not to be burned by the side or the nerve that moves it, from which a spasm may occur.
And let this be over the guard and the precaution against the flow of blood from the severed artery. For in its severing there is fear, and especially for him who does not know what it does, and is not studious or experienced: and he leaves the operation with it first.
And I will come with the remembrance of the management of the flow of blood from the artery according to its own manner and in its own place in this book.
If you see from the pain that this cauterizer does not suffice for him, and you see the weak body bearing the cauterizer in the middle of the head, as we have narrated, take care of the wound until he is healed.
And if you wish, administer the cauterizer which we said in the chapter of extracting the artery with a cauterizer having two knives. For this cauterization is better and more fitting.
On the method of cauterizing in ear pain.
When pain occurs in the ear from cold, and it is cured with solutions, and the rest of the cure as we said in division, and the pain is not removed, then cauterize with fire: and this is what is called a prick, whose form is this.
Then pricks with it after its ignition around the ear entirely, as it is turned: or around both, if the pain is in both. And withdraw yourself with the cauterizer a little from the root of the ear after you have marked the places with the cauterizer: and let the quantity of the cauterizer be ten pricks in every ear, and about that.
Then treat the affected areas until they are healed.
On the method of cauterizing in torture.
Chapter 7.
The torture that is cured with cauterization is only from the types that occur from phlegm, as we said in the divisions of illnesses.
And the absence of cauterization of the type that occurs from dryness and spasm of the nerve.
When you treat this type of torture with honey, and capitpurges, and gargarisms, and your cure does not help, then it is necessary for you to cauterize the sick person with three cauterizations: one at the root of the ear, and second a little lower from his time, and third at the junction of the two lips.
And place your cauterization on the opposite side of the weak part. Because softening does not occur except in the part that appears healthy.
And the form of cauterization is to cauterize the sick person with the cauterization directly at the tip of the upper ear under the horn of the head a little: and another in the time: whose length is according to the length of the thumb. And place your hand with the cauterization until the quantity of half the thickness of the skin is burned.
And this is the form of the cauterization, and it is a species from a knife, whose form was mentioned before: but it is not too sharp, as you see: and it is necessary that the knife be a little too thick.
Then treat the affected areas with what preceded until they are healed.
On the method of cauterizing in old apoplexy.
When apoplexy is old, and you treat it with what we said, and your medication does not help, and the sick person does not have a fever, then cauterize him with four cauterizations on all the horn of his head, and with the cauterization in the middle of his head, as we said, and with the cauterization in the back of his head, according to what preceded: and the method of cauterization should be according to what preceded.
Even cauterization is performed with a cautery on the mouth of the stomach: and it is more final.
Then it is treated, with what preceded it.
Chapter 9.
It is necessary that in the drink first give great hiera powder, and purifying pills cleanse the brain.
Then shave the head of the sick person all over, and place on his occiput the plaster of synapi described in the treatise on plasters: and place it several times.
For this is indeed the method of cauterization: and do it according to order, as I said there.
If therefore he is healed by this, it is good. If not: then perform three cauterizations on the posterior part of his head, which are descending from the superior part of the head down to the lower part of the eye: and place between every cauterization the thickness of a finger.
Then treat the cauterization, with what preceded it.
But if you wish an addition, and the sick person is tolerating this: then perform cauterization on the middle. If you wish an addition: then cauterize him over two horns.
Then treat him, until he is healed: and let the cauterization be oily according to the form which was previously given.
On the method of cauterization in paralysis, and softening.
Chapter 10.
It is necessary that you proceed in the cleansing of the head with hiera, and with what we said.
Then shave the head of the sick person: afterwards cauterize him in the middle of his head, and with a cauterization on every horn of his head, and on the back of his neck, and three on the spines of his neck.
If you lack the ability to tolerate many of these softening methods for the body and are weak, and the pain is strong: then cauterize it with four cauteries on the spines of the back, and the last one with a cauterizer until it burns the most of its skin, and raise your hand. Then care for it until it heals: and thus cauterize with oil.
On the method of cauterizing in epilepsy.
An epileptic should not be cauterized unless he is the one whose epilepsy is from phlegm.
Therefore it is necessary to cleanse his brain first with vinegar, and with the rest of the cure which we mentioned in division: when he is weak, or is not able to bear the taking of medicines.
But if it is a child who does not bear medicines, then the gargle is administered, and cleansing mastications of the brain are given before many days with good nutrition.
Then shave his head, and then cauterize him with a cauterizer in the middle of his head, according to what preceded in method: and with another cauterizer in the back of his head, and on every horn of his own head with a cauterizer. But if he is weak and strong, and is able to bear it, then cauterize him with the cauteries which I said in having paralysis, and softening of the body on the spines of the neck, and the spines of the back: and the cauterizer should be oily according to the method which preceded.
But if he is weak, then place the thin cauterizer in this way.
On the method of cauterizing in melancholy.
When the cause of melancholy is corrupted humors and thick phlegm, then cauterize with the cauteries we mentioned in one having paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is an excess of humors flowing down to melancholy, and there is a weak moist body, then give him a drink that cleanses his brain, according to what preceded in division: then shave the sick head, and make afterwards a well-made tortellini from linen, like a circle.
Then place it in the middle of the head: and the sick one sitting squarely held from every part.
Then present the liniment. And it is more fitting from old butter. And warm it gently over a fire with measured heat, which the finger could bear when inserted into it. Then evacuate it in the middle of his head in a circle, and let him go until he is cooled.
Do this for the sick one once a week, with good management of his other affairs, until he is healed.
Or if you wish, cauterize it by making small points as much as possible, except that you hold the hand with the cauterizer: indeed it should be smelling.
For this kind of cauterization humidifies the brain with quality.
Then place on it a wet cloth soaked in butter, or chicken fat.
¶ On the manner of cauterizing in water flowing down to the eye.
Chapter 13.
When the beginning of water is declared to you in the eye by signs which I said in division, then begin and give the sick one a drink with it that cleanses his head.
And guard him from all moistures, and make him sit in the bath, on fasting days for several days.
Then instruct him to cut off his head and cauterize it in the middle of his head. Then cauterize it over the two temples with two cauteries, if there is an onset of water in both eyes at once: or from one side, if there is an onset of water in one eye: and cut off all the veins and arteries that are under the skin: and let the cauterization be long in the width of the temples: and beware of blood flow.
If you see anything from it, then cut it off immediately with any possible medicine: and I will come with wisdom, which is in the extraction of arteries, and their cutting, and caution against blood flow.
And sometimes it is cauterized on the neck, under two bones, with two last cauterizations produced.
Concerning the method of cauterizing in the eyes of olden times.
When the tears of the eyes are olden, persistent: and they are on the veins, and arteries that are in the manifest exterior of the head, it is verified that that is from superfluities cold, phlegmatic: then cauterize with the same cauterization that I told in the onset of water descending, cauterization in the middle of the head, and two cauterizations over the two temples, and two cauterizations in the neck under two bones. And if you need additional, then cauterize it on every side of the eye carefully, over the extreme of the eyebrow with a small cauterization.
Concerning the method of cauterizing in the nostril discharge.
When you treat it, with that which we said in the division, and there is no remedy: then hasten, and give in the weak medicine for three nights: then cut off his head, and cauterize it in the middle with a fat cauterization. Then, cauterize the eyelid with a cautery hook, applying two cauteries, one above each eyebrow, just beneath the hair.
And guard against the artery, lest you cut it.
And this is the shape of the cautery hook.
On the method of cauterizing for relaxation of the eyelid.
When the eyelid is relaxed from pain or moisture, then cauterize the eyelid with a single cautery and this lunar cautery.
And if you wish, cauterize it above each eyebrow a little with two cauteries in every part: and they should be extended from both temples: and the length of all the cauteries should be according to the length of the eyebrows: and do not let your hand touch the cautery, but according to the quantity that burns the third eyelid.
On the method of cauterizing the eyelid when hairs point towards the eye.
The cautery in this case is according to two methods: either a cautery with fire: or a cautery with burning medicine.
In the cautery with fire, however, instruct the sick person before it, so that he may let go of his hairs, if it is from those who remove them, until they are extended and evened out. But if they point at his birth: then close his eyes with a bandage, so that they may not move, until they are born.
When they are born and evened out, then place the head of the sick person in your lap: then mark on the eyelid with a hot iron, a sign that it is according to the figure of myrtle leaves: and let the beginning of the sign be near the hairs.
Then place a moistened cotton pad on the albumen or on the mucilage of psyllium over the eye.
Then apply a cauterizing iron with this shape.
Then cauterize over the shape you indicated gradually in several strokes, until the surface of the skin is burned, which appears like the figure of a myrtle leaf, entirely.
And the sign of your work's health is that if you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted and the hairs raised at the point of the eye.
So wash your hand then, and let it rest for three days.
Then place a cotton pad with butter on it over it until the eschar is removed. Then care for it with ointment until it heals.
If some of the hairs return after an hour and the eyelid softens, then repeat the cauterizing iron on that spot, as you did first.
But if the hairs are on the lower part, then cauterize that spot until it returns to its natural place: and so it will not prick the eye with the hairs.
You should order the sick person to let go of the hairs until they grow and become equal. Make a shape of a myrtle leaf from paper and cloth.
Then take from the known soap and from the unsoaked chalk of each ounce I or about that: then rub them together with good friction, and make it with speed, so that it does not freeze. Then take a piece from that on the cloth you made like the shape of a myrtle leaf, and place it on the eyelid of one or both eyes. And place under the eye a moistened cotton pad in an egg white: and let the head of the sick person be in your lap.
And place your finger on the medicine, and press it slightly. And you move it whenever the sick person feels the bite of the medicine, since its bite is like fire.
While therefore he persisted in what he found to be the bite, then let go of the medicine, and move it with your finger. When therefore the bite is quieted, then remove the medicine, and wash the eye with water.
And consider then, if you see the eyelid raised, as it is raised with contraction with fire, or with incision, it is good: and if not, then repeat on it from the medicine on the place where it does not imprint the medicine, and does not stain, until your operation equals, and the eye contracts.
Then place on it a cotton pad with butter, until the burn of the skin is eradicated. Then care for it with diaphenhydramine ointment, or another, until it is healed.
And it is necessary for you at the operation, that you guard the last guard, lest something fall into the eye from the medicine.
If the eyelid softens after days, and something fighting from the hair is in the eye, then repeat the medicine on that place which softens from the eyelid properly, as you did first. Then care for it, until it is healed.
And this is the shape of the leaf of myrtle.
And know that the eyes of men vary in size and symmetry. Therefore according to that be your consideration: and do not hide the path of righteousness to him who has a desire for this art.
On the method of cauterizing a lacrimal fistula.
When you are treating a fistula, since as we mentioned in the divisions of diseases, and your cure does not succeed: then, it is necessary for you to cauterize it according to this method.
Instruct the patient to place his head in your lap, and hold his head between his hands thus, so that he does not move, nor act with his own head.
Then place a cotton swab soaked in a solution of oui, or in a mucilage of psyllium on his eye: then heat the cauterizing iron, whose form is thus.
Let it be concave, like the form of the pen feather of a quill from one end, with which the cauterizing iron is made: and if you wish it to be piercing up to the other end, and if you wish it to be upwards, then test thus.
However, this concave is better for your work.
Then express the fistula, if it is open, and remove the pus from it, and dry it: and if it is not open, then open it, and remove its pus.
Then place then on it the cauterizing iron, which is made fiery.
And hold with it your hand for a moment near the cauterizing iron from the eye, to the part of the nose, so that your hand does not err, or disturb the sick person: and place the cauterizing iron in the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
If therefore you reach the beginning of your cauterizing iron up to the bone, it will be good. And if not: then repeat the cauterizing iron once, or twice, if you need it: and let it go for three days.
Then place a poultice with butter on it, and care for it with a drying ointment until it heals.
If it has passed forty days and is not healed: then place a sharp, corrosive medicine on it until the bone is removed: and cut it according to how it comes in its chapter.
And there is another method of cauterizing a fistula, which some of the first ones said. Bend to the place of the fistula, and plug it: then place in the wound a thin cannula, that is, a thin needle, whose form is this. And pour in a quantity of drachma from the melted lead, and hold your hand with the cannula well retained, and do not move it at all weakly, so that it does not run, or the melted lead reaches his eye.
And it is necessary to place on the weak person's eye a poultice soaked in white of egg, or in water.
For lead burns the place of the fistula, and heals it with a marvelous cure.
If the fistula is healed, with what we said from cauterization, and cure, it is good. And if not, then it is necessary to administer the opening of the nose, and reduce the fistula to the course of the nose, according to how it comes to its proper place.
On the method of cauterizing in wounds of the lips.
Frequently wounds occur in the lip, which are called "pili," and especially in the lips of children.
When therefore you care for these wounds, with what we said in the division of diseases, and not a cure is combined, then a small cauterizing iron, according to this form.
And let its concavity be according to the sharpness of the knife.
Then place it quickly on those incisions, until the cautery reaches the depth of the incisions.
Then care for it with the caustic, until it heals.
¶ On the method of cauterizing a mouth ulcer.
When an abscess occurs at the root of the gingiva, or in the palate, or in the roots of the teeth: then it produces pus, and bursts: afterwards it becomes putrid, and pus runs out, and a fistula forms: then care for it, and the cure does not improve in it, then it is necessary to use a burning cautery according to the amount that fits into the fistula. Then insert it into the opening of the fistula, and hold your hand until the burning iron reaches the depth and end of it: do this once or twice.
Then care for it after that, with what we said about the cure until it heals.
If therefore the pus is cut off and healed, it will be good. And if not, then it is necessary to expose the place, and remove the bone of the corrupt part according to what comes into its head.
¶ On the method of cauterizing gums, and molten teeth.
When the gum is molten due to moisture, and the teeth are moved, and you care for it with medicines, and it does not improve: then place the head of the sick person in your lap.
Then a burning iron, of which the shape will come after these, so that you place a cannula on the tooth: and insert the burning iron into it quickly: and hold your hand for a little while, until the sick person feels the heat of the fire has reached the root of the tooth.
And retract your hand: then repeat the cauterization several times, according to what you wish.
Then the sick person will fill their mouth with salt water and hold it for one hour: and then spit it out.
For the tooth is strengthened by motion, and the jaw becomes soft and contracts, and thus the corrupted moisture is dried up.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in tooth pain.
When the toothache is due to coldness, or there is fever in it, or worms, and no cure is found with medicines: then cauterization is done in two ways: either cauterization with butter: or cauterization with fire.
But cauterization with butter is, so you take calf's butter, and boil it in an iron spoon, or in a vessel. Then take a cloth, and cover it over the end of the tooth. Then submerge it in the boiled butter: and place it on the painful tooth quickly, and hold it until it cools: then repeat it several times, until the power of fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, submerge a cloth, or a rag in cold butter, and place it on the painful tooth: and place a hot iron on it, until fire reaches the depth of the cavity of the tooth.
But cauterization with fire is, so you direct it to a tube of air, or an iron tube. And there should be something thick in its body, so that the sharpness of fire does not reach the mouth of the sick person.
Then cauterize with fire, whose form will come: and place it on the tooth: and hold your hand until the cauterization cools.
Perform this procedure several times, as the pain will be alleviated either on that same day or on another day.
And it is necessary for the sick person to fill his mouth with good charcoal and hold it for one hour, then spit it out.
This is the shape of the cauterizing iron.
Cauterize with any tip of the needle according to what is possible; and this is the shape of the cannula.
On the method of cauterizing in Strophuli.
When Strophuli are caused by phlegm, and by cold humors, and they do not obey the digestive process through medicines, and you want to quickly promote their digestion: then use a flat cauterizing iron, whose shape is this.
Having two open ends, so that smoke comes out from the cauterizing iron through the other end: and place it on the abscess once, and twice if you need to, until it reaches the depth of the abscess.
If the abscess is small: then place the cauterizing iron according to the size of the abscess.
Then let it go for three days, and place on it a compress soaked in an infusion, until the burn caused by the fire is removed.
Then care for it with tooth ointment, until the shape of the cannula is healed.
On the method of cauterizing in a hoarse voice, and in constriction of breath.
When moisture is accumulated on the bronchial tube, and especially when it is with a cold temperament, then it is necessary for the sick person to be evacuated first with dissolved medicines.
Then cauterize the wound itself at the root of the neck in a hollow place: and be careful not to let the cauterizer touch the throat, nor on the skin, unless something of it.
Then cauterize the wound itself with another cauterizer at the junction of the neck in the last spinal process of it: and let the cauterizer be narrow according to the mode that preceded.
Then care for it with what came before, until it heals.
¶ On the method of cauterizing in illnesses of the Lungs, and Cough.
When Cough and illness of the Lungs are from moisture and cold, and the sick person does not have fever, nor phthisis, and the illness is old: then cauterize it with two cauterizers above the wishbone in hollow places, gentle, empty. And with another cauterizer in the middle of the chest between two breasts: and let the cauterizer be a needle according to the form that preceded.
And if you want your cauterization to be by puncturing with the cauterizer called Punctum, whose form preceded in puncturing of pain of the ear: and let there be punctures from thirty punctures almost to another.
Then care for it with what came before, until it heals.
And now let the cauterizer have three branches: according to this form. Why relieves with it cauterization, when you do with it once three cauterizers.
Chapter 27.
When the head of the arm is dislocated by the cause of moisture, and it is not set in the hour of its return from dislocation, until it has that habit of returning to it, then dislocate it from a small movement, which happens as we have already testified there, then you should reduce the dislocation in the first. Then the invalid should be laid upon his back, or on the sound side. Then lift up the bedclothes, which are in the interior of the Ti-tilli, towards the upper parts with your left hand fingers: and if the joint is dislocated towards the inner side.
Then hold a cauterizing iron having two wounds. Whose form is this.
Then cauterize the bedclothes, until it penetrates it up to the other side, and the figure of cauterization comes with four cauterizations.
And sometimes cauterization is made with a cauterizing iron having three wounds, wherefore the figure of cauterization then becomes of six cauterizations: and they are wounds according to the fineness of the thread.
And this is the form of a cauterizing iron having three wounds.
And sometimes one is added to this manner, wherefore they are eight cauterizations.
Then place on the cauterizing iron crushed garlic with salt. Then make the invalid stick to the tranquility, so that the member does not move during any time, until he is strengthened.
And if the dislocation is towards the upper parts, and this rarely happens, then cauterize it on the arm with a claw-cauterizing iron, or with many puncturing cauterizations.
For the joint is strengthened, and the moisture is removed: and the invalid is healed.
¶ Of the manner of cauterizing the stomach.
When a fever and much moisture occur in the stomach, until they extract it from its connection, and multiply cataracts upon it, and frequent modes of cure, and do not bring relief: then it is necessary that the invalid should be laid upon his back, and extend his legs, and his hands. Then cauterize with three cautery needles, the cautery needle under the ear of the chest in the quantity of a finger's thickness, and two cautery needles below from both sides of the cautery needle of one, until it reaches the triangular shape of the cautery. And stretch them apart so that they do not touch each other when they make pus.
And let the depth of the cautery be the thickness of two-thirds of the skin.
And let the shape of the cautery be according to this form without addition: and if you wish to cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form, and let the cautery be according to the shape of a circle according to this form.
And the stomach is to be cauterized by pricking it where it is touched by this cautery: and it is, that the signs above the stomach are pricked according to the quantity, which you wish with the encaustro: then cauterize it with the cautery needle: then care for it with the remedy that preceded until it is healed.
¶ On the method of cauterizing Epar cold.
When it happens in Epar that pain occurs from cold and wetness, or from thick sweating, until it goes beyond its natural exit, and the sick person is cured, since we have said what we said, and it does not help him: then it is necessary for the sick person to be stretched out on his shoulder, and signs are pricked with three cautery needles according to this form, and the same thickness of the skin below Epar, where the arm of a man reaches: and let there be space that is the thickness of a finger between each cautery: and let the cautery be according to the length of the body straight: and do not press your hand with the cautery too much.
And let the quantity of what is burned be equal to the thickness of the skin, and let the quantity of the middle part not be added: and let him who stands on his feet be weak.
But if he is not standing, then let him who lies down, who has already extended his legs and raised his arms.
This is the shape of the cautery.
And it is possible for you, with this cautery, to cauterize with a scalpel when you are with skill and wisdom in the art.
And guard yourself, so that you do not proceed too far in cauterization, and the thickness of the skin is burned throughout, why the whole body is burned, and reaches the intestines: for the skin there is thin, so you know that.
On the method of cauterizing abscesses in the liver.
When it happens, and you want to know if that abscess is in the liver flesh, or in its tunic: then if it is in the liver flesh, it attacks the weak with pain, and there is gravity without sharpness: and if it is in the tunic of the liver, with pain there is very strong sharpness: and you see already, because its cure has tired out the doctors.
Therefore it is necessary that the weak person lie down on his neck. Then the shape of the place of the abscesses with the cautery: then burn the cautery that resembles a ray. And this is its shape. And cauterize with that cautery one, until the whole skin is burned, and it reaches the intestines, until all the pus comes out: then cure him with the cure of the wounds, until he is healed.
And it is not necessary to use this cautery species, unless whose study in the art of medicine is prolonged: and through whose hand these illnesses with trial several times: then for he dares on this operation.
It is indeed better to let her go, with me.
On the method of cauterizing in Pleurisy.
The ancients said, a cautery with the roots of Aristolochia should be applied to cold Pleurisy in this manner. And it is that you should take from the dry roots of Aristolochia, a longer root, which is found among them, and it should be as thick as the size of a finger. Then immerse it in oil: and burn it in the fire. Then cauterize it with a single cautery in that which is between the continuation of the backbone with the neck, and two small cauteries under the chin slightly declining to the part which is under the beard.
And with two cauteries also in that which is between the fifth and sixth rib declining to the backs a little: and with another cautery in the middle of the chest, and with another above the stomach. And with three cauteries from the backs: one in that which is between two spatulas: and with two cauteries from two sides of the chest, lower cauterie which is between two spatulas.
And it is not necessary to press your hand with the cautery, but rather it should be in plain sight of the skin smelling.
And indeed some ancients said that from men there are those who use a cautery from a similar iron rod: and they burn, and they put it inside in that which is between the ribs, until it reaches with it to the apostem, and the pus comes out: as we said in the apostem of Epatis.
But in this piercing with the cautery there is from fear, that either he dies weak immediately, or it happens in the place of a fistula, which has no cure.
Chapter 32 on the method of cauterizing the spleen.
When you are treating a splenic affliction, since as we mentioned earlier, the cure lies in dividing the afflictions, and your treatment does not succeed, then cauterization of it is done in three ways, all of which are correct.
One of which is to perform three or four cauterizations along the length of the spleen according to the shape of the liver cauteries, whose figure precedes it.
And let there be between each cauterization a thickness of the digit's breadth, or a little more or less.
And let the method of cauterization be as we mentioned in the cauterization of the liver equally.
And do not press your hand against the cauterizer: and let the patient be weak and lying on his back.
Another method of cauterization is: to have the cauterizer with two wounds, as we mentioned in the chapter on dislocation of the humerus: and raise the skin which is on the spleen directly, where the elbow of the weak left arm reaches: and let your elevation be according to the width of the body, so that the cauterizations fall according to the length of the body.
Then insert two burning wounds, until you penetrate the skin from the other side: then remove the cauterizer: so there are four cauterizations.
And if you wish to cauterize with another cauterizer having three wounds.
Then care for the cauterizer after you have released it, to emit pus for many days: for it is more helpful than all the other things that preceded from the cure.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in hydrops.
The cauterizer does not fall into hydrophobia unless properly trained.
When you treat hydrophobia with the methods of cure that we mentioned in the division, and do not combine the cure, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient four times around the umbilicus, and with a cauterizer on the stomach, and another on the epar, and one on the spleen, and two cauterizers after the back between the spines, and one in direct pectoris, and another in direct stomachi: and let the depth of the cauterization be close to the thickness of the skin.
Then dismiss the cauterizer open, so that it emits pus over a long period of time.
And do not remove the sick person from treatment after cauterization with him, for it is necessary that two intentions be gathered to him: and he will hasten to him with the help of God.
The form of the cauterizer with which the belly is cauterized should be closed, according to its previous form: and the form of the one with which the back is cauterized should be olive-oil-like, according to its previous form.
On the method of cauterizing feet and legs.
When abscesses form in hydrophobia and are filled with yellow water: then it is necessary to cauterize on the back of the foot in the nocrati, which is between the auricular and anular: and lift your hand with the cauterizer, and do not twist it: then lift your hand: and do not rub it at all.
For the yellow water flows out, and the cauterizer should be according to this form.
Then make two cauterizers on both legs, and let the cauterizer be according to the length of the leg, one under the knee, and the other below it, around the middle of the leg: and two cauterizers on every hip: and dismiss the cauterizer open without treatment for a long period of time: so that some water flows out from it: then cure him with the rest that we said.
On the method of cauterizing in the operation of ventroscopy.
Chapter 35.
When there is a dissolution of the belly due to cold and moisture, until it weakens the retentive and digestive powers in the stomach and intestines: and it is cured with the methods of cure, but not healed: and you see an infirm person bearing a cauterizing instrument of excessive power, then cauterize him with a great cauterizer on his stomach, according to what preceded in the cauterization of the stomach with the circle cauterizer, and four cauterizers in the circumference of the umbilicus, with the subtle cauterizer: and with the cauterizer on the alcatin above the alhosos, or with two cauterizers.
And if you see excessive moistures, and the infirm person bearing that, then cauterize him with a cauterizer on the pectin, and with the cauterizer on every ilium: and perhaps add two small cauterizers near the great one on the stomach.
For there is a cure that progresses, whose remedy does not stray.
On the method of cauterizing hemorrhoids.
Chapter 36.
When there are many old hemorrhoids in the anus, or one, and they are from thick humors, cold, or corrupted moistures, and are cured with what we said in division, and not with a complete cure: then cauterize with three cauterizers on the lower spondyle of the back slightly triangularly, and with the cauterizer under the umbilicus as if by two fingers.
And if you think that his stomach is cold, and his food is not digested, and you see his face swelling, then cauterize him on the stomach with a great cauterizer, according to what preceded: and with the cauterizer on his Epar, and another on his Splen, with the subtle cauterizer: and leave the cauterizer open for a time: then cure him until he is healed.
Chapter 37.
When you excise an ulcer, then apply a cauterizing iron that resembles a needle. Then insert the burning iron into the excised ulcer: and your last hand, until the cauterizing iron reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood flowed, do it once or twice.
If therefore the ulcers are many, then cauterize each one with a cauterizing iron according to what we have narrated. Then care for them with that which heals them from the ointment until they are healed.
And if you cauterize him with a large cauterizing iron over the skin, it is more painful.
Of the method of cauterizing a fistula in the anus.
Chapter 38.
When the sick person does not obey the incision and operation that we have narrated in its place, and is afraid of it, perhaps he will be healed with a cauterizing iron.
When therefore a fistula occurs and is deep, pus flows from it, and corrupt moistures. Therefore what is more fitting is to probe it with a thin needle. Then know the quantity of its depth with the needle.
Then apply a cauterizing iron that resembles a needle. Then insert the burning iron into the fistula and the quantity in which it entered the clod.
And repeat the iron over it, until those corrupt bodies are burned, once or twice or three times, according to the quantity of your need.
And guard yourself from burning of the nerve, if it is there, or great wound: or if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder, or to the body of the intestine, then guard yourself from all these places.
And do not do that, unless when the fistula is in a fleshy place: and you think, because it is not piercing.
Then care for the place until it heals.
But if the place is sealed, and the materials are cut off from it, and it remains like this for a long time: then you know that it has healed completely.
And if the materials are not cut off from it, then you know that it is piercing, or there is a rotten bone in its depth, or something like that from those: whose memory will come back to its place.
¶ On the method of cauterizing the kidneys.
When it happens in the kidneys pain from cold, or from thick ventosity, and is reduced because of the weakness of the breath, then it is necessary to cauterize that above almethenum above those kidneys, with a cauterizer on all the kidney with a clamp, whose memory has already been mentioned.
And perhaps we will cauterize it again in the second one in that almethenum. Why three straight lines will come. Therefore they will be more in the joint.
¶ On the method of cauterizing the bladder.
When it happens in the bladder weakness, and mollification from cold and moisture, until it does not retain infirm urine, then cauterize that in the lower part of the scrotum over the bladder, where the hairs begin to grow, and with a cauterizer from the right scrotum, and another from the left of that: and the length of that cauterization on the side is according to the quantity of the little finger: and cauterize it with a cauterizer on the lower back, or with two cauterizers, if you need that one: and it is according to what has already been mentioned the clamp cauterizer.
On the method of cauterizing the womb.
When cold and moisture occur in the womb, and pregnancy is prevented, and the menstruation is corrupted, and the provocation of them is delayed, and pain occurs when they come, then it is necessary to cauterize with three cauterizations around the navel, as we said in the cauterization of the bladder, and with a cauterization on the lower back, or with two cauterizations: and let the cauterizing instrument be sharp.
On the method of cauterizing the anus in dislocation.
When moisture is poured into the anus and becomes a cause of its exit from its place: and the sign of this is that the leg is lengthened over the other when they are compared together: and the location of dislocation is found to be empty in that place.
Therefore it is necessary to cauterize the infirm one over the anus of that person with a similar cauterization circle: after you sign with the encaustic in the circumference of the anus, as it rolls: and so that the anus falls in the middle of the circle.
If this cauterizing instrument is not present to you, then cauterize it with three cauterizations, with a large olive cauterization: and let the depth of the cauterizing instrument be according to the thickness of the skin of the whole.
Then care for him until he is healed.
On the method of cauterizing in sciatica.
When pain occurs in the anus and the cause of this is cold and moisture: and the infirm one is cured with him, as we said in division, and the cure does not reunite, and it is renewed: then it is necessary to dissolve the infirm one from gross humors with fetid pills, or with artificial pills, and similar. Then cauterize him.
And the method of cauterization depends on two methods: either with a cauterizing instrument burning with medicaments, or with fire.
A cauterizing instrument with fire is done in many ways.
One of these methods is to cauterize on top of the pivot stone of his anchor, in a triangular shape, according to this form. And make them either deep or shallow. And let there be space that is the thickness of each cauterization according to the size of a finger: and let the cauterization be oily.
Sometimes, however, the cauterization is done in the middle on top of his anchor. Therefore there are four cauterizations.
And if you wish to cauterize with a circle, whose preceding form is in the cauterization of anchor dislocation, one: so that it contains the whole anchor.
And burn the thickness of the skin entirely.
This is the method of cauterization in Sciatica, when the pain adheres to his anchor and does not extend up to the hip and leg.
But if it extends up to the hip and leg, then cauterize him with two cauterizations on the hip, on the place where he indicates the weakness, in which is the pain, and with your cauterizing instrument on the thigh four fingers towards the sylvestern part: and let the cauterization be knife-like.
And let the depth of the cauterization be according to the thickness of the skin.
But if he indicates that the pain extends up to near the toes of his foot, then cauterize him there where he indicates with your cauterizing instrument, three, or four, or more, if it is needed by him.
If there is an indication of pain under the knee towards the leg, then cauterize that spot with a single knife.
And always remember in all your cauterizations, so that you do not burn the nerves or a large artery, and thus cause harm to the weak body, or contraction.
And I myself have seen one and another from those who cauterized above the knee, and ended up in cauterization, and the leg became swollen, until a tumor followed the foot, and it was perforated entirely, and the entire foot rotted: then diagnosis of the abdomen occurred, and death after that.
If the pain is in both parts at once, cauterize each according to this method.
And some wise men said in cauterization of the ankle, which is this method. Make a similar spatula from iron, whose diameter is the middle of the palm: and it should be at its opening according to the thickness of the nucleus of the finger, or slightly less: and inside that spatula there should be a third spatula.
And there should be a space that is between each spatula by the thickness of the nodule of the thumb: and they should be open on both sides: and their height should be like a nodule, or two nodules: and make them a handle from iron properly fitted in the spatulas.
Then it should be heated in the fire until it glows red, and throw sparks: then it should be placed on a pillow of the weak ankle lying on the healthy side. Then cauterize him with three round cauteries in one stroke.
Then leave him for three days. Afterwards, apply plasters with butter: and let the open wound heal over many days. Then care for it with ointment, until it is healed.
Albucasis says, "In this manner of cauterizing, my son, we have been very little used, because of the fear of its appearance: and therefore, because we find few who are willing to wait over it.
Nevertheless, it is from good cauterizations that he who suffers and finds with him the place of his.
The cauterizing iron with medicaments is burned, so that you make two smae having a perforated ring, into which the card of his door descends from the air, or iron, length of the wall: whose height they are two knots, or as themselves.
And there is space that is between both quantities of thickness of the finger, and they are open below and above: and there is that they contain themselves to each other, according to this form.
Then lay it on the anchorage of a pitcher, sick lying on the healthy side. And press your hand on the anchorage of a pitcher much. Then pour between two circles from hot water, which is heated with fire a little, and hold it for a certain amount of time: and the sick bears its bite, and its burning, for he found its bite like fire, until the bite rests.
Then clean your hand with the tool, and remove hot water from the anchorage all with sweet water: then let it rest for three days.
And place on it butter, until the blackness of the burning is removed: and let it rest for several days, and drain from it pus. It is the last remedy for a wound.
Then treat it with ointments until it heals.
If the pain extends to the hip or leg: make a splint in that which contains water, as you did in the equal anchor.
And this is the method of hot water: and I have already written it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines. Take alkali and unburned lime each one part of the same weight: grind both, and put them in a new pot, whose lower part is perforated with a small hole of the same size as the radius: and put another glass pot under the bottom of the pot: and pour over the alkali and lime from sweet water, which covers both through your finger: after which you press it with your hand good compression: and leave the pot, until the sharp water flows down the lower part of the glass pot.
Then gather all that water and pour it over another lime: and cook, until it is renewed.
For this will then be very strong acid, which is administered in many medical operations, and in the cauterization of the remaining limbs. Because it performs the operation of its fire.
And from the medical remedies with which the anchors are cauterized, also as tesserae, and melted anacardium, and lime with soap, so that both are mixed. ¶
And indeed Galen himself related in his writings the cure of a certain man from ancient times, by which he was cured of the pain of the anchor and the sciatic vein: and praised it very much. And he said that it did not need other cure, and because he was healed from one vice, until he related, because perhaps he had entered the bath carried, and came out of it already healed.
And it is to be taken from the fresh green of seitaragi: and if it is not found, take the dry, recent one, and pound it thoroughly with a little fat, and place it on the anchor where the pain is, or in the leg, or in the hip: and tie it, and let it remain for three hours, or according to the quantity that the sick person feels sedation of the inflammation. Then immerse him in a bath.
When therefore his body becomes moist, immerse him in a chair. For the pain retreats, and he is healed.
And know that one should not use a cautery with these remedies, unless after evacuation of the body.
And Dioscorides who said that, when donkey dung is applied with it to the sciatic nerve, it brings him relief: and a cautery is made in this way. Take wool, and pour oil on it old, and place it on the deep place, which is between the thumb of the foot, and between the heel, and is closer to the heel.
Then take donkey dung dry, and burn it in fire, until it becomes coal.
Then place it on the wool, and let it go, until it is extinguished. Then repeat that. Do not therefore stop doing it, until the sense reaches above the remedy up to the hip, and the pain rests.
And this method of cautery is called the cautery of Vaccinium.
§ On the cauterization of the pain of the back.
Sometimes pain occurs in the back from many causes, or by accident, or by blow, or by excessive evacuation, and similar things, from the infusion of cold and wet matter: and cautery does not fall, except in this kind alone, which is made from the infusion of cold matter.
Therefore, after evacuation of the sick with foul-smelling pills and similar ones, they should be placed on the back where the pain is, three lines according to the width of the sick person's spine, after which signs with a hot iron in every line five cauterizations, or more according to the amount that comes from the tolerance of the sick person by its virtue: and let the cauterization be made with a cauterizing needle.
And if you wish, cauterize three times or four with a middle cauterizing needle, in this form.
On the method of cauterizing in the beginning of gibbosities.
This affliction often happens to small children.
And the sign of its beginning in children is: that which happens to him a tightness on his breathing and movement: and it is found in the last rib of the back and its knots, which already begins to rise above the other ribs.
When therefore you see that and wish to do it, then cauterize that with a cauterizing needle which is a circle in this form.
And he should take the cauterizing needle over every part of the rib equally: and if you wish to cauterize around the rib with a pointed cauterizing needle two lines, or three: and they should be close together.
Then care for the place, until he is healed with that which we said.
And beware, that you do not give the cauterizing needle in gibbosity, which is made in a spasm of the nerve.
On the method of cauterizing in gout, and pains of the joints.
When pains of the joints are from cold humors, which are poured out to each limb of the body, then when they occur in the feet, it is according to the custom of physicians, that they call that gout properly.
When, therefore, podagra (gout) of a cold cause is being treated and the pains are not removed, then the burning instrument will remove them.
And it is, that after the evacuation around the joint of the foot, with many burnings, the burning instrument should be olive oil.
And if you lack to make pricks on the face of the foot, then make with the burning instrument a prick. But if the pains ascend up to the knees, or other joints, and this often happens, then burn it over all the knee with three burnings, or four from every part, with this same burning instrument the Hamstring.
But if you need more of this burning instrument to you, then burn it. And do not submerge your hand with the burning instrument, but rather it should be about the thickness of the skin only.
But if the pains ascend up to the knees and back: then give what we said from the burning instrument in its chapter.
But if the pains are only in the hands: then make pricks around the wrist, as two lines turn.
But if there remains from the pains in the fingers: then make pricks on each joint of the finger, and on the palm of the hand.
But if the pains ascend up to the elbows, or shoulders: then burn both from every part.
And do not evacuate the weak from good regimen, from receipt of medicines. For if good regimen is made, and the phlegm is evacuated, it will be healed with the help of God with this burning instrument.
¶ On the method of burning in ruptures.
When a rupture occurs in the groin and the intestine or bladder descends to the testicle, and it is near the beginning: then you should order the sick person to abstain from eating on that day. And let him use laxatives so that feces may descend from his intestines.
Then let him sit between your hands on his back: and order him to hold his breath until the bladder or intestine appears.
Then let him reduce it with your fingers, and mark with a hot iron under the rupture on the edge of the lip, with a sign whose extremity is similar to the middle of a circle towards the upper part of the body.
Then let him heat the iron, whose shape is as follows, until it becomes white, and then throw sparks. Then let him reduce the intestine or bladder to its original shape. Then let him place his hand on the place so that the intestine does not exit: and you have already opened between the legs of the sick person, and placed under it a pillow, and another servant on his legs, and another on his chest who holds the hand.
Then let him place the iron on the sign, with your hand holding the iron upright. And hold him until you reach the mouth with it: or repeat with it another time if you did not reach the mouth with it the first time up to the mouth.
And carefully observe from the exit of the intestine during your cauterization, lest you burn it and cause harm or death or great evil through it on the sick person.
And know that when you cannot find a cautery, your operation is not complete.
And it is necessary for the cautery to be delicate for children, according to their size.
Then care with other ointments until it heals.
And let him be weak lying on his back for forty days, until the wound is sealed.
And it is necessary to give him food of a length of time for his healing, which soothes his belly: so that the intestine does not exit during defecation and excretion.
Then when he wants to get up after forty days, then give him a well-made bandage, and hold it for another forty days.
And reduce his labor, and food and drink intake, and violent voices.
For when he uses this regimen, thus heals completely with healing.
And I will tell the healing of ruptures with incision in his chapter.
When however the rupture occurs in the remaining belly, and they are beginning, and you want not to add, then cauterize his rupture with a round cautery according to its quantity: and let that which is burned from then be like the third of it. Then care for him, with what we said: and he should not be added.
And now some have said: to cauterize the rupture with a triangular cautery, according to this form.
After it is signed with encaustic, and a line is placed which is through the width in the upper side of the rupture, and another line to the lower. And place your hand in the middle with the cautery closed.
But the first cautery is easier and better.
In the case of pain due to a wound or blow, this is the method of cauterization.
Chapter 48.
When it happens to certain members due to a wound or blow, and the pain persists for a long time and does not improve with medication, then it is necessary to cauterize with a pointed cautery.
And the cautery should be of a size and strength appropriate to the member, its weakness, its power, its twisting, and the pain caused by it.
If therefore it is healed by the first cauterization, it is good. If not: then repeat the cauterization on it.
Because of the habit of these pains, they often change from one member to another that is close to it. Therefore it is necessary to follow them with a cautery until the sick member is healed.
In the case of leprosy, this is the method of cauterization.
Sometimes leprosy is healed by the greatest cauterization. Especially the kind of leprosy that is caused by the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy, when you want to cauterize it, consider.
If therefore the leprosy is incurable, and you have treated it with what we said in the division, and it has not descended nor stood still, and you fear that corruption will spread over the whole of its complexion: then cauterize it on the head five times: one in the middle of the head, and the second below towards the front of the hair, and two on the two horns, and one behind on the nape of the neck.
And finally your hand with the cautery a little, until it imprints a small impression on the mouth, and the skin is loosened: so that the heavy breathing of the vapors is relieved, and cauterize also on the spleen, according to what preceded.
If the leprosy has already spread over the sick person and is manifestly visible, then it is necessary to cauterize with these cauteries, which we mentioned at the beginning, and with a cauterizer on the tip of the nose, and with two cauterizers on the two maxillae, and with two cauterizers on the spines of the neck, and six on the spines of the back, and one large one on the buttocks and one above it, in the middle of the buttocks: and two on the knees: one on each knee, and two on the shoulders, and two on the elbows, and two on the tendons of his chest: and cauterize him over every joint, from the joints of his fingers of his hands and feet: and cauterize over every heel of his feet, and the wrists of his hands.
And beware of the nerves that are on the back of the last heel, so that you do not burn them.
And sometimes cauterize with a cauterizer on the beak of the tongue, and another on the mouth, and another on the esophagus.
And know that the more you add a cauterizer, the greater the relief and the better it helps.
And know that the sick person does not feel pain from the cauterizer, as healthy people do: because his body is already numb.
And it is necessary that the cauterizers be of a size and shape according to the limbs and joints: as was previously specified from the types of tools.
Then care for the cauterizer with flour of herb mixed with honey, and the rest of the cure, until he is healed.
¶ On the method of cauterizing in a stupor.
When a certain limb is numb and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, but does not heal, then burn that numb limb with cauteries, according to the size or extent of the limb.
And let your cautery penetrate slightly into the thickness of the skin. Then care for it with ointment until it heals.
And sometimes cauterize it for a certain numbness that occurs in the hand, and foot, on the spine at the exit of the nerves that move that limb: and the numbness will be removed.
But do not presume over it, unless he is wise in the anatomy of limbs, and the exit of nerves that move the body.
Chapter 61.
When Albaras is not covered with anything from the skills of medicine: then cauterize it slightly on that deep cautery, according to the thickness of the skin, until the whiteness is removed, and its color changes.
Then care for it with flour of herb, and lentils with rose oil, and leaves of arnoglossa, and blood of dove, and blood of goose: each of these is one part: mix all these, and they will be poured on cloth, and adhere to the place, until it heals.
On the method of cauterizing in Cancer.
When cancer is beginning, and you want to stop it: then cauterize it with a circular cautery around it, as it turns.
But wise men say, that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle.
To me, however, it does not appear that way: for I fear lest it should fester: and I have seen this thing often enough.
It is indeed better, to cauterize around it with a circle, as we said: or with many cautery-irons.
On the method of cauterizing in Albucasis.
When someone has Albucasis, and the maturation is delayed, either because of excessive bleeding which he causes, or because of old age, when he is an infirm old man with little blood, or because of time, and you wish to hasten the maturation of Albucasis, then cauterize around it with many small cautery-irons by pricking. Then let it go. For it will hasten with the maturation.
But if you wish to make a perforation in it with a cautery, then use a cautery-iron of this form.
And place it in the middle of Albucasis, until it penetrates the skin: and let the cautery-iron be weak from that which follows, to ease the course of the pure.
Then care for it until it is healed.
On the method of cauterizing in a corroding wound.
Chapter LXXXIV.
A corroding wound is not other than a corruption in a moving member, and it corrodes it: just as fire consumes dry wood.
If therefore you see a corroding wound in a place which can bear a cautery-iron with fire, then use many cautery-irons, small and large, according to what is suitable for that place where the corroding wound is.
Then cauterize it from all parts until the whole root of the corruption is removed, and nothing remains of it entirely.
Then let him rest for three days, and apply powdered sulfur mixed with oil to the cauterized areas until all the scabs are removed and all corruption is eliminated.
Then care for him with flesh-generating ointments.
If therefore you see that after three days flesh is growing in a healthy manner, free from corruption, it is good.
And if not: then repeat the cauterization on what remains of the corrupted areas.
And apply a sharp medicine when necessary for corrosion. For it rises in the place of the cauterization.
However, the cauterization with fire is a faster method of healing: and indeed I have already spoken of its division with sharp medicine; therefore take it there when you need it.
Of the method of cauterization in Claus and Verucis.
Chapter 50.
Frequently it happens in the lower parts of the feet that this ailment occurs: and it is a rough, running sore that injures the foot.
And indeed the cauterization in them is according to two methods: cauterization with fire, and cauterization with hot water.
However, when with fire, it is made like a hollow feather of a pen: which is made from iron, according to the amount that it contains the claw on all sides: and it is thin at the edge.
Then place it burning on the claw. Then turn your hand with the cauterization around the claw, until the cauterization reaches the depth of the claw: and let him rest for three days, until it begins to emit pus. Then apply plasters of your choice with sulfur, crushed with salt: and let the plaster be applied to him at night. He will be uprooted from his roots.
Then care for the wound with a generative flesh ointment until it heals.
If they are not converted and often occur on the surface of the body, especially on the hands and feet: then apply heat to them with hot water: and take a cannula from the air, or iron, or from the feather of a turkey dove: and place it on the hole, or althelul. Then throw in the cannula from hot water a small amount: hold your hand and turn it with your hand compression for a while, so that the edge of the cannula is pressed into the root of the nail, and the hot water finds a way to the depth, to the root of the nail: and wait for the weak one for an hour on the sting of hot water.
Then let him go, for the nail is uprooted with its roots.
So do with them one after another, until you come over all who are from them on the body.
Then care for them after they are uprooted with that which generates flesh from ointments.
¶ On the method of cauterizing in Tremor.
When it happens to someone with tremor from cold in the nerve, or from quartan fever, or from something else: then it is necessary to cauterize him with four or five cauteries on the spines of the back, and between every spine a cauterization, and in his chest a cauterization, and on his stomach a cauterization.
For the tremor is quiet with the oil cauterization, and hastens the health of the cold sickness.
¶ On the method of cauterizing Albathir.
Chapter 57.
Sometimes foul blisters, that is, boils, are expelled from the body, which arise from corrupted coarse matters.
Therefore, when they appear, they should be cauterized over the entire head of the blister with a thin cautery and with myrtle wood, whose end is burned with fire. Or with the root of long-leaved achillea. Or with a lens-shaped cautery.
And sometimes they are cauterized in this manner at the beginning of their expulsion: and they do not increase: and the excess is broken, which causes them, and they are cured from them.
However, it must be done after evacuation with venesection.
Of the manner of cauterizing in the flow of blood from the artery in a wound.
Many times it happens that the flow of blood from an artery which has been cut at a wound, which happens externally, or at the incision of an abscess, or a cauterizing iron on the member, and similar things to them: and it is difficult to remove it.
When therefore it happens to someone that thing, then hasten with your hand to the opening of the artery, and place on top of it your finger: and press it much, until the blood is blocked under your finger, and nothing comes out from it.
Then place on the small cautery of wax and many more: and blow on them until they are burned greatly.
Then take from them one, or a few, or many, according to the wound and the place in which the artery is broken, and place the cautery on the vein, after which you remove your finger quickly: and hold the cautery until the blood is cut.
If the thorn is expelled from the wound and the finger is cut off from the opening of the artery, and the heated iron is extinguished, then take another heated iron quickly, from the irons that are prepared in the fire.
Therefore do not cease to do this with one after another, until the blood stops flowing.
And beware, lest you burn the nerves which are there, and another evil may occur on the weak part.
And know that when blood flows from the artery, then it is impossible to remove it: especially when the artery is large, unless with one of four methods. Or with an iron, as we said. Or with the extraction, when it is not extracted. For when it is extracted, the ends of it are contracted, and the blood is cut off. Or it is tied with a strong ligature. Or medicines of proper property are placed on it, which is to cut off the blood and tie with a decent compression.
But whoever administers the cutting of it with a ligature and tying with a cloth, or the position of things that burn and similar, does not give it to him completely, unless rarely.
But if something happens to him of that, and he is not present with a physician or medicine: then he begins with the position of the finger index over the opening of the vein itself, as we have said, and the compression of it greatly, until the blood is blocked from the upper part of the wound, and on the artery. And the finger is not removed, above it with cold water of great cold always, until the blood freezes, and thickens, and is cut off.
And meanwhile he considers in it what is needed from the iron, or from the medicine.
On Incisions, Punctures, and Bloodletting in Wounds and Similar Cases.
We have already mentioned in Chapter One that all pain which is suitable for the use of a cauterizing fire and burning medicine, along with its causes, reasons, instruments, and forms of cauterization.
And I placed chapters from head to foot there.
And I proceed in this chapter the same way: so that it may alleviate those seeking the sought.
And before I begin that, it is necessary for you to learn, son, what is in this chapter from the fear of that which is in Chapter One about cauterization.
And for that reason, it is necessary to have greater caution in it, because in the operation which is in this chapter, often falls evacuation with blood, with which stands life at the opening of the vein, or incision over an abscess, or opening of exit, or cure of wound, or extraction of arrow, or incision on stone, and from all these, it is associated with trembling, and fear, and falls in many of them death.
And I advise you not to fall into that in which is hesitation, for sometimes such people come to you in this art with such ways of men and their weaknesses. For from them is he who is angry with his pain, and is light in him towards death: because of the vehemence of it which he found from his weakness and length of his malice. And with pain is from fear which signifies death.
And from them is he who gives his song, and enriches you with it, hoping for health, and his pain is destructive.
Therefore, it is not necessary to consent to him who comes to you from among them whose manner is such. And your caution should be more urgent than your greed and your ravenousness. And do not presume upon anything from him unless after a certain certain knowledge which verifies with you that succession is praiseworthy to which he arrives.
And use them in the treatment of all your sick, for diagnosis and indication of what is fittingly for their health.
For in him is to you a helper for the acquisition of fame and glory, and memory and praise.
May God breathe into you, O son, his understanding, and not take from you direction and inspiration: for that is in his hand.
And indeed I have arranged this Chapter by distinguishing it into chapters, according to what preceded in the chapter of Cauterization, from the scalp to the feet: so that it may be alleviated to you what you seek from him and what you need.
¶ On the treatment of water that gathers in the heads of children.
Chapter I.
Know that this infirmity often occurs to children at birth: or when the midwife tightly binds the head of the child without gentleness.
And also when it happens for an unknown cause which is not known.
And indeed I have not seen this ailment in other than children: and to all of whom I have seen from them hasten death: therefore it seemed to me to leave the operation in it.
And indeed I have seen from them a child whose head was filled with water, and his head was glorified every day, until he could not sit on himself, because of the greatness of his own head: and the moisture increased, until he died.
This moisture either accumulates between the skin and bone, or beneath the bone above the sinew.
And if the operation is performed on moisture between the skin and bone, and it is a small abscess, then it is necessary to make a cut in the middle of the head, one in width, and the length of the cut should be like two nodes, until the moisture is drained.
This is the shape of the incision.
If therefore the moisture is more increased, and the abscess is larger, then place these two cuts, according to this form.
And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and the sign of it is, that you see the edges of the head open from all parts: and water is pressed when you press it with your hand to the insides, and it does not hide itself from you, then it is necessary to make three cuts in the middle of the head, according to this manner.
And after the incision, extract all the moisture. Then bind the cuts with cloths and cotton. Then rub it above with wine and oil until the fifth day.
Then dissolve the ligament, and care for the wound with compresses, and ointments.
And do not dismiss binding the head with equality. And feed the sick person with all food dry and little moisture, until the limb is strengthened and healed.
And another manner of incision is, that you consider where the size of the abscess appears, and the collection of water.
For when it is often in the back, or in the forehead, or on the right, or on the left.
Therefore ascend with the incision where the abscess appears to you and is full of water: and cut it according to what is possible for you.
And observe, lest you cut the artery, and blood flow occurs, and the sick person dies from that flow with the discharge of moisture.
On the incision of arteries which are after the ears.
Chapter 2.
When a person has a catarrh to the eyes, or to the chest, and that is not cured by medical treatment: then the last cure for that person is the incision of those two arteries.
Therefore when you wish to incise them, it is necessary that the sick person bend his head. Then rub the place with a rough cloth, so that the arteries appear. Then the sick person ties his neck with any of his cloths. Then consider where the vein pulses. And the locations of both are locations which are after the ears depressed: and it is rarely hidden, unless in some men.
Then mark with a hot iron on both: and incise both with a narrow knife on each side, the incision going to the bone: and let that be done across the width of the head.
And if you wish, insert a narrow knife under the artery, and incise it to the upper part with the incision.
And let the length of the incision be like two fingers joined together.
For when the vein is incised, blood escapes with a pulsating flow, which jumps to the inside frequently.
But if the artery does not appear to the senses, then it is necessary that you measure from the ear the distance of three fingers. Then mark with a hot iron, and incise until the bone.
And that which is to be emitted from the blood is six unciae, and perhaps you may emit more or less from it. According to the appearance of the quantity that seems to you due to the weakness of the patient and the filling of his artery, do that.
Then consider the wound. Then if there remains at the bone from the siphon anything, then cut that, so that it does not happen that a hot abscess occurs: then bind the wound with lint from a cloth.
Then care for him with ointment until he is healed.
¶ About the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
Chapter 3.
When it happens to a man that he has ancient hemicrania, or sharp catarrh because of acrid humors, and heat in the temples, or old bile, strong, and similar to those: and he is treated with the methods of cure of medicine, and does not bear it: then we have experienced these ailments extraction of arteries from the temples, or cauterization of them, as we have narrated.
And the method of operation in their extraction is, that the sick one shaves the hairs that are in the temples, and directs himself to the artery that appears in the temple. For indeed it is shown to you from his pulse, and rarely is hidden unless in a few men, or because of the vehemence of cold.
But if it is hidden from you, then the sick one binds his head with any of his cloths: then he rubs the place with a rough cloth. Or steam the place with hot water, until it appears to you by a clear appearance. Then take the little lancet, which I formed a little before. Then scrape with it the skin with ease, until you reach the artery. Then thrust in it a hook, and extract it towards the upper parts, until you have extracted it from the skin, and make it go away from the garments that are under it from every part.
If however the artery is thin: then cover it with the tip of the needle. Then cut from that part according to the length at which their tips contract and do not cause blood flow. For if it does not cut and if it is not cut off, the blood will not rise completely.
Then evacuate from the blood six ounces, up to three.
If however the artery is large: then it is necessary to tie it in two places with a strong double thread of silk or of hair, as not to rush to its putrefaction before the consolidation of the wound and that blood flow does not occur.
Then cut the superfluity which is between the two knots. Do this at that hour or after another hour.
And if you wish, cauterize it with a cauterizer up to the bone, with a scalpel, until their tips cut and it stands in the place of that work.
And it is better work, unless if he is weak and has a fever or of hot constitution. Because the cauterizer is of those that help to end moistures. Therefore it is a better remedy.
And after the extraction of the arteries, the place should be filled with old cautery: and they should be placed on it well-made pads.
And after the solution, it should be treated with dry medicines that make flesh grow and with liniments until it is healed.
If however in the meantime while you are operating blood flow occurs from the artery, then rush to cut it with a cauterizer or to fill the place with zeolite: and hold your hand, until the blood is cut off. If nothing of those is present with you, then place it on the place of your finger until the blood congeals. And rub the place with strong cold water until the sharpness subsides and it contracts as it should.
And because it is lighter and easier to extract the artery, it has a cauterizing knife with this cauterizer having two blades: let the sharpness of the two blades be like alum. However, they are much less sharp than two knives. Since if they are as sharp as two knives, each freezes quickly: and they do not cut the flesh with speed. But since there is a little thickness in them, the heat of the fire is held in them, and the flesh is cut quickly: therefore it is better for every work, and lighter and easier.
And this is the form of the cauterizer.
And let there be a space between the two blades that is as thick as the thickness of your finger, after you have marked two places with the cauterizer: and put both hot ones, until they reach the bone, and cut the vein in two places: so that it is lengthened between its ends. For they do not harden completely with this cauterizer.
Chapter IV.
¶ On the care of the course of sharp and frequent tears from the eyes.
When the tears are frequent and their course is from the eyes which are above the skull externally: and nothing of medicine is applied to them with other medicines, and you see the face of the sick already red, and feels in his forehead a walk, as if it were the walking of ants: and his eyes are weakened, humid, so that already the hair on them has been worn away by corrosion: and his eyelids are heated from the sharpness of the tears: then the ancients needed in their cure of these this operation, and called it a cure with the Sword.
And it is, that you command the sick one to shave the hairs that are on his forehead. Then, you should make three evenly spaced incisions across the forehead according to its length: and let the length of the incision be about two fingers, and one incision should be evenly spaced with the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length slightly above the shoulder blades, and the third on the other side: and beware of the incision of the arteries that are on both sides: and extend your hand away from the continuity of the two jaws, and let the entire length of the incision be about three fingers joined together: and let there be a prepared piece of sponge or dry cloth with which to absorb the blood.
Then, insert a two-bladed sharp instrument, of which the following is its shape. From the incision that is on the temple side, up to the second incision: and scrape off with it all the skin that is between the two incisions, along with the sphincter, which is above the bone. Then do the same from the middle incision up to the second incision. Then remove this instrument and insert another instrument, called a sharp-edged knife, from one side gently, not sharply from the other side. And this is its shape.
And place its sharp side towards the flesh and skin, and its gentle side towards the bone: and push it until it reaches the middle incision: and cut off with it all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes: except that the incision continues up to what appears of the skin.
Then do the same in the middle incision up to another incision.
After an equal amount of blood has flowed out, press the areas where the clotted blood is located.
Then place linen soaked in old cooked linseed in every crack, and place on top of them damp cloths soaked in wine, oil, or vinegar. And be sure that the abscess does not become hot.
And on the third day dissolve the bandage, and administer a large infusion with warm water. Then care for it with basilicon ointment, and with other remedies used to treat wounds: until it heals.
Chapter 5.
¶ On the care of sharp tears and catarrh from the interior of the head to the eyes.
When sharp catarrh occurs to someone frequently, sharply, and constantly: and you see his eyes weakened, small, and already weakened in appearance: and the eyelids are ulcerated, and hairs fall out from them, and there is a sharp pain in the depth of the head, wounding, and following sneezing: then take from these accidents that those materials, and catarrh do not come, except from many vices.
And a better cure for them is this. And it is, that you command the sick person to shave his forehead. Then cut one incision in the middle of his forehead, or another a little wider in width, and begin with the incision from the left temple to the right temple: and let the incision be up to the bone: and keep your hand away from the moving jaws at chewing: until when the bone is exposed: and dry all the blood with a sponge.
Then separate between two lips of the incision with old cooked linseed, or with linen cloths. Then tie it above with swabs: and drink swabs with wine and oil, so that no heat abscess may occur.
And when you untie it, and see that the heat abscess is already diminishing: then it is necessary to knead the mouth, until flesh begins to grow in it.
Then care for it with an evaporating regimen that causes flesh to grow: as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of pitch: and prepare a plaster from them, and administer it to the birth of flesh in these wounds.
Chapter 6.
¶ On the care of that which falls into the Ear.
Everything that falls into the ear is one of four kinds: either a mineral stone, or a stone like it, such as iron and flint: or it is from a plant, such as peas and beans: or it is a fluid, such as water, and vinegar, and the like: or some animal.
When therefore a stone, or kind of stone from those which do not add and grow in the ear, falls into the ear, expose the Ear alone: if therefore you see the stone, then pour something from broken oil, or sawdust, into the Ear. Then administer its extraction, and make him sneeze with the condensed [substance], and open the nose with an onion at the approach of sneezing, after you have placed in the vicinity of the ear fragments of cloth, or wool, and extend the ear to the superior [part].
Often indeed it goes out with this care.
If however it does not go out, then administer its extraction with Gesti, that is, finely ground pizzarol: whose form is this.
If he goes out with his clothes on, it is good.
And if not, then administer the extraction of his tooth with a blunt-ended, fine, thin hook of few doublings.
If he does not come out through that, then make a canula of air, and insert the end of the canula into the ear hole a lot, and put a softened piece of clay with oil around the canula so that there is no wind except for the canula: then extract it with your strong attraction.
Very often he comes out with what we have mentioned. But if he does not come out this way: then take from helkalimbat, or from visco, that is, prepared glue with which birds are caught, a small amount: and put it on the end of the radius after you have wrapped it in a cloth properly placed: then insert it into the ear hole when you have dried the ear from moisture.
If he does not come out with all that we have mentioned, then hurry to break it before an abscess of hot pus, or spasm, occurs.
And the method of incision is, that you use a lancet on the weak one in the first place in the cephalic: and extract it from his blood according to the measure of its strength. Then make the weak one sit between your hands, and turn his ear to the superior parts, and make a small incision in the root of the ear at the fatty part of him in the depressed place: and let the incision be in the shape of a crescent moon until you reach the stone: then take it with that which is possible from your instruments.
Then sew his incision from your hour with speed, and care for it until he is healed.
If what falling into the ear is from one of the grains that grow and swell: then administer the extraction of it.
If it still does not obey you at the end, then take a thin, delicate spatula in this form.
And administer with it the incision of that kind from the grains that fall into your ear, and do not do it when you think that that grain is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, until you place many pieces of it: then extract them with hooks, or with a thin instrument, or with suction, as we said, for its extraction is relieved.
But in the water that enters your ear, it is necessary to use a weak sneezing with the disinfected first: and now it has filled its own ear with a little old cooked one: and it is lying on that ear, in which there is water. Therefore if it comes out through that, it is good.
And if not: then take many stones, according to the length of your finger, thin, gentle, and heat them with fire for a while, and the weak one inserts one of them into the hole of its ear: and he salts one of his feet from that part, and strikes with another stone on the stone that is in the ear. Therefore do not stop doing it with the stone and the stone until all the water comes out.
And now the water comes out so that you take one from the parpyro, or from the junco, and insert one of its ends into your ear: and light the other end with fire, until it is burned a lot of it. Then repeat the junco again, and do it many times, until all the water comes out: and extract it with a cannula as was prescribed in the stone.
But in the extraction of the animal that enters it, if it is small of body, like a flea, and similar to it, care for it as I said in division.
However, if it is a large body part that is visible to the senses: then perform its extraction with forceps and hooks, and its removal is easier than all those held in the ear.
However, in the extraction of worms generated in the ear, when you care for it with what we mentioned in division and in the treatment of distillations, and your cure does not combine: then you must look at the ear in the sunlight. Therefore, if something appears there from the worms, then extract it with forceps or with fine hooks.
But if nothing appears there, then take a cannula, whose form is this: narrow below, wide above: and insert its fine end into the ear according to the amount that an infirm person can bear: then suck with it strong suction. Do this many times, until all the worms come out.
But if they do not obey you to exit, then wrap the cannula with ash, as I said in the stone.
But if they do not come out with that which we said: then perform distillations which the ancients have been experienced in in the piercing of worms: and you will find it in the treatment of distillations.
And let your effusion be what you pour out oil and medicines into the ear with this instrument, whose form is depicted here. Just as you see make it from silver, or from brass, below narrow, in which there is a small hole, wide above.
Therefore let the pushing that is in the hollow of the cannula be made from brass properly. And if you wish, take a ray, and wrap it in the end of it with a proper wrapping: then project oil, or succum, or whatever you want from these medicines into the cannula: and it is in the ear: then insert the ray with cotton above, and press it gently by your hand until the oil is pushed into the hollow of the ear, and he feels it inside: and that which is poured into the ear should be already warmed with a little fire: and beware that what is distilled into it is not very cold: for medicines do not tolerate that.
Chapter VII.
¶ On the care of the accidental wounding of Gold (possibly a reference to gold fillings or dental work).
Sometimes, certain infants emerge from their mother's wombs unharmed, not having been pierced.
And it also happens to some men that the wounding of the ear occurs in the opening of the ear due to an injury or flesh born in it.
And this wounding of the ear sometimes occurs in the deep opening of the ear, which vision does not reach: and sometimes it happens to the outer part of the opening, and vision reaches it.
Therefore, that which happens in the deep part of the ear, and which does not include the scope of vision, is often difficult to heal in many positions.
And in that which vision reaches, it is necessary to place the ear of the sick person in the sun, and look at it: then if you see the wounding appearing, open it with a thin, subtle spatula, whose form is as follows: its end is small, and has a slight width; and the rest of the spatula is two-sided, smooth: so that it does not hurt the ear.
If therefore the wounding is born from flesh in the opening of the ear: then hold it with a thin tweezer, and cut it with great force until all the flesh is removed.
If the wounding is in the deep part of the ear: then take a thin, smooth, warm needle, and heat it with a small fire: then put it into the opening of the ear.
If therefore you feel the wounding with that which the sick person has, when he has great difficulty hearing, try to open it with ease: and beware, lest you wound the nerves of the ear.
Then place in the ear, linen according to the quantity of the foramen's width, which you have soaked in Egyptian ointment. Make it for several days until you are secure about the consolidation of the wound.
Or take linen and soak it in rosewater, and sprinkle powdered zeig on it, and use it thus.
If you see that the ear is already abscessing, then it is necessary to remove the linen and let it with another piece of linen, which you have soaked in rose oil, until the abscess sits warm: then care for it until it heals.
But if bleeding occurs, then immerse a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear: and use the remaining cure, which stops the aforementioned blood flow in the treatment of distillations.
¶ On the care of Althaea's eyelids.
Chapter 8.
These Althaea's which occur in the eyelids of the eye, sometimes are moist, and sometimes are dry.
Therefore you must hold them with tweezers: or with an unguent, and cut them with a lancet from their roots. Then place powdered zeig on the spots.
But if blood flows from them, then cauterize them with a fine lens cauterizer.
And to cauterize them is better after the incision. For often they return when something remains from their roots. And when they are cauterized with fire, those roots burn and do not return.
¶ On the care of Granatum's eyelids of the eye.
Chapter IX.
It frequently happens that something similar to a storm (Grando) occurs in the eyelids due to its strength and hardness, and because of this it is called Grando. It is an accumulation of thick moisture above the upper eyelid and below the lower eyelid.
Therefore, the operation in this case is to consider whether it is Grando that is proceeding from what appears from the eyelid and moves to all parts, and its nature is easy.
Therefore, find a cut above it in width. Then scrape it from all parts with ease until it becomes smooth. Then suspend it with a probe and cut it off.
But if the cut of it is not prepared for you unless after you penetrate the eyelid with an incision a little, then it harms the weak one in some way.
But if the cut is large, then gather it with a suture and care for it until it heals.
And if it is small, you will not encounter harm from it. For the ointment restores it and fleshens it.
And if Grando is declining towards the inner parts of the ear towards the inner surface, then turn the eyelid and suspend the Grando with a probe: but you will need an incision and press it from all parts.
But if the eyelid is lengthened by an incision, it does not harm it in some way.
Then wash the eye after the cut of Grando with salt water: and care for the place with it that fleshens until the weak one heals.
¶ On the care of Axirnath of the eyelids.
Chapter X.
Axirnath is a fatty substance that forms in the eyelids of the upper eyelid: and it particularly affects children: and it makes their eyes heavy, and they get cataracts in the mornings, and they cannot see the light of the sun, because their tears rush to them, and because of this you see them lying on their faces all the time, and they sleep on them, and their eyelids are wet under the swollen eyebrows, which has already been covered by inflation: and the protrusion of Axirnath is visible to the eye, and when you press it with your fingers, you feel Axirnath between them.
And the method of operation for this is that the sick person puts his head on your lap.
Then take a linen cloth and prepare linseed in it, and make a circle from it of the size that contains Axirnath from all sides. Then place him on it, and press with your fingers from all sides, so that Axirnath is gathered in the middle of the circle.
Then find in the middle of that moisture with a sharp lancet making incisions of width, and let there be no incision larger than that which is made in phlebotomy in depth.
Or it is necessary to make an incision in the whole skin, until you reach Axirnath, for in many arrangements Axirnath proceeds from the incision according to the shape of a white fat slice.
Then extract it with the cloth that you have placed between your fingers to the outside: and you turn your hand to the right and left, until it is spread: and beware, do not add to the incision, so that it does not reach with the lancet to the eye, and you hurt him.
If, however, Axirnath does not appear to you at the beginning of the incision, you will add it with some ease into the incision until Axirnath proceeds. Then extract it, as we said.
Then immerse the cloths in vinegar and water, and place them on the spot, and bind it with bandages.
And there are some who apply salt to it, and place it in the hollow of the incision, so that what remains from that moisture may melt.
Then care for it, until it is healed.
But if an abscess occurs in that place, then care for it with soothing plasters, until it is healed.
CONCERNING THE WAYS OF ATAXMIR'S EYES, THAT IS, WHEN THE EYEBEAM SOFTENS THE EYES, WHEREBY IT BECOMES SUCH THAT IT TEARS AS IT SHOULD NOT.
CHAPTER 11.
WHEN ADDITIONAL HAIR IS BORN IN THE EYEBEAMS BEYOND ITS NATURAL COURSE UNDER THE HAIR, AND IT AGES: THEN IT HARMS THE EYE, AND CAUSES THE ONSET OF AILMENTS, SUCH AS FREQUENT TEARS, AND SOFTENING OF THE EYEBEAMS, AND WHITE OF THE EYE, UNTIL THAT BECOMES THE CAUSE OF DESTRUCTION OF THE EYE.
AND ATAXMIR'S EYES ARE CURED ACCORDING TO FOUR WAYS. OR BY CAUTERIZATION WITH FIRE. OR WITH ACUTE MEDICINE, AS PREVIOUSLY STATED IN THE CHAPTER ON CAUTERIZATION. OR ATAXMIR'S EYES ARE CURED BY INCISION AND SUTURING. OR BY CANNULAS, AS I WILL SAY.
IT IS NECESSARY TO PLACE THE HEAD OF THE INFIRM ON YOUR BOSOM. Then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand.
If it is turned, it is good. And if not: insert the needle into it, where the thread is from the lower part of the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate with the thread from above, and let it be near the hairs, that is, near the margin of the eyelid, where the hairs grow: and pull the thread upwards with the eyelid, and turn it with a forceps.
Then find in the inner part of the eyelid under the added hairs with a probe entering from the larger lacrimal canal up to the smaller one.
Then remove the thread, and place a small amount of cotton or cloth under the eyelid: then mark on the eyelid with a cauterizer, which is like the shape of a myrtle leaf.
However, it must be made like the shape according to the quantity and elevation of the eyelid: because it is already varied among men.
For there are those who need that a large amount of it should enter from the eyelid according to the quantity which is softened from the eyelid.
Then with a probe find above two lines which you marked, and begin from the larger lacrimal canal up to the smaller one, and let there be a slit near the natural hairs, like the size of the radius.
Then insert a hook into one of the two angles of the skin. Then scrape it all off. Then gather it with a suture two lips, with a needle and fine wool thread: and wipe off the blood, and make what is superfluous from the threads over two eyebrows, with some things that cover, if you want to do that: and if not, do not care.
Then let go of the suture and thread for three days, or four; afterwards care for that.
And if you wish, let go of the wound without suture, and care for it along with that which dries and constricts. For the eyelid is raised at the sign of the wound and its union: but a better one is to come.
This method of healing, the ancients taught Ataxmir.
However, there is anxiety over the weak one, and it is from good operation, and there is not in it fear.
And another method is in Ataxmir also: and it is, that the signs above the eyelid are shaped like a figure, which is like the figure of myrtle leaves, as we have told.
Then raise the eyelid with three separate or joined needles, according to this following form, then cut off what exceeds with small scissors, according to this form, with equality of incision.
But if it is not possible for you to hold the needle, and it is not equal: then take a needle in which is thread, and insert it in the middle of the figure: and insert another thread near the lacrimal larger, and thread near the lacrimal smaller: and gather the threads with equality between your fingers.
Then raise your hand evenly: and raise the skin over which is marked with the sign, as we have told.
Then gather two lips of the wound with suture: and care for it, until it is healed.
But if indeed abscess happens at your incision, or your wound: dry up that abscess with charcoal, and with these similar, from ointments suppressing.
And sometimes it happens to the eyelid also, that its hairs are turned.
Therefore, you should use what we mentioned in the incision in that [place], but a stitch on both sides is more artificial. On the care of Ataxmir with dogs.
AND IT IS, that you turn the eyelid and split the wound which is inside, as I have said. THEN YOU SHOULD MAKE TWO CANES, OR TWO THIN WOODEN STICKS: THE LENGTH OF WHICH SHOULD BE ACCORDING TO THE LENGTH OF THE EYELID, AND THE WIDTH LESS THAN THE WIDTH OF A FINGER: AND YOU ALREADY INCISED IN THE EXTREMITIES OF BOTH FROM BOTH SIDES WHERE YOU HOLD THE THREADS.
THEN YOU SHOULD AGGREGATE BOTH WITH THINNESS ON TOP OF WHAT OVERFLOWS FROM THE EYELID, AND TIE THE TWO CANES FROM BOTH SIDES WITH A STRONG KNOT, AND LET IT GO FOR SEVERAL DAYS. BECAUSE THE SKIN IS TIGHT, IT WILL DIE, DISCOLOR, AND ROT, UNTIL IT FALLS OFF BY ITSELF.
IF HOWEVER IT DELAYS, THEN CUT IT WITH FORCEPS. THEN CARE FOR IT, UNTIL IT HEALS.
WHEN HOWEVER IT CONSOLIDATES, LIFT THE EYELID: AND DO NOT PICK AT THE HAIR.
AND THIS IS THE SHAPE OF TWO CANES, WHICH YOU SHOULD MAKE ACCORDING TO THIS FIGURE, AND IN QUANTITY IN LENGTH AND WIDTH.
CHAPTER 12.
ON LIFTING HAIR THAT PRICK THE EYE WITH A NEEDLE.
THE OPERATION IN THAT IS, THAT YOU TAKE A FINE NEEDLE, AND INSERT IT INTO THE HAIR FROM FINE SILK THREAD, GENTLY. THEN YOU AGGREGATE ITS EXTREMITIES, AND TIE BOTH KNOTS WITH A THIN KNOT VERY WELL: AND THE LENGTH OF THE THREAD SHOULD BE ONE FINGER.
Then compose in Alinxotati a thin thread under it in short, and knot its ends if you wish.
Then place the weak person's head in your lap, and let it be near the sun so that the operation can be seen: for it is a delicate or minor operation.
Then insert the needle with Alinxotati into the root of the eyelid, and make it penetrate into the eyelid quickly, until you remove it from above the natural eyelash.
Then draw the needle up to above Alinxotati: and insert the needle into Alinxotati if it is one, or two, or three, not more.
Then draw your hand with it until the needle exits with Alinxotati into the eyelid with the natural eyelash.
If however Alinxotati is drawn and the needle does not exit with it: draw Alinxotati to the lower parts, with the thread that you composed in it, until Alinxotati exits from the upper opening, and see it with the vision of the eye: for then draw Alinxotati and the thread, and remove both, and close the eye: and let him be closed for two days or three, until the needle sticks in its place, and flesh grows over it.
If however the needle is short, then associate with it a long needle from the natural needles, and raise it with it: or let him be, until it lengthens after a time, and then raise it.
Chapter 13.
When this Alinxotati happens to the eye, it is called Leporina.
And this Alinxotati is either natural or accidental.
An accidental wound is caused by the consolidation of a wound, or a cut, or a cauterization, and similar things to these.
And the method of operation in it is, that you find that consolidation, and that you separate its lips, and that you put in it what is between them linen from flax, and bind it, until it heals.
And you should not use in the treatment of it things that dry and constrict: for if you do that, Alexatrati returns worse than it was: rather use in it those things that soften, such as fenugreek: and rub with water in which althea has been cooked, seed of flax: and unguent dyaquilon, which has been liquefied with some oil: and wrap with it linen, and care for it with it.
And your treasure of treatment is, that you try every ingenuity, that it not consolidate, according to the form that was first.
And this operation which we have said, is not but some correction of Alexatrati, that it does not return the form of the place according to what it was entirely.
¶ On the care of Alexatrati which is made in the lower eyelid, and is a wrinkle or contraction upwards to the right and left.
Chapter 14.
This Alexatrati which is below, is what is truly called Alexatrati. And it is natural, and it is accidental.
And accidental is caused by a wound, or a cut, or a cauterization, and those similar things.
And the method of operation in it is, that you take an acum, in which there is a thread doubled, and you moisten it with flesh, and you make it penetrate from the left tear duct to the right tear duct, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
Then extend the flesh towards the upper part with a needle, and cut it with a broad, flat instrument. If therefore the figure of the eyelid returns as it should, it is good.
And if not, take the ray, and place it in the fissure, and turn it with it the eyelid: and make two fissures in the inner side of the eyelid, and let the ends of the two fissures be from two angles of the incision, until they meet and make an angle: until when they gather together, this figure is made, and it is the Greek letter.
Then remove that flesh by the amount, which is the sharp side of its lower width, from what follows the eyelid. Then gather the separated parts: sew it with a woolen thread.
Then care for them with what we said about healing ointments and lotions, until they are healed.
And if Alexander's disease occurs from the fissure and the suture, or with a cauterizer: then it is necessary to make the fissure flat under the eyelashes, even as it preceded. Then separate between two lips with a lotion, as we said.
And the final word on the care of Alexander when it is above or below, is that the operation should be carried out in it, according to how it is prepared from the form of Alexander.
For indeed it is of many diverse forms: and the skilled craftsman prepares his skill with whatever way is possible to him, until he makes the figure return to its natural form, or near to it, and himself the sick person, according to what fits him from the operation and instruments in many dispositions.
Chapter 15.
Translation: Concerning the adherence of the eyelid to the eye, whether it be united with the conjunctiva or the cornea.
Sometimes this adherence occurs to many people in such a way that the upper eyelid becomes united with the white of the eye and prevents it from performing its natural functions.
Therefore, you should insert the tip of the ray under the eyelid and lift it up: or extend it with a spoon: then incise the adherence with a thin, blunt-edged knife, which is not sharp in its incision, but rather dull: so that the weak person does not suffer during the operation, and the knife is removed without damaging the eye with its sharpness: and your incision should be as if you are scraping off the adherence with ease, until when the eyelid returns to its natural form and the adherence is completely healed.
Then pour salt water into the eye with clear water to clean it: or sprinkle it with water from a sponge made of zinc dissolved in water.
Then separate the eyelid from the eye with a linen cloth: and place on the eye a woolen cloth soaked in limewater: and use the sponge after three days, and with firm bandages, until it is healed.
Concerning the incision of the nail and the prominence of flesh in the eyes.
Chapter 16.
You should know that the nail is in two ways. Either it is nervous: and it is similar to a sponge hard and thin. Or it is not nervous, similar to the frozen moisture of a white substance: which when it touches the iron, or you try to take it with a knife, it is cut off and does not stick to the knife.
And both species do not begin, except from a larger lacrimal, until it gradually goes, until it covers the sight, and prevents light, and movement of the eye.
And the method of operation in its incision is: that he places his weak head in your lap. Then open his eyes, and raise the eyelid with your hand. Then gather the horn with a few notches of the scalpel, and extend it to the upper parts. Then take a needle, and insert a pin from horsehair, or goose, or chicken feathers: and let it be a strong thread, and double the tip of the needle slightly, and fix it in the middle of the horn: and pierce it with the needle, and tie the horn with the thread, and extend it to the upper parts: and scrape the side of the horn that follows the pupil, as if you were holding it with the pin until the end of its tail.
Then cut the remaining part at the root of the lacrimal with a thin saw, or with small forceps: and let go the natural flesh of the lacrimal, so that it does not happen from its incision that the course of tears is constant.
And sometimes the horn is extended with a single notch of the scalpel: or with a thread, as we said. Then scrape it with a thin saw, which has this form.
And beware, lest the saw touch the horn's skin, and it happens to it a breakage, and pierce the pupil.
Then after the incision, put something salty into the eye, or some powder made from sieves and zinc, and let it go until another day. Then care for him with what is necessary, until he is healed.
If the hoof is not nervous and you cannot insert an awl into it or attach a needle to it, then this type of hoof is often treated with medicines and heals as described in the division.
If you wish to cut it, then open the eye of the sick animal, and take a thin, weak, blunt awl according to this form. And shave the hoof from above with a razor with delicacy. If you see that it is becoming thin and broken, and you press a razor into it, then pour from your hourglass into the eye made from siif, or red siif, or finely ground salt: and oil the eye until another day.
Then repeat the operation on it until all of it is removed. Unless the opposite is true for you in the eye, an abscess of heat: then leave it and treat the abscess until it heals.
Then repeat the operation on it with a razor until it heals.
However, the prominence of the eyelid, if it causes harm in the eye with great damage, is suspended with a needle, and cut from that part: and do not complete the incision, so that the course of tears does not occur.
Then pour in the eyelid siif red, or made from siif, until it heals.
¶ On the incision of Algardhenic, and flesh born in the eye.
Chapter 17.
Flesh sometimes arises in certain human eyes, composed or placed red, until it covers the pupil, or approaches, or stretches over the eyelids, and perhaps turns the eyelids to the outside: and it resembles a rose of balm.
The operation on her is also that she places her sick head in your lap. Then open her eyes and gather all that flesh together with the suitable hooks to that: and hold it with one forceps, or with a pair of tweezers.
Then cut the flesh in the first place, until it ends all of hers with the incisor. And beware of the eye, so that you do not wound it during the operation: and your incision should be with a small knife, which we have mentioned in the incision of the hoof: or with small forceps, with which she is picked up, according to the shape of her after this head.
When therefore your incision is completed, and all the guard-flesh has been removed, then fill her eye with crushed salt: or sprinkle in it red powder, and similar things to her from corrosive medicines: and place on the eye of the deformed one cotton with egg white: so that it is secured from pus hot.
If however there remains any of the guard-flesh, and hot blood rules you, and you fear pus hot: then let go the eye, and care for him with that which sedates the pus.
Then repeat over him with the operation, until he is healed.
And similarly do with the flesh added which happens in the eye from this kind.
However it is necessary that the treatment of all eyes of the weak person from the natural way, or from the accidental way, operating with iron: and you do not introduce your hand in any of these operations, until you see, that that member is tolerating that operation.
¶ On the collection of Sebel from the eye.
Chapter 18.
Beneath the eyelids are red veins that cover the eye and prevent their own operation, and weaken the eye over time.
Therefore, it is necessary for you to first consider whether the eye in which there is a Sebel is strong and has no other illness besides a Sebel, then gather the Sebel from that eye.
And it is your command to prescribe to the weak one, that he put his head in your lap.
Then suspend those veins with a needle one or two according to your wisdom: and the needle should be thin for suture, in this form, or there should be two needles gradually in one body, in this form.
Then gather those veins with fine forceps with delicacy, and wipe off the blood hour by hour, until you see those veins removed from the eye, and dissolve: and beware of not injuring the eye with the tips of the forceps.
And let your operation be in the middle of the day in front of the sun, and you be firm in your operation greatly: so that you do not cut except those veins.
And when you have filled, then pour in the eye green or red water: so that its sharpness corrodes what remains from a Sebel.
If however it is not possible for you to gather all of it in that hour, then apply ointments to the eye with what soothes the eye pain: and leave him for several days until the pain settles: and secure it from suppuration hot: then repeat on it according to the same method, until it is healed.
And this is the form of the forceps.
Chapter on the reduction of Arissati to the nose.
Chapter 19.
The physicians call the fistula of Arris, which they treat with a cautery or with a sharp-burning medicine, according to what precedes its description.
And if it is not cured, then there is no skill in it: unless you find above the abscess at its birthplace and remove all the moisture that is in it and the pus, until the opening is cleaned.
When therefore the opening is cleaned and you see in it corruption or discoloration, then scrape it with an instrument whose shape is like this.
And it is called the Asper of the head.
Let it be made of iron and its head be round like an azir, which is dotted with the dotting of a file or the dotting of an aliskilferi, fine dotting, and place it on the spot of the corrupted bone.
Then turn it between your fingers and you press your hand on it a little, until you know that that corruption is now scraped off, and do this several times.
Then restore the spot with dry-healing styptics.
If therefore the spot is consolidated and flesh grows in it, and the course of pus is cut off, and it remains for forty days without being renewed or becoming an abscess or any accident happening to it, then you will know that it has been cured.
And if not, then there is no skill in it: unless you reduce the fistula to the opening of the nose, according to this shape.
And it is, that you scrape away from the bone second with iron, or with sharp medicine: and when the opening is scraped, then take a drill according to this shape, its end be iron, triangular: and the wood of it is a flattened pyramid until the end, as you see.
Then place it on the eye itself: and let it be near the lacrimal point: and keep your hand away from the eye a little. Then turn your hand with the trephine until it penetrates the eye, and let him feel the weak one: by which he found the wind coming out of it, when he holds his hand on his nose.
Therefore then restore the place with astringent ointments, as I taught you.
When therefore the flesh is born and the place is hardened: then the matter that flowed to the outside returns to the nose: it is therefore lighter on the weak one.
On the reduction of the protrusion of the Eye.
Chapter 20.
When the eye protrudes with all of it, and no harm occurs in the sight, nor diminution: then you should dissolve the weak one: then you should bleed him: afterwards you should place aerosols in the neck without scarification, but with suction.
Then place on the eye a liniment made from acacia, and aloe, and olibanum, and sarcocolla. Then bind the eye above with a plaster with many cottons.
And the method of cottons is: that you take soft cloths, many, and double each cloth over four: make many from them: then place them one on top of another, according to the quantity that the eye needs: then bind them above with a hard cloth with a strong binding.
And repeat the aerosols with suction without scarification.
Then remove the aerosols, and let the eye loose during the day and night.
But if the bandage again becomes soft, then you should bind it a lot: then remove the bandage after day and night, as we said.
If you see the eye beginning to return to its original position under the eyelid, it is good; but if not, then repeat the application of the plaster, cotton, and bandage, and the eye drops, until it heals.
On making an incision in the eyelid.
Chapter 21.
When a tear occurs in the eyelid, it protrudes and extends outside the eyelids like a grain of sand, and disfigures the face due to this, and you want to cut it: then the operation on it is as follows: and it is to insert a needle into the root of the eyelid from the lower part to the upper part.
Then insert another needle into which there is a double thread from the lacrimal part, and make it penetrate: and release the first needle according to its arrangement.
Then cut the place of the double thread, and tie it with the part of the eyelid in the circumference of the needle: and tie it tightly.
Then remove the needle, and place a wet bandage on the eye on the sclera: and release it, until the thread falls with the eyelid.
Then care for the eye with it, which strengthens it, until the wound heals.
And sometimes the eyelid is tied all around with a bandage from cloth, until the eye gains great prominence.
Then puncture with a thin needle, which reaches deep into the eye, and drain the moisture from the sclera, and the eye descends, and enter immediately: then tie it, until it heals.
On the treatment of almonds.
Chapter 22.
This disease which is called almonds, is not, unless it is pus, which collects in the eye, similar to water descending, and it is not itself.
The method of operation in this case is that you should make the infirm person sit on a prepared seat or a straight one.
Then take the head of the person in your hands from both sides and move it until you see health reach the lower parts of your eyes. Then it should be shaped and not go down, and the light should be completed: and the infirm person should see things as he used to: and if it does not go down lower, you will know that it is water.
But if the preparation of the descent of health does not go with what we said, then make the infirm person sit between your hands. Then take a fine lancet and prick with it above the corneal membrane slightly at the continuity of the connected cornea in the crown until the pus comes out.
When it comes out, then pour hot water into the eye in which you mixed honey: or water in which you already boiled fenugreek and honey: then it should be treated with the rest of the cure until he is healed.
¶ On the care of water that goes into the eye, or cataract.
Chapter 23.
Now we have mentioned the appearance of water in division, and what is appropriate for piercing with speech declaring and explaining, then take that same one according to health.
Then therefore you should make the infirm person sit between your hands squarely, facing the light, near the sun: and tie the healthy eye, and tighten it very much: then with your right hand the eyelid of the eye in which is the water, if the eye in which is the water is the left eye: or with your left hand, if the eye is right.
Then take with your right hand a lancet, if the eye is left: or with your left hand, if the eye is right.
Then place the needle near the edge of the cornea, close to the appearance of the radius' thickness in the whiteness of the lachrymal minor: then push the needle with force, and you turn it back with your hand until it penetrates into the sclera of the eye: and feel that the needle has already reached the empty space.
And it should be that the length of the needle is a measure of its journey to the depth, a measure of the space that is from the pupil to the end of the darkness: and it is the edge of the eye. You will see it in the pupil itself, for the clarity of the cornea's tunic.
Then place the needle until it reaches the place where there is water. Then press it down evenly, one after the other.
If therefore water immediately flows down, then the sick person sees it above what opens his sight immediately, and the needle in his eye.
Then rest a little. If therefore water flows down, then lay it down secondly, except that the needle should exit.
When therefore it is stuck, and does not rise: then pull the needle out easily: and you turn back your hand gradually.
Then dissolve some clear salt gem in water: and wash with it the eye from inside. Then place outside the eye all the bandage, or the dyed wool with rose oil, and the sclera of the eye: and tie it with the healthy eye.
But we, and those who are of our time, place on him ground glass with the sclera of the eye.
If therefore the needle does not obey you for entering into the eye because of its hardness, since from men it is, whose eye is very hard: then it is necessary that you take a small spatula, which is called Alberid, of which this is the shape.
Therefore, join the punctured part only, and do not insert your entire hand into the opening; rather, make a path to the subtle location of the almug tree.
Then introduce the almug wood, as we have said.
And at the completion of your work, prepare a properly made bed for the sick person to sleep on his back in a dark house; and he should be prohibited from all movements, and coughing: and place his food which soothes his nature; and he should not move his head with his right hand, nor at all with his left.
And let the bandage be according to his condition up to the third day.
Then dissolve it in that dark house, and test his sight; and make him see things. Then reduce the bandage up to the seventh day.
And it should not be done during the hour of healing, or immediately after the incision: rather, it should be done by others, because water rises quickly through a strong gaze.
But if a boil becomes hot: then it is necessary to dissolve the eye before the seventh day: and correct it with what soothes the boil, until it is soothed: then complete his sight, and place on his face an oral remedy which regulates his sight for several days, while he is still in that dark house.
Then he should exit the house gradually, and return to his own quarters.
And know that in zaltea the student is not exempted from vision several times: then he dares to perform the operation.
And indeed, one of those who are from Alayrach has come to us, who said that it happened in Alayrach that a man was pierced with a magdan, through which water is drawn.
Indeed, I have not seen anyone in your land who has done this: nor have I read it in any of the ancient books: and it is possible that it is new.
And those are the forms of species from the main, so that they stand above those who do not know them.
Let them be made of air properly: and their ends should be with this same subtlety triangular, and the sharp end.
HEAD XXIV.
OF THE CARE OF FLESH BORN IN THE NOSE.
Sometimes flesh is born in the nose of different kinds, from which there is something that resembles a scorpion of many feet: and from it is cancerous flesh, stone-like, of a dark color: and from it is that which is flesh that is soft, not of a dark color.
In that therefore which is from those flesh that is soft, not deceitful, nor cancerous, you should do that the infirm person is placed opposite to you, and open his nose, and thrust a hook into those flesh: then pull them out to the outside, and cut what you have grasped from them with a sharp, thin spatula on one side, until you know that all the flesh is removed.
If something remained from that of whose cutting is not possible: then shave it with one of the instrument's thin with ease, until there is nothing remaining from it. If however the blood rules you, or hot pus falls on you: then place it on him with what is necessary: or it is from malignant abscesses, then hurry to cauterize it, until the blood is cut off, and all the flesh is removed.
Then throw into the nose after incision vinegar, and water, or wine. If the nose opens and moisture flows out from it up to the palate, then you will know that he is already healed.
But if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you will know that there is flesh inside him born in the upper nasal bones, to which the instrument did not reach with the incision.
Then therefore you must insert a string with some knots in it and many knots: and between each knot a quantity of a finger, or less: and the weak one should put one end of the string into his nose with a probe, or with whatever is possible for him after he has done so similar to an azzer: and pull out his smell, until it reaches the bone, and comes out over his throat.
And often indeed they do something similar to this to boys in school: and it is an easy thing for him who wants to.
Then put two ends of the string, one end which comes out over the nose, and the other which remains in the nose. Then with a sharp knife cut the flesh with the knots that are on the string. Do this until you know that the flesh is now with the knots of the string.
Then remove the string: and put linen after washing away the blood into the Egyptian ointment which you imbibed: do this for three days, or more, until the ointment has corroded all that remains of the flesh.
Then put at the end of the matter into the nose a lead tube for several days, until he is healed.
But if he needs treatment which will dry out, use that.
To make the head purging, with which oil and other medicines distill into the nose, do this from silver, or air: that it be similar to a small lamp, open like a shell: and its passage similarly.
If you wish to make a closed cannula like a pipe.
And for making the concha of a purgative instrument, it should be full and emptied: with which is its handle at the end of it, with which you hold it when you heat oil in it, or whatever you wish to extract from solid or fluid substances.
Chapter 25.
The nose often develops at the end of the nose, and it grows and increases with age, until it becomes ugly in appearance.
And because of this, it is necessary to remove all of it at the beginning of its appearance. Then place on the spot, or a cauterizer, or a burning medicine that remains in its place.
If therefore the cutting of it is delayed until it grows large, then consider if it is hard, stony, of dark color, and few sensations: then do not touch it with iron: for it is an abscess that is cancerous.
For often I have seen that one who cuts an abscess has suffered great harm from it.
And if the abscess is gentle to the touch, not of dark color, and you see that it is possible to cut all of it, then evacuate the weak part, and cut it without fear, without pain: and care for the spot with what dries and contracts, until it is healed.
Chapter 26.
Chapter on sutures of the nose, lips, and ears.
Know that when dissolution of continuity occurs in one of these cartilages, it does not hold together well in that operation, except in some men.
Therefore, when something happens to someone, you should consider whether it is a fresh wound with its own blood. Then gather the edges of the wound with stitches, and then care for it until it heals.
And if the edges of continuity are already separated and each part has become healthy, then you must scrape off all the part from its apparent skin until it bleeds. Then gather two edges with a stitch and tie them, and sprinkle powder of dragon's blood on it, and powdered frankincense: and place above the powders a fragment of the plaster diafinicon, and some other fragment of consolidating plasters: and leave it tied for two days or three. Then dissolve it and change the medicine: and leave it until the stitches come off by themselves. Then care for it with ointment until it heals.
However, the method of stitching is to gather the edges of continuity, or with a needle, as we told you about the stitch of the belly: or gather it with thread, as I have shown you.
Chapter 27.
¶ On the extraction of lip knots.
Many people indeed suffer from hard abscesses in the inner parts of their lips, similar to grains of herb: and some of them are smaller, and some larger.
Therefore you should turn the lip over, and cut across all the knot of it, and hang it up with a hook, and cut it from every part.
Then fill the place after the incision with powdered zeig, until the blood is gone.
Then it should be bound with vinegar, and the place should be cared for with it until the wounds are healed.
Chapter 28.
Translation: On making an incision in the flesh of a newborn on the gum.
Often flesh is born on the gum above, which the ancients called abuluss.
Therefore you should suspend it with a spoon: or hold it with forceps, and cut it at its root, and let the wound run, or bleed.
Then place it on a place of zeig powder, or other stanching and drying powders.
If that flesh returns after healing, for often it returns, then cut it again, and cauterize it: for indeed it does not return after cauterization.
Chapter 29.
On the reason of teeth with iron.
Sometimes they gather on the surfaces of teeth from the inner and outer parts, and between the gums rough, discolored, and sometimes yellowish, until that corruption reaches the gum, and the teeth become foul through it.
Therefore you should make the weak one sit between your hands, and his head in your lap, and scrape off the molar and tooth, in which the roughnesses and sand-like things appear to you: until there is nothing left of them, and likewise do with discoloration, greenness, yellowishness, and other things until they are cleansed.
If therefore that which is at the beginning of their reason is removed, it is good: and if not, then repeat the file on them on another day, secondly, and thirdly, until you reach the end of your desire in it.
And know that the tooth needs filing of various forms, many figures: according to how it is prepared for your operation: because the file with which the tooth is filed from the lower part is different from the file with which it is filed between the teeth, according to other forms.
These forms of razors are prepared for you, which you see.
Chapter 30.
On the extraction of toothache.
You should remove the tooth from its pain with all your skill, and delay in its extraction. For its root does not fit when it is extracted: because it is a subtle substance: until when there is no excuse for its extraction, then when the sick person must remove it himself, he should do so to strengthen himself and be certain with you about the toothache.
For often the pain deceives the sick person, and he thinks that it is in the tooth and remove it: then the pain does not go away, until the weak tooth is extracted.
For we have already seen this from the operation of bloodletting.
When therefore the sick person himself is certain about the toothache, then you should scarify around the tooth with a sharp lancet, in which there is some virtue, until the gum is dissolved from all parts: then move it with your fingers, or with slender forceps gradually, until you shake it.
Then place large forceps in that location with good hold, and the head of the sick person between your knees: which you have already held well, so that it does not move: then pull the tooth according to straightness, so that you do not break it.
If therefore it does not come out, then take some of those instruments, and insert it under it from all parts with ease, and try to move it, as you did in the first place.
But if the tooth is perforated, or corroded: then you should fill the hole with a cloth: and tie it with the tip of a slender rod, so that it does not break in the hour of your constriction over it with forceps.
And it is necessary to carefully perform scarification around the circumference of the jaw from all sides by a lot.
And keep your strength, so that it does not break itself, and its part remains, and it returns above the weak one from that greater malice which is more of its pain first.
And beware, that you do not do what unknowing phlebotomists do in their haste, and the boldness of them beyond its eradication, besides what they administer which we have mentioned.
For they often happen to people great infirmities, of which some are difficult to break, and all its roots remain, or some of them: or that they extract it with some of the jawbones: as we have often testified about that.
Then it should be covered after its eradication with wine, or with vinegar and salt.
If blood flow occurs from the places (for it often happens), then you should wipe a little from zege, and fill with it that place: and if not, burn it if zege does not help you.
The forms of the fine forceps by which the tooth is moved in the first place, should be long at their extremities, short at the handle, thick, so that they do not duplicate when with them pressed on the tooth: they should be like the thick handles, until when you squeeze with them, they do not bite themselves, nor duplicate: short at their extremities, and made of iron, or of a well-made sharp edge, direct extremities: and in their extremities there should be teeth, some of which enter into certain ones, and squeeze with a proper constriction, strong.
And sometimes they are made like the extremities of the beak of a bird called a stork, and they are strong for constriction.
Chapter 31.
Translation: On the removal of teeth and the extraction of jawbone fractures.
When a tooth is broken and there remains something under the extraction, then it is necessary to place butter on the affected area for one or two days until the area becomes soft: then introduce lute or forceps, whose tips resemble the beak of a bird called ciconia. However, this is the form of forceps.
Their tips are made like a file inside or like an axe.
If therefore it does not submit to you with these forceps, then it is necessary to make a hole above the root and tear the flesh entirely, and introduce the tool called the "small pliers," whose form is as follows:
Let it be short in length, somewhat thick: and not wet, so that it does not break.
If therefore the root exits through that, it is good: and if not, you must groan with these other tools whose forms are as follows:
The form of the first triangular tip, in which there is a certain thickness.
The form of the fine triangular tip.
And with other tools and instruments that preceded in the ratio of teeth.
Also groan with this tool that resembles a large hook, of this form, a twisted triangular tip, in which there is a certain thickness, so that it does not break: and it is not wet.
And know that there are many tools for teeth: and similarly the other tools are not counted, and the wise craftsman, skilled in his art, has invented by himself the tool according to what signifies to him the operation and the pains of them.
Since from grudges are those things to which the ancients did not speak, due to their diversity in kinds.
But if the jawbone is broken from the jaw, or from other bones of the mouth, or rots: then examine above it in its place with that which is fitting for him from the instruments and forceps which I mentioned in the extraction of the root, and heal with the one whose form is this.
Let there be something of thickness gradually, so that it is bound or held with the jaw, and does not flee and float until the jaw exits: and restore the place with suitable medicines to that.
But if there is a small rot in the bone, then scrape it from its own rot, and heal it, until it is healed.
Chapter 32.
Of the extraction of teeth projecting above others.
When teeth do not project above others according to their natural course, it becomes ugly by that form: and especially when it happens in women, and girls, that is, in virgins.
Therefore you should consider. For if the tooth is born after another tooth, and does not fit, or is possible to be extracted, nor is it cut: then remove it: and if it is connected with another tooth, then cut it with this instrument, whose form is this.
It is similar to a small beak, and is made of iron, very sharp at the end.
And let your cut be where you cut it into many days, and because of the hardness of the tooth, and so that another is not moved from the teeth.
But if it is projecting exposed to its own cutting: then cut it with a file with a file, whose form is this.
It should all be done from the inside, and the handle of its needles and puncturers should be like a file with which sharp points are made: with which the tooth is gradually cut away over many days with ease, so that the tooth does not move and fall off; then it is gently rubbed, and in the end it is scraped with some rasors.
But if it is a tooth from which a part is broken off and hurts the tongue: then it is necessary that the edge of it even be filed away, until the roughness of that broken part is evened out; and it should be flattened, and not hurt the tongue, nor corrupt speech.
Chapter 33.
On the retention of teeth with gold wires.
When it happens to the front teeth that they are shaken and moved by a blow or by chance: and the weak one cannot string over what he eats so that it does not fall out; and you have treated them with stiptics, and the cure has not improved: then the ingenuity in them is, that they should be strung with gold wire: because silver becomes green, and rots after days: but gold never changes.
And let the wire be of medium thinness and thickness according to the quantity that it takes between the teeth.
Indeed the form of retention is, that you take the wire, and insert a double of it between two healthy teeth: then you weave with both ends of the wire between the moved teeth, whether one is, or more, until you reach with the net up to the healthy tooth of the other part. Then repeat the weaving up to the part from which you began: and tie your hand with thinness and wisdom, until it is not moved at all: and your constriction when you string the wire, at the roots of the teeth, so that it does not rot.
Then cut the excess ends of the thread with scissors: and gather both ends, and fold them over the gum: and hide each one between the sound tooth and the moving tooth, so as not to wound the tongue: then let it be left thus tight until it remains.
But if it is dislodged or cut, tie them again with another thread, and let it remain with it thus for the whole time.
And this is the form of the teeth, and the shape of the bite of two sound teeth, and two moving teeth, as you see.
And sometimes it happens that one tooth, or two after the loss of both, returns to its place and is held as we have mentioned, and remains: and this is done only by a skillful and experienced craftsman.
And sometimes something is fitted from the bones of cattle: and it is made into the shape of a tooth, and is placed in the place from which the tooth is protected and tied, as we have said: and it remains, and is served with it for a long time.
Chapter 34.
Sometimes this ligament that occurs under the tongue is natural, with which man is born, or accidental, from a wound that has already consolidated.
And the operation in it is that you open the mouth of the sick person in his breast, and raise his tongue: then cut this nervous ligament in width, until the tongue is released from its retention.
If there is something hard and knotted in it, and it is from the consolidation of a wound: then thrust into it a hook, and cut it through width, until you have cut the ligament, and released the knot.
And beware, lest there be a deep cut in the flesh, and you sever an artery there, and blood loss occurs.
Then the wound should be covered with a rosewater soaked cloth, or with vinegar, or with cold water.
Then place a linen bandage under the tongue, which the weak person should hold all night: so that it does not consolidate again on the second day.
But if blood loss occurs, then place on the wound a poultice of zegi powder. But if indeed the blood overwhelms you, then cauterize the place with a lentiginous cauterizer, which is suitable for that: then care for it along with the rest of the treatment, until it heals.
Chapter 35.
Sometimes a tumor occurs under the tongue that resembles a small stone, preventing the tongue from performing its natural function: and perhaps it grows so much, until it fills the mouth.
And the operation in it is, that you open the mouth of the sick person before the sun: and consider the tumor.
If therefore you see it of a dark or black color, hard, to which the sick person does not have sense: then do not touch it, because it is cancer.
And if it is inclined to whiteness, in which there is moisture, then push into it a hook, and cut it with a fine spear, and free it from all part. But if the blood overwhelms you in your hour of operation, then place on it a poultice of zegi powder, until the blood is cut off: then return to your operation, until you extract it with its fullness.
Then it is soaked with vinegar and salt: and care for it with the rest of the cure that is suitable to that, until it heals.
On the Cure of Two Abscesses in the Tonsils.
Chapter 36.
Sometimes abscesses occur between the throat and the glands, that is, the tonsils, which resemble almonds: and they are called two Tonsils: which when you treat with what we said in division, and do not heal, then consider.
If therefore it is a hard abscess, of brownish color, with little pain: then do not touch it with iron.
And if it is of red color, and its root is thick: then do not touch it even with iron, fearing the flow of blood, indeed leave it, until it ripens. And then either you will pierce it: or it will burst by itself.
And if it is of white color, round, and its root is thin: then it must be pierced.
And the operation in it is, that you consider before the operation of its abscess, if the hot abscess of it has been completed with quiet rest, or it has diminished by some diminution: then therefore make the sick person sit in front of the sun, and his head in your lap: and open his mouth, and let him take a servant between his hands, and press his lower tongue with an instrument, whose this is its form.
Let it be made of silver, or of brass, which is thin like a knife.
When therefore you press with it the tongue, and the abscess appears to you, and falls on it your sight: then take a hook, and fix it in the tonsil, and draw it out as much as you can, except that you pull with it some from its clothes.
Then, cut it with an instrument of this form, which follows. It is adapted to forceps: however, its extremities should be guarded, so that the opening of each of them is directly opposite and sharp: therefore, care should be taken that it is from iron indo, or alloyed with lead.
But if this instrument is not present, then cut it with a spatula of this form. It should be sharp on one side, not sharp on the other.
And after you have cut one almond, cut the other according to the same method of incision.
Then, after incision, the sick person should gargle with cold water, or with vinegar and water.
But if blood flow occurs to him, gargle with water in which the bark of beans has been boiled: or myrtle leaves, and similar things from stiptics, until the bleeding is stopped: then care for it, until it is healed.
And sometimes abscesses arise in the throat other than the two almonds. Then cut them according to what I said in the incision of two almonds equally.
And indeed, I myself have already healed a woman from an abscess, which was born between her throat, which was pulling to the esophagus, little sense, which had almost closed the throat: and the woman breathed through a narrow opening, and had already stopped her eating, and drinking water: and had arrived at death, if she remained for one day, or two days.
And the abscess had risen so much that it had emitted two branches, until they exited through two nostril holes.
I therefore acted swiftly and fixed one of their hooks. Then I pulled it out, and a large piece came with it.
Then I cut it off where I had grasped it from the nostril opening.
Then I did the same to the other one that protruded from the nostril opening.
Then I opened his mouth, and pressed his tongue: and afterwards I fixed a hook into the abscess: then I cut out part of it, and only a little blood came out of it: therefore the throat of the woman was cured, and she immediately began to drink water, and then she took food.
Therefore I did not stop cutting out of that abscess many times over a long period of time: and the abscess would take the place of what I was cutting out, until it had been prolonged too much and with it.
Therefore I devised, and I cauterized the abscess between the throat.
Therefore she stood up after the addition: then I walked away from that side, and I did not know what God had done with her after me.
Chapter on the cutting of abscesses in the mouth.
Chapter 37.
When the catarrh descends to the mouth, and becomes an abscess, and is long: then it is called a perpendicular one: and if it is in the lower part round and large, then it is called a wound.
When it is cured with what we said in the division, and the cure does not come together: and you see that the abscess has become warm and thin: then it is necessary to cut it out.
And what is gathered from it is round and not long, and is bloody, or of a yellowish or black color, and there is no sensation: then it is necessary to follow the cutting out of it. For it is in that place where there is fear of the weak.
Therefore, when you see it according to the manner I mentioned from its whiteness and length, you should make the infirm person sit before the sun: and press his tongue with an instrument, of which the preceding narration was made: then fix a hook in the wound, and pull it downwards: and cut it with one of the two instruments I mentioned for incision of the two tonsils.
And it is necessary that you do not cut from it, except that which is added above the natural limit without addition.
For if you cut from it more, you will damage the voice and speech.
Then after the incision, use that which we mentioned in the incision of the two tonsils: and care for it, until it is healed.
But if the infirm person fears the incision: then you must use your skill in cauterizing it without fear and cowardice.
And the method of cauterization in it is not, except with sharp water: and it is, that you place the head of the infirm person in your lap. Then press his tongue with the instrument which we mentioned. Then take from the water which I told you in the chapter of cauterizing, and mix it with unextinguished charcoal, and place it not thick nor thin, and fill the cavity of this instrument, whose form is as follows.
Let the extreme part of it in which the medicine is placed be a hollow, like the hollow of a needle.
And place the instrument with the medicine on the same hook: and let the infirm person be lying on his side, so that salt may run out from his mouth from the internal medicine, so that nothing may descend from it to his throat, and harm him.
Then hold your hand with the medicine. And you should apply it to the first part of the wound, in the amount of half an hour, until you see that it has become discolored and the pain of the medicine has been relieved.
And if you want to take a probe, and wrap it with cloth, and pour the probe with the medicine, and insert the probe with the cloth into a tube from above, until the cloth sticks to the wound.
Do this many times, until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of that wound. Then let it go: for it will dry up and fall off after three days, or four.
But if you need to repeat the medicine, repeat it: and after cauterization wipe around the wound with cloth dampened in butter, and clean it with what is around it from the medicine: and moisten it with cold water.
And it will be healed externally with an ointment, and internally with gargles, until it is healed.
Therefore this kind of treatment is healthier than incision and further from fear.
And sometimes the wound is also healed with that which is finer than cauterization and incision: it is healed with smoking, in this way. Take a poultice, and hyssop, and origanum, and rue, and seaweed, and chamomile, and abrotanum, and similar herbs to these: and gather all of them, or some of them in a pot, and immerse them with vinegar, and boil: and the pot should be glazed with clay properly: and there should be a hole in the middle of the pot, above which a concave instrument is placed according to this way.
Make it from silver or copper: and its tip is inserted into the mouth of the sick person, where there is a lemon, until the vapor rises to the nostril through the tube, until the nostril becomes obscured.
Then repeat this process on it many times, until it dries out.
And beware, do not make this treatment at the beginning of the appearance of abscesses. For it rather adds to the abscess: and you should not make this unless at the decline of its hot stage.
If however this instrument is not present to you, then take a tube, and place in its tip some wool: so that the mouth of the sick person will not be burned: because the wool prevents the vapor from burning the mouth: and this is from good treatment with safety.
¶ On the extraction of thorns from the throat, and bones.
Chapter 38.
Often a bone or thorn of a fish, or other thing, sticks in the throat.
Therefore you must extract what is apparent on top of which it falls, after you have placed your tongue with the instrument under the sun, and it is declared to you that it is in the throat.
And what does not appear to you and is hidden in the throat, you must make the sick person vomit before the food is digested in the stomach. Perhaps the attached thing will come out through vomiting.
Or the sick person may swallow a piece of bone, or the stem of lettuce, or a dry crust of bread: or he may receive a piece of dried sea sponge gently, and then tie it with a thread, and then swallow it. When therefore it has reached the place where the thorns, or bone, are, and is extracted, then it comes out.
If therefore it does not exit with that which we said, then use the tool made of lead according to this form.
Let it be larger than the radius by a little, and at its end there should be a narrowness which will enter into his throat with ease: and he himself should have his head raised up.
And beware of his own epiglottis, so that it does not happen to him coughing, and he pushes with it, or a spindle, or inserts himself the physician with his own hand.
But that the sick person inserts, this is better: because of his knowledge of the location of the attached thing: and he pushes downwards, or draws his hand with the instrument upwards, all that second according to the quantity which is prepared for him, until it exits.
§ On the extraction of a leech.
Chapter 39.
When the leech is treated with it which we said in division from cure with medicines, and does not attach, then consider in the throat of the sick person before the sun, or at the sun after you have placed his tongue with the instrument which I told you.
If therefore your sight falls upon the leech, extract it with a small hook, or with a delicate instrument.
If it is not possible with them: then take a hollow needle, and insert it into the throat of the sick person up to near the throat: then insert into the hollow of the needle burning iron with fire. Do this many times: and the sick person should avoid all water for the whole day.
Then he should receive a full glass of cold water, and open his mouth in it: and cover his mouth with it, and not swallow anything from it: and move the water one hour after another with his hand. Bloodletting is immediately affected when it feels water.
If, however, it does not exit with what we mentioned, then smoke the infirm person with cicadas, or with assa foetida using the instrument we mentioned in the smoking of the wound.
Do this often, because it will fall itself.
And the method of operation in smoking is, that you take a pot in which there are live prunes with fire: and the pot should be covered with a covering, in which there is a hole: and it should be arranged in that hole the end of the instrument.
Then throw the smoking, and place the infirm person's mouth at the end of the cannula, and close his mouth, so that the smoking does not exit, until you know that the smoking has reached the bloodsucker. For the bloodsucker will immediately fall.
If it does not fall, then repeat the smoking often.
And the infirm person should tolerate thirst, and eat with salt, and mallows, and not drink water.
It is therefore necessary that it exit with this regimen.
And this is the form of the instrument with which the bloodsucker is drawn from the throat, when it falls on it with its sight.
It is similar to forceps, as you see: unless that it has this curve which is inserted into the throat. And its end is similar to the beak of a bird which is called a stork, in which there is the roughness of a file: when it grasps something, it does not let it go entirely.
On the opening of abscesses, and their section, and care in general.
Chapter 40.
Abscesses are of many kinds, of many modes, according to how the remembrance of them comes, namely one, and one in this book: and they are diverse in their perforation, and section from two modes.
One of them is of the kind of boils that exist within themselves and which include moisture.
And the second method is due to the locations where it occurs from the body.
Because a boil that occurs in the head is different from a boil that occurs in the anus, and a boil that occurs in fleshy places is different from a boil that occurs in joints, and each of them has its own judgment according to its operation.
And from boils are those that do not require to be lanced unless after the maturation of pus in them and its suppuration: and from them are those that require to be lanced while they are raw and not matured according to their suppuration.
Such as boils that are near joints.
Because a boil when it occurs near a joint, and persists to be its existence until it putrefies what is in its vicinity perhaps the ligaments or nerves of that joint's connection are corrupted: therefore this is a cause for contraction of that limb.
Or it is a boil at the main member: for if you delay its lancing until it matures, it will harm either him or through that main member.
Or it is near the anus, lance therefore it immature: and it is not necessary to lance a raw boil that is not fully digested, except that which is near the anus so that it does not putrefy deeply and extend to the interior of the anus and become a fistula or become in its end that is not healed.
It is necessary to know the time of lancing boils that have matured according to their suppuration: and it is at the cessation of pain, recession of fever, and diminution of redness, and pulsation, and sharpness of the head's boil: and other signs.
And it is necessary to make the same incision in the lower part of the abscess and its most prominent elevation: and let the incision be made lengthwise along the body, if the abscesses are in the parts of the hands and feet, and in the back, and in the tendons, and nerves, and arteries, and finally in all equal places where there is no reflection.
But in those things which are reflected, go with the incision according to that member.
But when the abscess is in fleshy places, it is better to let the incision of it go until its digestion is confirmed, as we said according to the complement,
because if you incise it before that, the course of the virus from it is prolonged, and there are many and filthy discharges, and perhaps its lips are hardened, and its depth.
And some abscesses are incised according to the width of the body at necessity: or according to that by which the member needs.
And it is necessary for the attendant to make a small incision in small abscesses, and a wide incision in large abscesses: or many cuts according to the similarity of the size of the abscesses.
And there are abscesses from which the skin must be concaved: and it is incised when it has been made like a garment, and has become in the end, which is already dead: like that which happens in many, so that they doubt, and in buboes.
And there are those which are cut with a cut having three angles. And there is one from which it is incised like the figure of a myrtle leaf.
Like the inguinal abscess.
And there are those in which the incision is circular, and the lunar incision: and similar to them from the incisions.
That which does not have a head, such as soft, shallow abscesses, should be pierced with a shallow, flat incision.
And when the abscess is large and has already collected a lot of pus, it should be pierced so that you do not rush and remove all the pus at once, but rather remove some of it from that part. Then leave the abscess alone until another day. Then remove some more of the pus again.
Do this repeatedly according to the gradation until it is all out, especially if the patient is weak and lacking in strength, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an old man: for the animal spirit often dissolves with the exit of pus, and perhaps the weak one dies, and you will not notice.
Therefore pay great attention to this chapter.
And after your incision, by which you have pierced these abscesses, it is necessary to clean the wound and consider. If therefore the wound is small or a flat incision, then apply lint from linen, or old cotton. And if the abscess is large and there are many incisions, then you must insert lint into every incision until they all meet.
And if you have cut a part of the skin in the abscess, or have scooped it out: then you must fill it with old cotton, or as when a garment is sewn, or shorn of its wool without moisture: and bind it up until the third day.
Then raise it up, and care for it with what is necessary from an ointment until it heals.
If bleeding occurs during your surgical procedure, then apply cold water and vinegar to the cloth after it has absorbed the blood, and place it repeatedly on the wound.
If the bleeding persists, then you must apply the treatment and cure, as I have mentioned in various places of this book, and by division.
If it is during the winter season and there are many boils on the skin: then you must pour in powders with wine and warm oil, and place them on the affected areas.
And if it is during the summer and there are fleshy areas: then you must place powders soaked in water and oil, or with wine and oil, and make the whole thing cold. Until the third day, as we said, then you must dissolve the boils and cleanse it, and apply the treatment that is appropriate for its healing until it is healed.
This is therefore what is necessary for the universal knowledge of the treatment of boils.
Indeed, according to the method of distinction, I have already said about every boil, how the way to its cure is taken up separately in each chapter.
Chapter 41.
¶ About the incision of boils that occur on the skin of the head.
Small boils occur on the skin of the head, and are of the kind of nodes that contain the tunics which are like their sacks: as if they were themselves plucked chickens.
And there are many of these kinds.
From these there are fleshy ones: and from these there are those that contain moisture similar to lime: and from these there are those that contain moisture similar to flour and porridge: and from these there are similar ones, and from these there are those that are hard like stone.
In all cases of cutting and their removal, there is no fear as long as one does not perform the cut opposite an artery.
The operation in their cutting is to try it with the instrument whose form comes after these, which is called the "Intrumissus", until you know what it contains.
For if it contains moisture, then dry it with a cut according to the length of the surface cut: in this form.
And begin with a cut from line b to line g. When the moisture is drained, then scrape off the shell that contains that moisture, and do not leave anything from it completely.
For often it returns if something remains from it.
Then immerse the wound in Egyptian ointment if it is present: and if not, in water and salt: and fill the wound with it, and leave it until another day. For it will consume what remains from the shell.
Then repeat over it with Egyptian ointment second and third, and if you need it, until you trust that nothing remains from the shell, then care for the wound with ointment until it is healed.
If the abscess contains a fat knot: then dry it according to this form, with a cut having the form of a cross: and insert pins between the sides of the cut, and scrape it from all parts: and try your strength in extracting the tunic that contains it.
But if it makes a contradiction for you, an artery, then do what I will tell you after.
And likewise do in a stone abscess, from the cut and cure, as we said.
This section on lapidary abscess is easier: because it has little blood and moisture. Sometimes there are certain abscesses among these people, in which there is no moisture at all.
Which is: because I cut open an abscess on the head of an old woman, and found an abscess like a solid and hard, rough, white stone, which could not be broken: and if anyone struck it with it throwing, it would wound him.
But in other abscesses that occur on the head, namely those that occur in the heads of children, and at the roots of the ears, this section is all surface.
Or make an incision in them always from the lower part of them, so that the course of the pus may be relieved to the lower parts.
Then take care of those with what is suitable for their cure.
§ On the incision of Strophularia in the neck.
Chapter 42.
These abscesses often occur in the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin: and sometimes they occur in the rest of the body.
And over those that occur in the neck, there is one and many: and they are generated from each other: and every Strophula from them is within its own tunic, as is in knots and abscesses of the head, as we have said.
And the species of these Strophularia are many. For from them there are stony ones: and from them there are those that contain moisture: and from them there are evil ones, which do not obey the cure.
In that one therefore which you see of good disposition in touch, whose color is near the skin, and moves to all parts, and is not annexed with the nerves of the neck, nor with the ganglia, nor with the artery, nor is deep: it is necessary to cut it with a shallow incision from the upper part to the lower part of the body along a line b. to a line g., and scrape it from all parts: and extend two lips of skin with a needle, or with many needles, if you need that, as we said in abscesses of the head, and extrahe it gradually.
And it is a precaution that the vein or nerve does not get caught.
And let the incision be not too sharp: so that it does not add to your hand with the incision, or disturb the weak, and you cut what is not necessary.
But if you cut the vein or artery, and it prevents you from the operation, then place in the wound some triturated zegium powder, or some powders that stop bleeding, and tie the wound, and leave it until the sharpness of the abscess subsides, and the wound becomes soft: or it begins to putrefy.
For the blood is stopped then. So return to your operation until you complete it.
Then with your index finger, check if there is anything remaining from the strophuli or small ones: so cut them and clean them.
But if there is a large vein in the root of the strophuli: then it is necessary that you do not cut that strophuli from its root: but it is necessary that you tie it with a strong doubled thread, and leave it until it falls off without harm.
Then fill the wound with old cataplasm that you have already immersed in Egyptian ointment. Then take care of it yourself.
But if the strophuli is cut entirely, then it is necessary that you gather the two wound lips: and suture it immediately, after you see that there is no remaining excess.
But if you see that there is remaining excess due to the size of the strophuli, then it is necessary that you extend to cutting its root, and removing it: and administer the suture that we said.
And what contains moisture from the strophuli, puncture it with a superficial puncture: so that you see its place of maturity to you: and place the puncture below the body, as we said.
After perforation, apply liniment with ointment and similar substances to cauterize the remaining part affected by corruption until you see that the wound is clean. Then treat the wound with a generative ointment of flesh until it heals.
Chapter 43.
On Sectioning the Epiglottis from an Abscess within the Throat.
The ancients performed this sectioning of the epiglottis, and I have not seen anyone in our land who has done it; and this is the written account of their words.
However, in those who have a synanche, it is necessary to avoid sectioning the epiglottis because a tracheotomy cannot be performed through it; since all veins and lungs are weak.
However, in those who have a hot abscess in the mouth, throat, or both jaws when there is no illness in the canal, it is necessary to perform sectioning of the epiglottis to escape from the danger that occurs from the praefication.
Therefore, when we want to do it, we should section the epiglottis under three or four circles of the epiglottis by a small cut along its width, in the part between two circles by an amount that is a section in the cartilage, not in the cartilage: and this location is convenient for sectioning because it is free from flesh, and the veins are far from it.
However, if the physician is afraid, then it is necessary to stretch the skin of the throat with a lancet. Then he should flatten the skin until he reaches the canal: avoid the veins if he sees anything from them.
Then he should cut the cartilage that we mentioned: and it is indicated to cut the canal from the phlegm that escapes from it, because it is broken, and the division of the voice.
And leave an open wound at some time.
When therefore the prefication is removed at the time when it is feared, gather the two lips of the wound together and heal the skin alone without cartilage.
Then administer medicines which cause flesh to grow until it is healed.
Albucasis says. The summary of this narrative that we have told is not an explanation unless when they see that some of these abscesses has already filled the throat of the sick person: and the sick person was raised up over death, and wanted to be cut off from his breathing: they go to cut the epiglottis, so that the sick person may breathe on the place of the wound with some breathing, and be saved from death: and for this reason they ordered to leave the open wound until the malice of the illness is consumed, and its malice is three days, and almost itself: then they ordered to heal the wound and cure it until it is healed.
And that which I saw myself is that one maidservant took a knife and sent it with her into her throat, and cut the part of the trachea.
And I was called for her cure, and I found her groaning, as is the groaning of the dead.
Then I untied her from the wound, and I found blood that had gone out of the wound in a small amount. Then I was afraid that she had not cut the vein, nor stopped it: and wind was going out of the wound.
Then I hurried and healed her wound, until it was healed: and nothing happened to the maidservant except a hoarseness in her voice: and she returned after days to a better condition of her affairs.
I therefore say: that in the section of the Epiglottis there is no fear.
Of the section of the hernia of the throat.
Chapter 44.
This apostema called hernia of the throat, is a large apostema according to the color of the body: and it is much in women.
And it is according to two modes: either it is natural: or it is accidental.
In the natural certainly there is no skill.
But in the accidental indeed there are two modes: of which one is similar to the fat knots. And the other mode, is similar to the apostema that is made from the bending of the artery. And in it is fear, and it is not necessary that a presumption be made to it with iron, unless in that which is small: and you probe it, and investigate it with the intromission. If therefore you find it similar to the fat knot, and it is not suspended with any vein: then cut it, as they are cut off the knots: and extract it with that which contains from the chest, if it is in the chest: and if not, then scrutinize all of it. Then care for the place with that which is necessary from the cure, until it is healed.
Chapter 45.
Of the section of the kind of knots.
There are many kinds of knots, and I have already said all the kinds of them in the division: and it is necessary that I tell here the difference between a knot, and an ulcer: since it causes doubt.
I say therefore, that when an ulcer is heat, and fever, and very sharp pains, until the boiling over of the superfluity is quieted, and the putrefaction is completed: then indeed the fever and the heat are quieted.
When there is a knot, there is no heat, fever, or pain, and it contains them in their own sifachin, which is their own sack and is according to the color of the body: and its beginning is like chickpeas, and it becomes like broad beans, and greater and smaller.
And they are according to two species: either fat: or they contain moisture. And the colors of moisture are many, as I said in the division.
Therefore, when you come to the cure of the knot, you must experiment with it and inquire about it first with the instrument called Intromissus, according to its form as it comes in the chapter that follows.
And the method of investigating the abscess and all knots is, that you take this instrument and insert it into a moister place, which you find in the abscess: and you turn your fingers with it gradually, until you know that the instrument has penetrated the skin. Then your last hand according to the measure of the size of the abscess.
Then extract Intromissus, and consider what comes out at its tread.
If therefore it comes out running moisture, whatever color it is: then dry it with a shallow cut, according to what I said in the other abscesses.
And if moisture does not come out at the tread of Intromissus, then you know that it is fat: then dry it with a cut having the form of a cross, according to this form, as I taught you: and suspend it with hooks, and excoriate the skin from all parts with ease: and guard the sac if you can over it, so that you may extract it whole with the knot.
But if the sac is torn by the operation, and it is not possible to extract it whole, often this happens: then extract it in pieces, until there remains nothing from it.
For if something remains from it, either too little or too much, it returns to the knot as much as possible.
If it wounds you and something remains from it too little: then fill the wound with certain corrosive powders at your completion, and tie the wound, and place on top of it what sits apostema hot, and care for it with the rest of the cure until it is healed.
If therefore it is a large knot, then cut its two lips, and care for it with that which fleshens.
But if it is contrary to you vein pulsatilis, or not pulsatilis: then hurry, and fill the place zegi ground, and let it be tied for two days, or three, until the wound rots, and the boiling of blood stops: then return to cutting that which remains from the knot.
Chapter 46
Paragraph on external instruments for cutting and piercing.
From them are the forms of intromissors, and they are of three kinds.
For from them is the large one, and from them is the medium one, and from them is the small one.
Let them be made from iron awl of square ends properly, so that they quickly enter into the apostema.
And these are the forms of experiens, and no, that is, piercing: and one of them is called beris, that is, piercing: and they are of three kinds.
For from them is the large one, and the medium one, and the small one.
They are used, so that they investigate through them the apostemata, and the exits, and the fistulas, and the bubones from that which is between them from the bones.
And others are made round, clean, soft, like the large awls which have seats, from citrine indeed, or from air, or from iron, or from silver.
And better among them are those that are made from citrine.
They are also made from black lead, which they use to experiment with fistulas, whose concavity is a reflection, so that they reflect gently with their own reflections.
And there are again three kinds. Because from them are the long ones, from them the medium ones, and from them the short ones, according to the extent of the length of the fistula and its tightness.
The shape of the Uncins, and they are many kinds.
Because from them are the simple ones, that is, those with one curvature: and they are three kinds as you see, large, medium, and small.
And from them are the blind Uncins: and they are three kinds.
And from them are the Uncins with two curvatures, and they are three kinds: and from them are the Uncins with three curvatures, and they are three kinds: and all of these are necessary in their place.
And these are the shapes of Scalpels, with which they cut and scrape Nodes, and abscesses: and they are three kinds: because from them is large, medium, and small.
Their extremities by which the section is made are sharp, other extremities are not sharp: and they are not placed thus, except that with them is made a gentle touch in scraping Nodes at the fear of incision of the vein, or nerve: and that the sick person may be healed by it, and find a little tranquility from the burning which he found at scraping abscesses.
They are made from air, and they are similar to the Rod, with which is made alcohol: and in the broad extremity is a hidden Spatula point: and in it runs to the insides, and to the outsides when you want, as you see.
The shape of the boils that are hidden between the fingers, at the opening of the pustule: and they do not feel them by the sick: and they are of three kinds, large, medium, and small.
The shape of the wounds from which blood flows: and they are of three kinds, large, medium, and small.
Let them be made of air, or yellow, round, to a certain length, as you see: and let they be at the subtlety.
And it is necessary that these species of wounds from which blood flows be large and small with you: so as to cut through them the blood with speed at need, and then when there is not present for you the medicine.
But you will not use them in the cutting of blood in every place of the body, and you will not use unless in fleshy places: as the arms of the legs, and the hips, and the arms of the arms, and the breasts, and the belly, and the groin, and similar to them, from fleshy places, moist.
And sometimes they are made of them small instruments similar to the shells of nuts, according to their shape: through which blood is cut when it flows from the place of phlebotomy, or at the incision of the vein, or artery: and sometimes they are made of them round according to this form.
Chapter 47.
About the care of the breasts of men which resemble the breasts of women.
Sometimes the breasts of certain men swell at the fullness of sleep (that is, when they begin to be polluted in sleep) until they resemble the breasts of women: and remain pustulous fiercely.
Whoever abhors that, it is necessary for him to cover the breasts with a crescent-shaped incision, according to this form from point b to line a, and then remove all the fat. Afterwards, fill the wound with flesh-colored medicament. Then gather both wound lips together with a suture, and care for it until it is healed.
If however the breast leans towards the lower parts and becomes soft due to its size, as often happens with women: then it is necessary for him to make two incisions in the upper two sides of his breasts, each containing one on either side near their ends, until a larger line contains a smaller one, according to this form from point b to line a, g. Afterwards remove the skin that is between the two lips, and take off all the fat, and administer what we said about sutures and powders, which is necessary for healing, until it is healed.
If however he cannot complete the incision that is necessary to make, due to the agitation of the sick person, or due to the flow of blood: then it is necessary for him to fill the wound with a dissolving ointment submerged, and leave it, until it corrodes what remains of the fat. Then care for it until it is healed.
Concerning the piercing of abscesses, which happens under the nipple.
Chapter 48.
These abscesses which happen under the nipple are from a kind of hard Strophularia, which contains pustules, and from these are those which contain moistures.
Those therefore which are from those which contain moistures, it is necessary for them to be dried with a crescent-shaped incision, according to this form from point b to line a, g. When however all that is in the abscess is evacuated through pus, then fill it with old ointment, and leave it until another day.
Then remove the bandage and treat it with an appropriate ointment until it heals.
If the abscess is of the type of Strophularia blisters, then cut it above, as we said in the section on Strophularia evenly.
If the wound extends so that it can discharge pus, then apply a cautery to it according to what we said in the one that was previously mentioned.
Chapter 49.
On incising abscesses that occur due to artery and vein.
When the artery is ruptured and the skin that is above it is consolidated, an abscess often occurs from this: and similarly, an abscess and swelling also occur in veins.
And the signs by which it is known that the abscess and swelling are due to the artery and vein, are: because when the abscess is due to the artery, it is long, gathered deep in the body: and when you press the abscess with your fingers, you feel as if there is a noise to it.
And that which is due to the vein, is round in the obvious body.
And incision on this abscess is an error, and especially that which is under the armpits, and groins, and neck, and in many places of the body: and it is great very much. Therefore it should be avoided with iron, and that which is from them also at the extremities, or at the head, should be avoided.
On that which is from them due to swelling of the artery opening, find in the skin incision in length. Then open the incision with hooks, then the artery: and free it from the tunics, until it is stripped.
Then introduce the needle under it and make it penetrate to the other side, and tie the artery with a double thread in two places, as I taught you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples.
Then prick the place that is between two ligaments with a lancet, until all the blood that is in it comes out and the abscess is dissolved.
Then administer the treatment that generates pus until the ligaments fall off; afterwards care for it with suitable ointments until it heals.
If it is an abscess due to the cutting of a vein, then you must hold with your hand what is possible to remove from the abscess and the skin. Then introduce the needle under the place that you held with your hand, and make it penetrate; and let there be a double thread on it, until you remove it from the other side. Then tie it with the abscess with a good ligature: according to what I told you about tying a vein from two parts with two ends of the thread.
But if you fear that the thread will be pulled out, then introduce another needle with another thread under the abscess entirely near the incision of the needle: press and tie your thread in four places.
Then cut the abscess in the middle of it, until when it comes out what is in it: then cut the excess skin and let go what is tied from it.
Then place on it the swab that you immersed in wine and oil. Then administer the treatment that is made with linen and ointment until it heals.
Chapter L.
About an abscess that happens due to the twisting of nerves.
Just as it happens that an abscess forms in an artery and vein, similarly, an abscess can form in nerves. This occurs in them due to a blow or from excessive labor, and the like. It is most common in the regions of helpers, such as the heel, and in every place where the joints move. And it is a severe abscess.
Its color is similar to that of the rest of the body, and it occurs in many positions without pain. And when it is pressed with intensity, the sick person feels in it a sensation similar to a stupor.
And it is not an aggregated abscess in the deep part of the body, but rather under the skin, and it moves to every part, and does not go towards the front or before, nor behind to the back parts.
Therefore, what is in the joints, it is not necessary to pierce with iron. Perhaps contraction may occur.
But in that which is from them in the head, or in the forehead, pierce the skin with a small knife. If therefore it is a small abscess, then grasp it with forceps, and cut it away from the root.
And if it is large, then suspend it with a hook, and scrape it off. Then remove it, and suture the wound with a stitch: and care for it until it heals.
Chapter Ll.
Concerning the incision of abscesses that occur in the belly.
Sometimes many people have in their bellies and in the rest of their bodies, tumors, which are called mushrooms, due to a likeness of them to mushrooms.
Whose root is thin, and their head is thick, and their lips are turned over. And there are also those who are few in number: and there are also those who are highly praised.
And indeed I have seen a man, and in his belly were two thelils, which were more similar to other things than anything else: there was no difference between them, they were white, with small roots, and they opposed their lips, and they found each other, and moisture always flowed from them.
I therefore cut into them, and I found in the weight of one as if it were X and VIII ounces and in the other as if it were VI ounces. And the operation in their incision is, that you consider then, if the sick person is humid, and the color of the thelil is white, moist, subtle root: then cut him with a broad spatula, and there be cauterization in your presence in fire.
For often blood is driven out from his incision: therefore if the blood overcomes you, then cauterize it.
But if you see the sick person afraid and timid from the incision with iron, then take a thread made of lead properly, and tie with it athelul: whose mode we have said, and let him be for two days.
Then add to the lead seal. Therefore do not cease to tie the lead, as often as it is pressed into the thelil, until it is cut off and falls by itself without labor.
But if the thelil is thick of root, then in its incision there is a certain fear and timidity: especially because it is in the belly.
Nevertheless it is possible to cut into its middle. Then cauterize it, so that it does not return.
Then care for it, until the wound heals.
And beware of presuming to incise a thelil which is of a dark color, few sensations, and foul appearance, for indeed it is a cancerous abscess: and I will come with a memory of Cancer after this.
Chapter LII.
On the care of the prominent umbilicus.
The umbilicus becomes prominent for many reasons. Or from fissures of the skin, which is above the abdomen: and it exits through it an abscess, or intestine, according to what happens in other ruptures. Or from the blood that flows from the vein, or artery, according to what was previously mentioned. Or from the fatness enclosed in it.
But if it is due to a skin fissure, and the outlet is thin: then it is of a similar color to an abscess: and it is gentle, painless: and appears to be in different positions. And if it is due to the outlet of the intestine, then its position is with that which we have mentioned, of greater diversity. Therefore when you presume to touch it with your fingers, it disappears: then it returns, and perhaps it is with it a sound: and it is much magnified at the entrance of the bath, and the laborious movement.
But if it is due to moisture, it is gentle: then it does not disappear when you presume to touch it with your hand, nor is there any binding, nor addition.
But if it is due to blood, then with these signs an abscess appears to be of a dark color from the slope.
But if it is due to flesh born: then it is a heavy, thick, hard abscess, and it is shaped according to one quantity.
If indeed it is due to its moisture, then its touch is gentle.
And the operation in it is such that you should consider then, if the prominence of the umbilicus is due to blood from the Artery, or Vein, or moisture: then it is necessary to be prevented from its treatment. For in that there is fear and fear, as I taught you in the chapter in which I said about abscesses due to the Artery and Vein.
But if the prominence of the umbilicus is due to the intestine, or feces: then it is necessary to command the weak one, as much as he holds his breath, and stands extended. Then signs with the cauterizing iron around the umbilicus of the whole. Then command him to lie down supine between your hands on his back. Then surround with a flat broad spatula around the umbilicus over the place that you marked with the cauterizing iron. Then extend the middle of the abscesses to the upper parts, with a large needle. Then bind him around the strong place with thread, or with a silk cord from a firm ligament: and let there be a knot of the bound ligament.
Then open the middle of the abscesses extended above the ligament. If indeed you find it already caught by the ligament: then remove the bound one, and insert your index finger into it, and push the intestine to the interior of the belly: and if you find feces, then take it with a needle, and cut its excess.
But if the opposite is against you, the Artery, or Vein: then surround it much. Then return to your operation. And take two needles and insert two strong threads into them. And insert two needles into the circle that you made around the abscess in the shape of a cross, which you make to penetrate.
Then tie the abscess in four places on the needle: and if you wish, remove the needle and let the place go until the flesh rots and falls off by itself: or cut it when it becomes thin and rotten.
Then care for that with what is necessary from the ointments until it heals.
If the protuberance of the navel is from the flesh or from moisture: then it is necessary to hollow out the abscess as we said. And extract the blood, or moisture that you find in it.
Then care for that with what is necessary to harden the place.
Chapter 53.
¶ On the care of cancer.
We have already said about the division of the species of cancer and how the way to its cure with medicines is: and one must be careful with it when curing it with iron, so that it does not become inflamed: and we said about a cancer generated in the womb, and the precaution from its cure.
And the ancients said that sometimes cancer is in a place where it is possible to eradicate it: such as cancer which is in the breasts, or in the thigh, and similar places from movable members to extract all of it: especially when it is beginning to be small.
But when it is old, and is large, one should not approach it.
For I could not cure anyone from that: nor did I see any who came to it before me.
And the operation on it when it is located as we said is, that one goes before and dissolves the sick from black bile several times. Then, if you find the phlebotomy needle itself with a clear sign of fullness.
Then prepare the sick person with preparation, in which it will be placed with operation.
Then introduce into the cankered teeth that are suitable for him. Afterwards, hollow him from all parts with the skin, according to examination, until nothing remains of his roots: and let the blood run out, and do not cut him off quickly, but express the spots and wipe off the whole thick blood with your hand, or with whatever is possible there from instruments.
But if the thick blood flow from the incision of the artery, or vein, makes you contrary, then cauterize the vein until it is cut off. Then care for him with the rest of the cure, until he is healed.
¶ About the Care of Hydropsy.
Chapter 41. Now we have spoken about the division of the species of Hydropsy, and how the accumulation of water is made: and all the signs of each species, and its cure with remedies.
And those that are cured with iron are only the species of ascites alone: and it does not approach with iron of the species of tympanites: nor of the species of hyposarca completely, for that is deadly.
When you have already cured this species of Hydropsy tympanites with remedies, and your treatment has not added: then consider. For if the sick person has already followed weakness, or is with him another infirmity besides Hydropsy: as if it is with him coughing, or dissolution of the belly, and similar things: then beware that you do not treat him with iron: for that is fear.
If you see an individual of robust health, except for Hydropism alone, and he is neither a child nor an elderly person, then the method of operation on him is as follows: you should lift up the sick person standing between your hands, and the assistant behind him should express his bowels by pushing water down with his hand towards the lower part of the beard.
Then take a sharp sponge in this shape. It should be shaped like the two sharp ends of a long, sharp-ended sponge. However, it should have a certain brevity gradually, so that you do not pass through him with him up to the intestine, and injure it.
Then consider. For if the generation of Hydropism is from the part of the intestines, then you should extend with the cutting from the navel by the quantity of three fingers, downwards directly above the beard.
But if the generation of Hydropism is due to pain in the liver: then your cut should be on the left side from the navel by three fingers.
And if the generation of Hydropism is due to the spleen, then your cut should be on the right side: and you should not even make a cut in the side where the sick person wants to lie, so that superfluities do not flow to that weaker place.
Then pierce with an instrument through the whole skin. Then introduce into that cut, and elevate your hand with the sponge between the skin and flesh, as if you are scraping it: and let the quantity that scrapes be the quantity of a nail, or about that.
Then pierce the flesh until the sponge reaches the empty place: and it is the place of water. Then remove it and insert the instrument of this form into the hole. It is similar to a cannula: it is made of silver, or copper, or gold, and is thin and clean: it has a small hole on its lower part, and on its sides there are three holes, two on one side and one on the other: and its tip is cut according to the shape of a pen, as you see: at its upper end is a ring.
For when the instrument reaches the water, then the water immediately flows down on the instrument, so you should suck out the water from the instrument in the middle of an hour's time.
For if you suck out more than necessary from it, the weak person may die of exhaustion or suffer from other symptoms that approach death.
But suck out from it according to its strength and according to the symptoms that the weak person shows you, indicating their condition by its pulse and its nature.
Then remove the instrument and retain the water.
This is because it should be retained immediately due to the skin that retains the hole that is on the side of the syringe: of which I have spoken, so you should pierce it in that way.
Then repeat the process with the instrument on the second day, if you see that the weak person is able to tolerate it: and also remove a small amount of water from the water.
Do this for several days without fear, and guard yourself from error: until there is only a little left in the water.
But if you fear for the weak person, and release a large amount of water from the water: then care for him with burial in hot sand, and much sweating in the bath and sun, and wait for his thirst: and care for him with dry medicines until he is healed: and cauterize above the stomach, and epar, and spleen, after the extraction of water: according to what I have spoken about it before.
On the care of children who are born in places where their urinary openings are not pierced.
Chapter 55.
When someone of the children is born from the belly of his mother, and the head of his muzzle is not pierced, or is narrow, or is not in its place.
Therefore one must assist with the piercing of it immediately after he is born with a thin, very sharp knife, according to this shape.
Then place a thin sling of lead in the opening and tie it up: and hold it for three days, or four.
When therefore he wants to emit urine, remove it, and mix. Then reduce it again.
And if you do not place lead, already possible is that the urine which flows over the place, does not allow it to be closed.
But he whose opening is narrow, he is treated with lead, as we said, for many days, until it is enlarged.
But those in which the opening is not in its place, they are hurt. That is, because from those who are born, the opening is at the end of the hair of the maiden: therefore he cannot mix to the anterior, until he raises the hair with his hand to the upper parts. And he has no generation, therefore, because the semen cannot reach the mother according to the straightness: and it is a very shameful illness.
And the method of operation in him is, that the weak one be bent over his back. Then extend the head of his maiden with your left hand by strong extension, and cut the head of the maiden from the place of the penis, with a sharp point, or with a thin sharp knife: as is the cutting of a reed, or as you cut something, that the middle of it comes similar to the head of the maiden: and so that the opening falls in the middle according to what is necessary.
And provide for yourself during your surgical procedure from blood loss. For this often happens. Therefore, apply to it with that which stops blood flow and care for the wound until it heals.
Of white spots that occur on the foreskin and hair of the head, and corruption, blackening, and adhesion.
Head 65.
These white spots often occur on the face, and there is a disfiguring of flesh.
And from it, one is malignant, and another is not malignant.
Therefore, do not remove the non-malignant one with a fine knife, and cut it off, until you cleanse it entirely. Then apply over it a piece of cloth soaked in Egyptian oil. Then care for it with the oil of daffodil, until it heals.
If the white spot is malignant, of foul color, then you should apply a cauterizing instrument after its incision and its own razor.
If the white spot is in the foreskin of an uncircumcised man, and it is part of the white spot inside the foreskin, and part outside: then you should remove the white spot that is inside first, until when it becomes solidified, then care for it externally: because when you care for it simultaneously, the foreskin does not become secure so that it will not protrude.
And now also occur in the testicles, and blackening and corruption of the foreskin. Therefore, you should scrape off everything that is already blackened, and what wants to become corrupted, or is already corrupted.
Then apply a line over it after that with honey that has been ground with flour of chickpeas, and crushed herbs of the sieve.
Then take care of that (wound) along with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
If, however, there is bleeding, then apply the cauterizing iron with a crescent-shaped iron, in this form.
For the cauterizing iron is a tool with two positions at once, namely for bleeding and when the wound is decaying.
If it corrodes the head of the woman and destroys everything in an hour: then you must insert a lead tube into the urethral opening, so that the weak one can urinate over it.
In adherence of the foreskin with the head of the woman, and this adherence does not occur unless in him whose foreskin is healthy, and circumcision is not required above it: and sometimes adhesion occurs due to a wound or abscess: therefore you must scrape it with a blunt spatula, until the ligament is dissolved, and the head of the woman is freed from all parts.
If it is difficult to distinguish that exactly, then you must scrape something from the head of the woman and from the foreskin. Because the foreskin when it is thin, perhaps it is pierced due to its thinness quickly.
Then separate between the foreskin and the head of the woman with a linen cloth that is already made wet in cold water, so that they do not stick again.
Then treat it with a styptic wine until it hardens.
Chapter 77.
About the cleaning of infants and treatment from the error that happens to them.
Circumcision is not the solution of continuity, as other wounds: but since it is from our operation, our will, and its use is proper for boys, it is necessary that we mark in this operation a better sign and a path leading more easily to salvation.
I say therefore that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books, because they do not use it in their laws, and it is only what we have acquired through experience.
Which is because I have found that the majority of craftsmen and bleeders use cleansing by circumcision with a needle, and with forceps; and they use those who are affected, and those who tie with thread, and those who cut with a lancet.
And I myself have already proved all these methods, and I have not found a better cleansing with forceps, and tying with thread.
Because often the skin escapes in cleansing with a needle. Because the skin of the prepuce has two layers: perhaps the upper skin is cut and the lower layer remains: therefore it is necessary to cut again and cause future pain. And with cleansing that is done by those who are affected, that is, by hand, which tailors use, the cut at the end of the male member's limb is not secured: because perhaps it enters into its opening.
But in cleansing with a lancet, perhaps it avoids the iron, and corrupts your operation: and the skin of the child is short by nature, and often they are born thus, which do not need cleansing: and I have already seen this.
But in cleansing with forceps, and tying with thread, a good experiment has shown to me: because forceps are proportional to the cut: therefore, because the sharpness which is above is like the sharpness which is below. Therefore when you place your hand, two sharpnesses are proportional, and they cut according to one operation at one time: and a compression of similar figure is made, containing the skin of the maiden from all parts, with which there is no error at all.
The proper method of operation is to test the boy, especially if he understands a little, by tying a string around his finger, which you do not do unless you tie it on his own finger and let him go until another day.
Then make him happy and joyful in every way possible for you, because he receives his understanding from it. Then make him stand between your prepared hands, and do not let him sit: and hide the needles in your sleeve or under your foot, so that the boy sees nothing at all, and does not see any of the instruments.
Then insert your hand into his finger, and blow on the skin, and pull it upwards until the head of the finger comes out. Then clean it from what accumulates in it dirtiness.
Then tie the marked place with double thread. Then tie it a little below with another ligature. Then hold it with your index finger and thumb, keeping the lower ligature well, and cut between the two ligatures. Then lift the skin up quickly, and remove the head of the finger. Then let the blood flow slowly (it is better), and put powder on top: and above the powder a cloth in which the expanded vein was cooked in rose water, shaken with rose oil. Then apply it fresh and good: and let him go on top of it until another day: and take care of the rest of the cure, until he is healed.
But the form of the needle for cleansing is this.
They should be sharp at both ends and pointed: so that the branch of the claw does not protrude from them: and the length of the two points should be as long as the length of the two handles equally.
The error that occurs during cleaning is: perhaps the whole skin has completely escaped, or a part of it near the incision.
Therefore, you should extend it with your own finger and nail before the formation of an abscess at that location, and cut it according to equality.
If you cannot hold it with your own finger and nail, then remove it with a hook and cut it.
But if more than three days have passed and there remains what is under the knife inflated, it is an abscess: then let it go until the abscess is warm and seated, and scrape it with facility, and cut it according to what is prepared for you: and beware of the tip of the knife. For that will not harm it.
Therefore take care of it with that which consolidates the wound from the powders which we have mentioned in the treatise on powders: and if it is cut through the skin above measure, and avoids the upper parts, it does not harm it even then.
Therefore take care of it with that which we have said until it is healed.
Chapter 58.
¶ On the extraction of a retained stone in the bladder.
Urinary retention in the bladder occurs from an obstruction made of stone, or frozen blood, or pus, or flesh born, and similar to those which we have mentioned from methods of treatment in division.
And if the stone is not solved, and you see that its retention is due to the stone which is already in the neck of the bladder: then it is necessary for him to be lying on his knees cared for. Then his feet are placed on his back, and he extends his belly from the upper part of his back, and binds his weak breath as much as possible to him. Therefore, when the neck of the bladder is turned towards the removal of a stone, it is relieved by the Vrine.
If it is not relieved by the method we mentioned and the condition is very strong, then the assistant of the extraction should use an instrument called a siringa, which has this form: It should be made of silver, and be thin, light, concave like the quill of a bird in its subtlety, long in the likeness of the palm of one's hand and middle finger: it should have a thin cannula in its head.
And the method of exit through it is as follows: you should take a doubled thread and a ligature at its end, or cotton, a good ligature: and insert the end of the thread into the lower part of the siringa: and if there is any excess from the wool, but insert it into the cannula with force, as one would do with a needle.
Then anoint the siringa with oil, or with butter, and with white lead: and make the infirm person sit on a seat, and embrocate the bladder, and its staff with wet oils, and oil of olives, and warm water.
Then insert the siringa into the staff with ease, until it reaches the root of the staff.
Then double it above from the navel part.
Then push the siringa inside it, until it reaches the bladder, and the infirm person feels that it has already reached an empty space: and this is not done in this order unless the passage, through which it goes, is where there is twisting.
Then extend the thread with wool gradually. For the Vrine will follow the wool.
Then, remove it and make the patient run a thread of silk through the urinary tract: and repeat the stringing, and do not stop doing this until the bladder is emptied and the weak one finds relief.
On the quality of the bladder with Clepsydra.
Chapter LXIX.
When an ulcer occurs in the bladder, or blood congeals in it, or pus is constricted in it, and water and medicines are desired to distill into it: then make with an instrument called Clepsydra, and this is its shape.
For it is deaf, that is, closed. And in it are three openings, two on one side and one on the other, as you see.
And a hollow place, in which is that which pushes, should be according to the amount that will push it without addition, until when something is drawn with it, water is attracted: and when it is pushed, it expels it far: as Clepsydra does, with which naphta, that is, Greek fire in battles of Mars.
Therefore when you want to project water into the bladder, insert the end of Clepsydra into the water, and draw with it what pushes to the upper parts, for water is drawn into the hollowness of Clepsydra.
Then insert its end into a reed, as we have told you in the stringing. Then push water with it because that water has reached the bladder immediately, so that the weak one feels it.
The shape of the delicate catheter by which the bladder is catheterized.
Make it from silver or gold: whose head is higher and more like a woman's breast, and under which there are folds where the band can lie.
Then take a sheep's bladder and put it in the moisture you want to use to moisten the bladder. Then tie it between two folds with a strong rope and double thread: and warm that moisture slightly over the fire.
Then insert the end of the catheter into the urethra, afterwards tie your hand on the bladder with moisture with a proper binding, until he feels weak, that that moisture has already reached the bladder.
But if you do not have a bladder present for you, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle from it, and pierce it from all its roundness. Then insert a strong thread through those holes, as they roll. Then gather the circle, like an oyster: afterwards you put it in it what you want from moistures, and oils, and waters.
Then tie it in the instrument: and make with it as you made with the bladder from expression with your hand, until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter 60
¶ On extracting a Stone.
Now we have spoken of the division of the species of the stone, and its cure with medicines: and I said the difference between a stone formed in the kidneys, and the bladder, and the signs of all that: and I said the stone in which the operation with hand and cutting falls: and it is a stone properly formed in the bladder: and that which is shaped in the urethra: and I am narrating that with manifest explanation and abbreviation.
I say therefore that a stone generated in the bladder, very often happens to children.
And from its signs it is known that the urine flows out of the bladder like water in its fineness: and there appears in it white sand, and the weak man rubs his rod against it, and struggles with it, and often hangs on it. Then he is raised up, and flows out with it the rectum in many of them.
And it is easy to cure children from this until they reach fourteen years old. And it is difficult in the elderly. But it is medium in young people, in that which is between this: and whose stone is larger, cure is easier: and if small, it is the opposite of its cure.
When therefore we come to the cure, it is necessary first, that we cleanse the weak man with a clyster, which extracts all the feces that are in his intestines: for that when sometimes prevents the discovery of the stone during inspection.
Then the sick man should be taken with his feet, and shaken, and moved towards the lower parts: so that the stone may descend to the bottom of the bladder, or jump from a high place several times.
Then make him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands be under his buttocks, so that the bladder may become all sloping towards the lower parts.
Then seek him out, and touch him from outside.
If therefore you feel the stone in the space, then hasten immediately with a cutting above it.
If it does not fall under your touch at all, then it is necessary that you wipe the finger indicating with the oil of your left hand, if the sick man is a child: or the middle finger if he is a young man complete: and introduce it into his anus, and seek out about the stone, until it is under your finger: and turn him gradually to the neck of the bladder.
Then press on it with your finger and push it towards the external location against which you wish to make the incision: and order the assistant to press on the anus with his hand, and order another assistant to extend the testicles with his right hand towards the upper part: and with his left hand, to remove the skin that is under the testicles in the part away from the location where the incision is to be made.
Then insert the spatula, which has the following form. And find in it what is between the anus and the testicles, and not in the middle, to the side of the left buttock: and let the incision be made over it on a stone, and your finger be in the anus: and let the incision be made crosswise, so that it may be an external incision wide, and an internal incision narrow, according to the possible size of the stone's exit.
For perhaps your finger, which is in the anus, may press against the stone at the incision, and exit without difficulty.
And you should know that from the stone are the angles and margins, therefore it is difficult for its exit because of that.
And from that is smooth, similar to a gallbladder, and round: and its exit is easy.
Therefore, for those who have angles and margins, add in the incision.
If it does not exit in this way, then it is necessary to place a forceps over it: or to tie it above with a bandage, the end of which is like the moon, which ties over the stone, and does not slip from it: or to insert an instrument under it, curved at its end.
If however you cannot place it above with a bandage, then enlarge the opening slightly. If something bites you from the blood, cut it off with scissors.
If indeed the stone is larger than one, then drive the first large one against the bladder's bone. Then cut above it. Afterwards drive a small one after that, and similarly do if there are many by two.
If it is rather large, then it is a mistake to separate above it with a large cut. For it happens to the feeble one of two things, either that he dies, or it happens to him constant assiduous distillation of urine: because the place is not at all consolidated.
But administer its expulsion until it comes out: or use skills in its fracture with forceps, until you remove it by breaking it into pieces.
When therefore you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with thyme, and aloe, and dragon's blood: and bind it up, and put on top of it a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or rose oil, and cold water: that the abscess may sit warm.
Then place the feeble one on his back over his neck, and do not loosen the ligament until the third day. When therefore you are loosening him, rub the place with much oil and water.
Then care for him with diaphenic ointment, and basilicon ointment, until he is healed.
If however it happens in the wound that an abscess warm is added, and corroded, and similar things: as if blood congeals in the bladder, and is prevented from being urinated out: and this is known from the emission of blood with urine. Therefore insert your finger into the wound, and remove that blood. For if it remains, it provokes to the corruption of the bladder, and its putrefaction.
Then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt, and apply it with whatever is suitable for healing until it becomes whole again.
And it is necessary during the entire healing process to place bandages on both thighs and buttocks as a reason for applying the medications on the affected area.
If the stone is small and it is located in the vaginal opening and is stuck there and prevents the flow of urine, then cure it with what I mentioned before you reach the incision. Often times you will avoid the need for an incision through this treatment, as I have already proven it to be effective.
And it is, that you take the Perforator from iron, which has this form, a triangular-shaped tip, sharp, fixed on wood.
Then take a thread and tie it with the reed under the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
Then insert the perforating iron into the reed with ease until the Perforator reaches the stone: and turn the Perforator by hand in the stone gradually, and try to make a hole through it until you make it penetrate from the other side.
For the urine is immediately discharged.
Then press your hand on what remains of the stone from the outer part of the vagina. For it is broken up and exits with the urine, and the sick person is healed.
But if this treatment is not prepared for you because of something that prevents it from being done: then tie a thread under the stone and another thread above the stone. Then cut on the stone in the vagina between the two threads. Then remove it. Afterwards, dissolve the ligament, and cleanse the congealed blood that forms in the wound.
It is not necessary to use a thread under the stone, unless it does not return to the foreskin: and another thread above, unless when the thread below is dissolved after the stone's emergence, the skin returns to its place and covers the wound: and for this reason it is necessary for you to raise the skin above when you tie the upper thread, so that it returns to its original place and covers the wound, as we said.
Chapter 61.
¶ On the Extraction of Stones in Women.
Stones are not commonly formed in women.
If however it does occur to some of them, then the cure is difficult, and it is forbidden due to many reasons.
One of these is: that she may be a virgin.
And the second is, because you do not find a woman who conceals herself from the doctor when she is chaste, or from those who have husbands.
The third is, because you do not find a woman well-skilled in this art, especially the operation with the hand.
And the fourth is the distance from the place of the stone: therefore it requires deep incision, and there is fear.
If however necessity provokes to that, then it is necessary for you to take the woman to a doctor who is well-skilled: and she is not easily found.
But if you lack her, then seek a chaste, clever, and present female midwife well-skilled in the matter of women, or a woman who takes part in this art: make her present, and especially to her, that she does all that you order her from your investigation on the stone.
Firstly, it is necessary that he look to see if the woman is a virgin: then it is required that he insert his finger into her anus, and search for a stone.
If therefore he finds it, he should cover it with his finger, and then command the midwife to insert her finger into the weak vagina, and search for the stone, after placing her left hand on the bladder, and pressing it with good pressure.
If therefore he finds the stone, then it is required that he gradually move it from the bladder opening to the lower parts with great skill, until he reaches it with the stone at the root of the thigh.
Then he should cover it over the bladder at the middle of the vagina, from whatever part it is prepared and feels the stone in that part: and his finger should not be moved away from the stone, covering it: and let the incision be small in the first place. Then he should insert the ray over that incision.
Then he should insert the ray over that incision. If therefore he feels the stone, then he should add to the incision in proportion to the amount that the stone is exiting from it.
And know that there are many kinds of stones. For from these there is a small one, and a large one, a smooth one and a rough one, having branches.
Know therefore its species, so that it may be signified to you by this above what you wish.
If therefore it convinces you with blood, then add in the place of zege ground, and hold it for an hour, until the blood is cut off.
Then return to your operation, until the stone exits: and make sure that you prepare with yourself from the tools that I said in the extraction of the stone in men, so that you may help through them in your operation.
If you are convinced that the cause of the bleeding is the expulsion of blood from an artery which has been cut, then place powder on the wound and bind it with a clean bandage, without moving it, and do not remove the stone, but leave it in place. Perhaps the weak woman will die. Then care for the wound.
When, however, the sharpness of the blood is subdued after days, and the wound becomes putrid, then return to your operation until the stone comes out.
Chapter 62.
¶ On cutting for hernia aquosa.
Hydrocele is not present unless it is an accumulation of moisture in the sac under the skin of the testicle containing the epididymis, which is called the sac.
And sometimes it is in its own proper sac, which nature has prepared for itself in a part of the body, until it is thought to be something else, and that is another egg, and is the skin of the testicle between the sacs, which we have said: and this does not happen very often.
And the generation of this hydrocele is indeed due to the weakness that happens to the testicles, therefore this material is poured out to them. And sometimes it happens from a blow on the testicles.
And this moisture has many colors. For indeed its color is declining to yellowness, or it is red with blood, or fecal, black, or is watery white, and that is the more.
And the signs by which it is known where the accumulation of water is, are these. For if it is in the sac under the skin of the testicle which we have said, then the apostema is round to some length like the figure of an egg: and the testicle does not appear because the moisture contains it from every part.
If there is moisture within its own cloth, then the abscess is round with a part of the egg, and because of this, the man considers it to be another egg.
If there is moisture between the skin of the testicles and the white membrane, then it falls under the sense.
Therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, then try the color of the moisture in the abscess with an square intruder, whose form precedes it. According to what goes out in the tread of the intruder, judge about that which is between it.
When therefore we come to the cure with iron, then it is necessary for you to command the sick one, that he be bled if possible, and you see his body full.
Then let him lie on his back on a high bed, and put many cloths under him.
Then you sit on his left, and command the servant to sit on his right, who extends his rod to one of the two skin of the testicles, and to the part of the belly.
Then take a wide spatula, and dry the skin of the testicles from the middle in length, until near the feather: and make the cut according to the rectitude of the line which divides the skin of the testicles, until it reaches the white membrane encompassing: and scrape him and observe, or caution from this, that you dry him: and your scraping should be from the part which hangs with the egg more: and subtly scrutinize with the scraping according to the quantity which is possible for you.
Then pierce the full white membrane with a wide perforation, and extract all the water.
Then separate between the two lips of the cut with the hooks, and extend the white membrane to the upper parts, and do not touch the skin of the testicles encompassing: and cut the white membrane however it is possible for you to cut him, or with all of its, or frustatim, especially the thin side. If you do not carefully examine it, there is no safety in the incision, so that water may not return.
But if you proceed with something from the outer part of its skin during your operation: then when you have completed the section, bring it back. Then gather two lips of the skin of the testicles with a stitch.
Then care for it as you would other wounds, until it heals.
But if you find something corrupted from another discoloration, then it is necessary to bind wet dressings, which are the support, fearing the flow of blood.
Then cut off the testicle with the support, and remove it: then care for it with what we said.
But if water is gathered in two parts, then you will know that there are two branches: therefore cut off the other part according to what you did in the other equally.
And if it is equal to you, that the operation be one, then do: then wipe off the blood. And insert in the incisions submerged wool in oil, or in rose-colored oil: and place another wool that you submerged in wine and oil, and spread it over two testicles, and belly: and place above double cloths, and are powders: and tie them above with a bandage, which has six according to this form.
Then two cloths are taken, and they are soaked, and they are filled with powdered la na, according to this likeness: and the ends that press from the cotton, or wet wool: and they are gathered with a bandage in the loin braces: and one end takes above the anus up to the back, and the second takes to the part of the comb: and two ends on two thighs below, and two other ends on two inguina, and it is gathered all the bandage in the loin braces.
And at times, this ramex is artificially medicated with a cautery at the location of the incision with an iron: and it is, that you take a fine knife-cautery, and scrape with it the skin of the testicles: and it is ignited, according to what we have told: until when it detaches the white sheet containing water: then take the cautery, according to this form.
The Greek letter is assimilated.
Then pierce through it with that sheet, and it is ignited, until all the moisture comes out.
Then extend that sheet with hooks, and scrape the flesh with a fine burning knife-cautery, and cut it according to what is possible for you, until you remove all of its roots.
And beware from the egg, lest it touch that fire.
And know that this operation is safer, and farther from bleeding, and better than the operation with incision.
But if contradiction gives you in the hour of incision, or in the hour of cauterization, a hot abscess, or bleeding, or something else: then it is necessary for you to cure what contradiction gives you from that with the treatment that corresponds to it, according to what was previously mentioned.
But if the patient is weak and timid, and does not wait for this operation because of its own horror: then administer perforation according to what I tell you: and it is.
When it is certified to you by that which we said about the meanings, that the ramex is watery: then it is necessary for you to make the sick person sit on a raised seat.
Then pierce the abscess in its lower part with a narrow flat instrument: and place the perforation according to the length of the body, and it is an open wide, until all the water runs out.
Then place it on a soft spot, and tie it up, and let it run the remaining water: then care for it until the wound heals.
But if there is resistance to the outflow of water at the hour when it perforates itself: and this is not the case unless because the white cloth causes resistance in the wound opening, and prevents the exit of water: then you must insert a needle into the wound, or an instrument with which water is extracted from hydropicum, whose shape preceded: or add in the operation of the wound for a little.
And know that water returns and gathers after six months, or about them. When it therefore gathers, then it will be restored according to the same method, and it will pass its weak days.
Chapter 63.
¶ On the care of fleshy tumors.
Know that in the cut above this tumor, there is often brought about by fear a harmful outcome in many positions. Therefore it seems to me that its removal may be saved from that.
And I remember the operation in it, and the appearance of abscesses.
I say therefore that many abscesses occur in the bodies, from which the testicles are composed: and this is caused by many reasons, namely.
Either from an excess of sharp, or sharp, which is poured out to the testicles. Or from a blow.
And the appearance of abscesses is according to the color of the body, and there is no pain found in it: and it is a heavy abscess.
And perhaps it is a stone abscess, whose color is dark, and there is no feeling in it.
And sometimes it is caused by the knotting of the arteries, and their inflation: as has already been mentioned: or from the inflation of the veins.
What is caused by the inflation of the arteries can be known by the arrangement of the pus, when you press it with your fingers. And it is not necessary to touch it entirely.
However, that which is caused by the inflation of the veins is not dispersed from it at all when pressed with the fingers.
And now it is possible to make a cut of this kind and on the other flesh: and it is to separate the skin of the testicles. Then extend it upwards and remove it with a white siphon: and free the suspension from the vessel, and tie the vessels: and cut the suspension after you have freed it from all parts of the parts of the wound.
If therefore the siphon is consolidated with those fleshy parts, then it is necessary to draw out the siphon and cut it.
And if there is adhesion between something from the siphon, or in that which is between the vessels: then it is necessary to free the whole of that adhesion, and cut it with a round cut.
But if there is the birth of flesh in the place of adhesion which is behind: then it is necessary to cut all of it, and remove the siphon, as we said.
When therefore your operation is completed, then fill the wound with wool soaked in oil rose-scented, and wine: and then take care of it with the other care until it is healed.
Chapter 64.
About the care of Ramicis, which is with Vite.
There is an abscess uncovered in a certain inflation, similar to a boil, with the softening of the testicles: and it is difficult on weak movement and exercise, and walking.
In the treatment of this ailment, fear is also involved due to the recollection of that which preceded it.
However, we must say about the operation in that one according to how they did it first.
I say therefore, that you should do so that the sick person sits on a raised seat. Then push the scrotal supporter towards the lower parts. Then hold the skin of the testicles with your fingers, with those which are near the maiden: and another servant should hold them and extend them with a strong extension.
Then cut with a broad, flat, sharp transverse section across the direct way of the vases, until the vases are uncovered.
Then remove all the scraps, as we told you in the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
Then fix an awl in them where the thread is doubled, and tie it at the first place where the veins are: and tie it again at the last of them. Then cut them in the middle straight line according to the length of the body, and extract what gathers from the moist, corrupted feces.
Then treat the wound with the treatment of the other wounds, in which you want to generate health, so that the vases which nourish one testicle fall. For it is not an evil through that.
But if the vein happens to all the vases, then it is necessary that they should be removed because of this testicle with the vases: so that it does not lose nourishment, on account of the incision, and it rots, or dries up, and it is not a benefit with them.
Chapter 65.
§ On the care of the intestines.
The event of this injury is from a cut that occurred on the thigh, extended over the abdomen, in the part of the groin, from the inguinal region of the belly.
Why do the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the testicles? And this rupture is either from the thigh, or from its extension.
And these two types occur from many causes. Or from impact. Or from a sudden jolt. Or from a loud noise. Or from heavy lifting, and similar things.
And the sign when it is from the thigh's extension is that the intestines descend to one of the testicles. It is that which happens gradually over a long period of time, and does not happen suddenly: and it is an abscess equal in length and depth: therefore, because the thigh compresses the intestine.
And the sign of it when it is from the thigh's cut is because it causes pain to occur suddenly at the beginning: and it is an abscess different, appearing under the nearby skin: and that is because of the exit of the intestine, and its course to the outer thigh.
And sometimes it exits with the intestine fistula: and this is called an inguinal hernia, and a fistula: and sometimes it becomes with suppuration.
And sometimes feces run into the intestine, and are retained there: and it is with that harm to the weak: because it causes a dull pain, and especially when it is pressed.
And in the treatment of these kinds of illnesses with iron, there is fear: therefore it is necessary to avoid that case.
And the method of operation is, that you command the weak one, so that he may reduce the intestine with his own hand to the interior of its concavity, if it does not return. Then apply pressure to his neck between your hands: and raise his legs.
Then extend the skin that follows the skin to the upper parts, and dry the skin of the testicles entirely in length. Then fix two hooks in the two lips of the incision, according to what you need to open the incision with them: and the section should be in the amount that is possible so that an egg can come out from it.
Then scrape off the scrotum, and what is under the skin of the testicles, until when the white scrotum is detached from all parts: then insert your index finger into that which follows the testicle, in that which is between the white scrotum, which is under the skin of the egg, and between the white scrotum, and complete with it the adhesion that is in the posterior part of the egg.
Then move with your right hand to the interior of the skin of the testicles: and with this extend the white scrotum upwards, with your left hand: and raise the egg with the scrotum to the part of the incision: and order the minister to extend the egg upwards: and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind the completed solution.
And ask with your fingers, that there is nothing there from the unrolled intestine in the white scrotum hard. But if you find something from it: then push it down to the lower abdomen.
Then take a needle, in which there is a thick thread made of linen from ten threads: and insert it at the last scrotum, that is, the skin that follows the incision of the testicles: then cut the ends that project from the thread, until there are four threads. Then make some of them on top of some with the figure that is in the shape of a cross: and tie with them the scrotum, which we said was under the skin of the testicles by a strong ligament, until it cannot send any from the vessels that nourish them to send something to them: so that no hot abscess comes from it. And place the second ligature according to the first external ligature, about two fingers away from it. And after these two ligatures, let out from the sifach, which is under the skin of the testicles, an amount equal to the thickness of a finger: and cut the rest of it round and take out the egg.
Then cut in the lower part of the skin of the testicles, from which blood and pus flowed, as we mentioned in what was previously stated.
Then apply the immersed bandage in oil, and place it on the wound: and apply the ligature which we mentioned. And sometimes the white sifach which we mentioned is cauterized after its incision, in fear of blood flow. For this often happens. And let out the ligature until it falls off by itself.
But if its fall is delayed, then it should be rubbed with warm water: and place on it what we mentioned until it falls off.
Then care for the wound with the rest of the treatment of wounds, until it heals.
Chapter 66.
¶ On the soft ramie.
In this soft ramie, I have not seen anyone daring to treat it with iron.
And the first said that it is done as we mentioned in the ramie which is with vine. That is, to apply ligatures on it after the incision from below with ease: then cut in the middle, and care for it finally with what opens it, until the ligatures fall off: and care for the wound, as we mentioned, until it heals.
Chapter 67.
¶ On the hernia that occurs in the groin.
When a rupture occurs in the groin, as we have mentioned, and the location is elevated and does not extend down to the testicles from the intestines: and if it does extend, it is only slightly and returns to its normal position at all hours. However, if this condition persists for an extended period of time, a new fissure forms in the scrotum, allowing the intestines to descend into the scrotum.
And this occurs due to the extension of the scrotum, which is located in the groin, as we have mentioned. This is because the scrotum is stretched: then it becomes softened, and the wound becomes inflamed, and it rises up.
And its treatment is with a cautery, as previously mentioned in its description.
And sometimes it is treated with a knife, in this manner: and it is, that the sick person lies on their back between your hands. Then dry the wound of the inflamed rupture and elevated area, by cutting across its width, according to the size of three fingers.
Then bind the alsum (a type of adhesive) and what is under the skin, until when the scrotum is peeled off, which is under the skin that follows it.
Then take the probe, and place it on the elevated location from the scrotum, and press it to the depth of the abdomen.
Then suck two elevated locations on the end of the probe from the scrotum, and connect them with a stitch one to another: then remove the end of the probe.
And do not cut the alsum at all, nor stretch anything, nor anything else, as I have taught you in the treatment of the intestinal branches.
Then treat that with the treatment of wounds. When therefore you cut the thread, clean it, and restore the wound, until it consolidates.
The scar contracts and does not add prominence to the rupture.
And a cautery is better in this place, because it is closer to safety.
Chapter 68.
On the softening of the skin of the testicles.
The skin of the testicles is often softened in some men, because of which the flesh that is between them is softened and their appearance is defiled.
Therefore it is necessary for him who is asked about its cure, to make the sick man lie on his back, and let all the skin that is softened fall onto the natural skin.
Then he should bring together two lips with a stitch: and if you wish, with three or four stitches on the first excess of the softened skin, and a strong stitch.
Then cut between the stitches.
Then care for the healing of the other wounds until he is healed, and the threads fall off.
Chapter 69.
On Castration.
You should know that castration is excommunicated in our law: and for this reason it was allowed to me not to remember it in my book: and the remembrance of it is not necessary, except for two reasons.
One of these is that it may be in the knowledge of a physician when he is asked about it: and that he may know its healing to him who has it happen to him.
And the other reason is that we often need castration of certain animals for our uses, because of our wool and milk, as cattle, horses, and similar animals.
I say therefore that castration is done in two ways. Either by crushing. Or through an incision and a cut.
However, in the method that is done by attrition, the way of operation is: we make the animal sit in hot water until the testicles are softened and soothed, and hang down; then rub them with your hand until they dissolve and do not appear under touch.
However, in castration by incision and cut, it is necessary that you hold the animal and press the skin of its testicles with your left hand.
Then tie the suspensorium, and cut over every part with one cut, until when the two eggs proceed: then cut them after you have peeled each one, and do not leave on them any of the sifaket except the fine sifac on the vessels.
And this method of castration is better than that which is done by attrition: because attrition perhaps leaves something in the testicles, therefore the animal desires copulation.
Then care for the wound until it heals.
Head 70.
¶ On the care of Hermaphrodite's two methods.
Hermaphrodites are from men according to two methods. One of them is because it appears in him that follows the space, or on the skin of the testicles, in that which is between two testicles, a shape like a woman's vulva, in which are hairs: and sometimes urine runs from that which is on the skin of the testicles.
In women, however, there is one species, and it is a woman's vulva on the breasts like small male testicles projecting to the outside: of which one is like the man's priapus, and two are like two testicles.
And the care of three species, two from men and one from women, is: because it is necessary that you cut the added flesh until the impression of them disappears. Then take care of the rest of the wounds with the same treatment.
However, in the second species of men, from which urine exits through the skin of the testicles, there is no operation and no treatment at all.
Chapter 71.
Regarding the incision of the tenting, and the prominent flesh in the vulvas of women.
Perhaps the tentigo is added to the natural thing until it becomes disfigured and unsightly: and sometimes it is magnified in some women to such an extent that it expands like in men, and reaches even to copulation.
Therefore you must hold the excess of the tentigo with your hand or with a comb, and cut it: and do not complete the incision, especially at the deep root: so that blood does not flow.
Then take care of the wound itself with the same treatment until it heals.
However, the flesh that is born, is the flesh that is born in the maternal opening, until it fills it: and perhaps it exits to the exterior according to the similarity of a tail: and because of this, some call the sickness caudated. Therefore you must cut it as you would cut the tentigo, and take care of it until it heals.
Regarding the care of the alratica, which is the vulva of a woman not pierced.
Chapter 72.
The alratica is that it is the vulva of a woman not pierced, or that there is a small opening. And it is either natural or accidental.
The accidental one is from the sickness that preceded it: and this is made either by flesh added naturally, or by thin silk, or by thick wool: and it is made in the deep maternal opening, or on its sides, or in its upper part, or in its lower part: and it prevents copulation and impregnation, and birth, and perhaps it prevents menstruation.
And knowledge of that is gained through the observation of a midwife, if the swelling appears to be near.
But if it is not appearing, then search for it with your fingers or with a probe.
But if the swelling is from a thin sponge and is near two lips: then hurry, and tear it open.
And place cotton on the two lips.
Then place your two fingers simultaneously, and the woman should be on her back with her legs spread apart. Then extend the two lips with strength, until the thin sponge is torn and the swelling is opened.
Then take a piece of cloth and soak it in oil, and place it on the spot: and let the woman cover it every day, so that it does not become hardened by another substance.
But if the sponge is thick, foul-smelling: then it must be separated from the thin branch of a myrtle leaf.
But if the swelling is from a piece of flesh born: then suspend it with hooks, and cut it: and let there be medicines with you that stop the flow of blood without causing pain, such as acacia, and dragon's blood, and a lump of frankincense mixed with egg white.
Then administer a wide lead tube, so that the wound does not become hardened quickly, hold it for several days: and then administer linen from dry cloth, and then heal the rest of the treatment, until it is healed.
And sometimes the birth of flesh from other animals: therefore it must be cut according to this method: until there is no abscess or cancerous abscess, for a cancerous abscess that is in the womb, does not make any contradiction with iron at all.
Chapter 73.
Regarding the treatment of hemorrhoids, Atrehelil and Botor, red in the vaginas of women.
Hemorrhoids are the opening of the veins being dilated, until much blood flows from them continuously.
Therefore, when hemorrhoids are treated, they become Atrehelil: and I have already spoken about their division and signs in my previous work, and now I will say what kinds of them can be cured and what cannot.
I say therefore that hemorrhoids which are in the opening of the womb and do not appear to sense, then there is no cure with iron.
But those which are in the opening of the womb above which sensation falls, are those that can be cured.
Therefore, it is necessary to insert the woman into a cold house. Then extend Atrehelil with forceps, or with rough cloth, and cut them from their roots.
Then powder over them at the flow of blood from one powder of cut pieces without biting: such as acacia, and dragon's blood, and thistle, and similar to them.
Then press her feet against the wall for one hour. Then lay her down in cold water.
If the flow of blood persists: then make her sit in a decoction of sumac, and the bark of grapevines, and henbane, and similar things.
Then take barley flour, and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a plaster with it on her back.
If therefore blood is removed with it, it is good: and if not, make feathers and sponges stick to her back without incision.
Then take wool and immerse it in the juice of tarathite, or the juice of arnoglossa, or the juice of the leaves of the alaulat tree, that is, the wild vine, with sea water, and make it stick to the wound.
When therefore the abscess has settled, then care for the place with ointments until it heals.
Albarth indeed is red like the heads of the alhaise, and has a rough appearance.
Therefore you must cut off what appears from it, as I said in the thistle evenly: and care for it until it heals.
Chapter LXXII
¶ On the perforation of the fetus that happens in the womb.
Many kinds of abscesses occur in the womb, such as cancer, and carbuncle, and ulcers, and adubelati, and alekilati, that is, herpes, aestiomemus, and fistulae, and hemorrhoids, and ragadiae, and thistles, and hot abscess.
And I indeed have already spoken of all these afflictions and their kinds, and their signs, and their cures in the division: it is necessary that I say in this treatise about hot abscess that happens in the womb when it is from the abscesses that collect pus, and you want to know how its opening is made with iron.
Therefore you must consider. Then if the pain of the abscess in its beginning is sharp with its blow, and flame, and fever: and you see it red: if it falls on it sensation, then do not rush with its opening: and care for it with it that helps over maturation, until when quietness of the accidents.
Then you should make the woman sit on a seat that washes two seats, and she should lean back, or be placed on her back, and gather her feet to the lower part of her belly: and let her hips be spread, and place her arms under her thighs, and bind each side with a suitable band.
Then the midwife should sit on the right side, and hold the instrument that opens the maternal opening.
And when you want to administer this instrument, you should form with a radio deep in the woman's womb: so that it is not what enters from the instrument more than deep in the womb, and wounds the weak.
But if the instrument is greater than deep in the womb, then you should place pledgets on the roof of deep in the womb: so that the entrance of the instrument entirely into deep in the womb is prevented: and you should place a wheel, which runs in the instrument, from the upper side: and you should hold the instrument, and you should turn the minister wheel, until deep in the womb is opened.
When therefore the exit appears, and is touched by hand, and is gentle and soft: then you should set it aside with a flat spatula near its head.
When therefore the pus is evacuated, then you should place a piece of lint soaked in rose oil: or oil green, in which there is some hemostatic: and place the lint, and extract the cutting in deep in the womb.
And place outside on the womb, and on a clean needle soaked in water, in which there are some tannins.
Then it should be treated after two days with an ointment that is suitable for it, until it is healed.
And sometimes the mother is washed and the wound, so that it is dressed with water and honey: then with water in which boiled is the root of the lily or long-leaved aristolochia, then return to the ointment.
If the wound is hidden inside the matrix, then it is necessary to be prohibited from its healing with iron, indeed to heal it with what we said in division.
Chapter 70.
Of the teaching of obstetrics, how the fetuses are healed who have exited in a form not natural.
It is necessary for the obstetrician to know in the first place the form of natural birth.
For this is the sign of it that when you see a woman being pressed down to her lower parts, and desires to smell the air, and is relieved above her which is over her from birth, and hastens the exit of the fetus: then know that this birth is according to the form of nature, and its exit is on its head, and the placenta with it: or suspended, or hanging from the navel.
When therefore you see these signs, then it is necessary that her belly be pressed, so that the fetus may descend quickly.
For when it has descended on its head, it has descended with the placenta, and is cleansed of those superfluities by good cleaning.
But he who is other than this birth, is unnatural, undeserving.
For when sometimes the fetus exits above its feet, and exits the body before its head, and its body, and one of its hands, or one of its feet: or exits its head and one of its hands: or exits its belly: and perhaps it turns over on its neck, and similar from undeserving figures.
It is therefore necessary for the midwife to be wise and clever in all these matters, and to beware of error and deception: and I am showing every figure from them, and what kind of nature is in it, and how it is signified by it, and stands above it.
When the child exits its head with its own natural exit, and becomes violent upon the woman, and difficult birth becomes for her, and you see that its strength is already weakened: then make her sit on a seat, or let women hold her: and vapor of wormwood with fenugreek decoction, and with wet oils.
Then the midwife should insert between her fingers a small spatula, and apply it with it a second instrument, and cover it with her nail, until what is in it from moisture: and press the woman's belly, until the child descends.
But if it does not descend, then it is necessary to enema the woman from fenugreek mucilage, with sesame oil.
Then tell her after the enema to sneeze: and make her sneeze with the condiment, and hold her nose and her nostril at once. The child will exit immediately.
But if two hands of the child come out first, then you should gradually reduce them with a hook. But if it does not obey at the entrance, then place the woman on a seat, and raise her feet up: then shake the seat on the ground: and the woman should be held, so that she does not fall with the shaking.
If therefore the hands do not come out, and the child dies: then cut them, and remove the remaining fetus: and tie its hand with cloth, and remove it with equality: for it will exit.
The exit of the embryo is upon its feet. When the fetus exits upon its feet, then it is necessary to push it upwards: afterwards, he should gradually turn the fetus: then, he should balance it.
Then, he should take one of its feet and extend it gradually.
When therefore they exit up to the hips, then command him, that he be compressed, and make her sneeze with a wet cloth: it will exit, if God wills.
And if it does not exit with what we have said, then reduce the fetus gradually, until you place him according to the natural form. For he will exit then with an easy exit.
If it is prevented with all that we have said: then take from the mucilage of the aloe, and oil of sisamino, and melted gum: and strike all in a mortar with good percussion: afterwards, a line with it the woman's umbilical cord, and below the belly of her. Then make her sit in warm water, until she has a hiccup.
When therefore you see that the lower parts of her are already heated, then make for her a fomentation from myrrh: and cover him. When therefore she holds the fomentation for one hour, then make her sit on a seat. Then make her sneeze: and squeeze his mouth and nose: and press the lower part of the belly with gentle compression. For the fetus will exit immediately.
The exit of the fetus upon its knees and hands. When it exits according to this form, then he should gradually insert his hands. Then the woman should lie on her back, with her feet hanging down, and she should fold her hands. Then gradually press on her abdomen. Then remove what is under her feet from the pillows until it is prepared in the lower part. If the fetus does not come out, then take her feet and move them with great force. Then gradually press on what is above the hypochondria until the fetus rises to the upper part. Then insert her hand and gradually equalize the fetus until it comes out.
The exit of the fetus hangs laterally from her hands. Her hand is supported in the reduction. If she cannot reduce it, then lift her up and make her walk.
If indeed she cannot walk, then make her lie on the bed: and shake her legs with great force.
Then apply the liniment that you prepared from mucilages.
If she accepts it in labor, then make her sit on a chair. Then strive in the reduction of her hand and equalize the fetus according to its natural shape: and make the woman sneeze, and tell her to compress herself until it comes out.
The exit of the fetus is on its neck, with its hands spread out, and its face is towards the back of its mother. The midwife should hold the hand of the fetus, then gradually turn it and equalize it with ease.
When it is equalized, then place on its vulva what we mentioned from oil and mucilages.
Then instruct him to be gradually moved. When therefore you have done that, then make him sit on a seat, and instruct him to lean towards the right side. Then instruct him to be compressed: and make him sneeze with the conditioned [medicine].
The outcome of the prepared [foetus] is on the side. When it descends to the maternal opening according to this manner with the secundine, then cut the secundine with your nail, until it is emptied of moisture.
If therefore it is suspended above the face of the foetus, and its neck, then cut it from the navel: so that it may not be retained, and die.
Then push the foetus to the insides, until you place it according to what is necessary: and instruct the woman to compress herself several times: for he will exit lightly with the outcome.
The outcome of twins, or of many foetuses. Know that twins are often born: and sometimes they are born three, and four. However, that is foreign, and rarely happens.
Five indeed is a thing extraordinary, and does not live completely: and it contains them, although they multiply, one secundine: and they are separated by the sac, distinguishing between them tied in the navel of each of theirs.
And sometimes they exit as if one foetus exits naturally and easily, and they exit with the praiseworthy outcome, as we have said.
If however some of them are difficult at birth, and they reach that which we said from the unnatural figures, then care for them as we have said: and let it be for the subtle midwife, and she should make what she does with facility and slowness, and she should shape it according to every figure with that which is prepared for her by the leading [force] to salvation.
Rememoration of what is formed in the womb from embryos and miscarry.
Sometimes one, and two, and three, and four, and five, and six, and seven, and more than ten are formed in the womb: and it has been verified to me that a woman miscarried seven, and another fifteen, all of them formed.
Which was done by the measurement of the glorious wise one.
Therefore, all of this must be in the knowledge of the obstetrician. Perhaps he will come to her like that one: therefore, let him put against him what is necessary
Chapter 76.
Rememoration of the extraction of a dead fetus.
When you care for a dead fetus with that which I said in the division of medication, and it does not exit, and you must use an operation with your hand, then you should consider.
If therefore the woman is of sound virtue, and is not with any of those accidents from which danger is feared for her: then it must be that the woman lies on the bed, on her back, and her head is inclined downwards, and her legs are raised: and the assistant holds her from two parts, or she is tied to the bed, so that her body is not drawn out during the extraction of the fetus.
Then moisten the mouth of the womb with warm oils mixed with a lot of mucilage, and of fenugreek, and of the seed of linseed.
Then let the midwife anoint her hand with these oils and mucilages: then she should insert it into the womb with ease. Then let her seek with her the place where she can hook the nails from the fetus, and the suitable places to that.
Therefore, if the fetus is prepared to descend upon its head: then fix hooks in its eyes, or on its neck, or in its mouth, or in its palate, or under its beard, or in its shoulder blades, or in nearby ribs, and under its armpits.
But if the descent is upon its feet: then in the shinbone, and in its middle ribs.
And it is necessary that he holds the hook with his right hand: and place the curve of it in what is between the fingers of his left hand: and insert it with his left hand with facility, and fix the hook in one of those places which we mentioned, until he arrives at the empty place.
Then he should fix another hook, or a third if necessary, on its opposite side, so that the contraction is equal, and does not lean to one side.
Then the extension should be made equally, and not be extension only in a straight line, but move to all parts, so that his exit is facilitated: just as it is done with the tooth when it is being extracted.
And it is necessary in that which is between them, that the extension be softened. If a part of it is held back from that: then it is necessary for the midwife to put some fingers with oil on them, and insert them from one side, so that she rolls it with what is being held back.
If therefore a part of the fetus comes out, then they should change the hooks to another place which is higher: do this until the whole fetus comes out.
If therefore the hand comes out before the other, and it is not possible to reduce it, because of its tightness: then it is necessary for a cloth to be rolled over it. Then take it out until when it comes out whole, cut it at the joint of the foot, or at the elbow: and so it is necessary to do in the other hand, and in two feet.
If the fetus's head is large, or if there is a constriction at the outlet, or if there is water accumulated in its head: then it is necessary to insert the Spatula-like spiny instrument between the fingers, and strike with it against the head, and remove the water; or to break it with the instrument called Almisdac, whose form comes with the forms of the other instruments in the chapter that follows.
Similarly, if the fetus is naturally of large head: then it is necessary to separate the alengengematu: or to extract it with the misdach, as we said. Then extract the bones with forceps.
If the head emerges and is constricted at the fork: then it is struck, until the moisture that is in the chest flows out.
If it does not constrict, nor obey the outlet: then cut the head in small pieces, as much as possible for you.
If there is an abscess below the belly, or if there is dropsy in it: then it is necessary to pierce it, until the moisture flows out of it.
If indeed the fetus is above its feet: then its extraction is easy, and its direction towards the mother's bones is light.
If it is constricted at the belly, or the chest: then it is necessary to extract it with the cloth that you have wrapped around your hand: and strike the belly, or the chest, until what is in them flows out.
If the other limbs are removed, and the head returns: then the midwife should insert her left hand. Therefore, if the mother's bones are open: then she should insert her hand into the depth of the mother's bones, and seek with it the head, and draw it out with her fingers until the mother's bones: then she should insert a hook, or two hooks, into it, and draw it out with them.
If the mother's mouth is closed due to an abscess that has occurred to her, then it is not necessary for her to be forced upon it, but rather it is necessary at that time to administer a moist effusion, a thick one: and apply ointments, and let her sit in waters that will soften and moisten.
If the fetus is on its side, then it is possible to do so: then what we said about the living fetus will be administered.
If it is not possible to do that, then it is cut into pieces and removed.
And it is necessary not to let anything remain inside the secondina at all.
Therefore, when you have completed your operation, then what we said about hot abscesses that occur in the mothers will be administered.
If bleeding occurs, then it should go down into stop-bleeding waters, and the rest of the cure will be administered.
And indeed I have seen a woman whose belly had a dead fetus: then she became pregnant over it with another, afterwards the other fetus also died. Therefore it happened to her after a long time that an abscess occurred in her navel, and it swelled up until it was open: and she began to emit pus.
Therefore I was called for her cure, and I treated her for a long time: and the wound did not heal.
Therefore I placed on it some strong attracting ointments: and the bone came out of the place. Then some days passed by her, and another bone came out. Therefore I was amazed from there, since in the belly there is no bone.
Therefore I thought that they were from the bones of the dead fetus.
I have examined the wound, and extracted many bones, with the woman being in her better conditions: and she has now lived for a long time in this manner, and she is now discharging some pus from the place.
And I did not apply this foreign matter here, unless there is knowledge and assistance from the skill and craft of the physician artist with his hand for the cure.
Chapter 77.
¶ On the forms of necessary instruments in the extraction of the fetus.
The form of the pulley that opens the womb.
Here below is the form of the Strictorium, by which the rib bones are equalized, with two pulleys evenly placed on the two ends of two wooden rods. However, this pulley should be more delicate than the Strictorium: and it is made from either ebony or from smooth wood.
And the width of each wood is as if two fingers: and the edge of each of them is as if one finger, and the length of each of them is a palm and a half: and in the middle of the two woods are two additions of the same type of wood, which have already been fixed in both, whose length is a palm and a half or more, and the width of each of them is as if two fingers, or more.
And these two additions are inserted into the mother's ribs, so that it opens with them when you turn the two pulleys.
Another form similar to it, but more delicate and lighter.
It should be made from ebony or smooth wood, according to the similarity of a pair of tongs. However, at the end of it there should be two additions, as you see above: and the length of each addition is as if a palm: and the width of each of them is as if two fingers.
When you want to open the mother's womb with it, then make the woman sit on the bed, with her feet hanging down, opening what is between her legs. Then insert these two additions connected into the womb: and you are holding the lower end of the instrument between her thighs. Then open your hand with the instrument, as you do with forceps, equally according to the quantity that you want from the opening of the mother's womb, until the midwife does what she wants.
The form of another tilt than they said of the ancients, namely the form of Impelling which impels the fetus.
The form of Almisdac, by which the large head is crushed: and it resembles forceps, which have teeth at the end, as you see.
And sometimes it becomes a tongue, like forceps according to this form, as you see, which have teeth like the teeth of a saw, by which it cuts and crushes.
The form of having one spine.
The form of having two spines.
The form of Spatumilis which has two ends for cutting off the head.
The form of two Spatumilium and also pullers.
These instruments are all exercised, and the more multiplied their species, and they are prepared by the craftsman, is faster to their operation, and higher among men, because of their quantity.
Therefore do not despise from them an instrument, that it is prepared by you. Their necessity is indeed inexcusable.
Chapter 78.
On the Extraction of a Second Tooth.
When the second tooth is retained during childbirth, then it is necessary to instruct the weak one to hold their breath. Then make her sneeze with a wet cloth: and press your hand on her mouth and nose. If it comes out this way, it is good.
If not: then take a pot, and pierce the lid with a hole: and put in it opening drugs for the mother's mouth, such as calamint, rue, and aneth, and chamomile, and seseli, and cassia wood, and centaury: take all these herbs, or some of them, and mix them with water, and put them on fire.
Then put a reed bundle on the hole of the lid of the pot, and the other end in the mother's mouth: and hold it until the steam reaches the hollow of the mother.
Then make her sneeze, as we said. The second tooth will come out with ease.
If however it remains after this treatment, and does not come out: then instruct the midwife to immerse her hand in sisamin oil, or a thick decoction of althea. Then she should insert it into the vulva, and seek for the second tooth with it. When therefore she finds it, then she should take it, and stretch it slowly.
If however it is attached deep in the mother's womb, then she should insert her hand, as we said, until when she finds the second tooth, and takes it out slowly according to straightness, so that the mother does not fall during strong attraction: indeed it is necessary, that it be changed with ease to the right and left sides: then add in the amount of attraction. It dies then and is preserved, and avoids sticking.
If the mother's mouth is closed, as we have already mentioned: treat it with nasal irrigation and with the herbal remedy from the bowl.
If however it does not come out with all that we have mentioned, then be careful not to exhaust it with repeated extraction.
However, it is necessary that what comes out from the mother's mouth should be tied to the woman's groin. Then cleanse it with the Tetra Pharmakon ointment. For indeed it will rot it after days, and dissolve, and come out.
However, when it rots, the bad smell is removed from the stomach and head, and harms that weak one. Therefore it is necessary that appropriate fumigations should be administered to it.
However, some of the ancients have already experienced the fumigation of nasturtium and dried figs.
The form of the instrument by which the woman is fumigated during retention of Secundine and menstrual blood.
Let a hollow instrument like a pipe or a jar be made from clay: and place its wide end over the fire: and the fumigation should be placed on the branches: hold it until that fumigation is consumed: and repeat another.
Chapter 79.
On the treatment of the unperforated anus.
Many children are born, and their anuses are not perforated, which he has already covered with soft shavings. Therefore it is necessary that the midwife should pierce it with her finger: and if not, she should pierce it with a sharp spatula: and beware of the hand, lest it touch it.
Then place a wool soaked in wine and oil on top of it. Then care for it with the ointment until it is healed.
But if you fear that it will swell, then place a lead tube with a hole in the opening for many days, and remove it when the boy wants to go out.
And now swelling of the anus also occurs from the consolidation of the wound or abscess. Therefore it is necessary to cut away that consolidation, then care for it with what we said about the cure and lead.
Chapter 80.
¶ On the treatment of fistulas that occur in the lower part.
Fistulas that occur in the lower part are Nodosities and Swelling which occur near the anus, deforming: or in the space of one part: and it is a fistula, or more.
When therefore that nodosity is opened, water flows out from it, or thin pus.
And sometimes they are from these penetrating fistulas. Therefore the penetrating ones are known by what comes out from defecation, and softness, when an invalid is used for defecation: and perhaps it comes out from those worms.
And they are from these fistulas when they are in the space penetrating up to the bladder, and up to the vagina. And they are from these penetrating up to the junction of the hip, and up to the tailbone.
From that however by which it is known that the penetrating fistula reaches to the anus, even from the non-penetrating one, is that you insert your finger into the anus: and you insert a thin probe into the fistula from air, or iron: when there is no twisting.
If there is twisting in it, then insert a thin lead probe or a horsehair needle from the horses' hair into it, until you feel the probe, or the needle in your finger.
If you do not feel it entirely, and nothing protrudes from the opening due to excretion, nor is there wind or worms as I said, then you know that it is not punctured: therefore hasten to treatment.
And when the fistula is punctured up to the bladder or the urethra, then its signification is the exit of urine from it, and its prevention from this so that the place can consolidate with medicines.
But if it is punctured up to the hip joint or the hip bone: then its sign is that the probe reaches there, if there is no twisting in it up to the bone: and the discovery of pain in the circumference of the part, and that pus always escapes from it: and that medication does not hold in it, nor consolidates with ointment.
And in all these fistulas that penetrate, there is no cure at all: and the cure of them is a labor and vanity to him, from foolish doctors, on which it is based.
But in that which is not punctured, and is not ancient, there is hope of healing with a splint: according to what I tell you, and I have already tested: and it is, that the sick person lie under your hands on his back: and raise his legs up above his hips, and his hips be inclined towards his belly. Then he will insert the thin lead probe, or of air, if there is twisting in the fistula, until you know where the probe reaches.
But if the sick person feels it around the anus, then you must insert your finger into the anus.
If you feel that the prick has already penetrated itself through your finger, apart from what you felt between your finger and it, or flesh: then you must certainly know that it is a prick, and therefore do not labor in it, since there is no cure for it, as we have said.
But they said that flesh is healed in some men, and from the medication by which it is hoped for healing, it is, to apply a thin hot cauterizing iron according to the size of the Fistula, as has been mentioned before, and to insert the burning one into the Fistula, until it reaches around the anus. Then repeat that twice or three times, until you know that all the added flesh has been burned, which are like the filtered feathers that are similar to the quill of a bird's wing.
Then care for that with rolled linens in butter, until those burned flesh comes out: then care for that with ointments generating and consolidating flesh.
If therefore it is healed, good.
And if not, then it will never be healed with other cure.
And if it comes out and does not reach to your finger which is in the anus, and is between it and the thick, slimy skin from flesh or flesh: and you see the Fistula in what follows the surface of the skin, then dry the skin from the beginning of the Fistula, and you go drying with the tent which is in the Fistula, until the drying reaches where the end of the tent comes out, and the tent is freed and falls.
Then clean those filtered flesh which are similar to the quill of a bird's wing, so that nothing remains from them.
If, however, the blood adheres to you and dissolves between you and the operation, so that you separate those flesh: then it is better and faster to cauterize it with fire, or with sharp medicine.
Because the cauterizer with fire gathers good conditions, it adds burns of those flesh, and separation of blood, and drying of moisture.
Then care for it with unfolded bandages in butter, or crushed bread, until the place emits pus, and those burnt flesh come out into pus.
Then care for the wound then with consolidating ointments, generating hard flesh: and they are medicines in which there is stipticness and drying.
For when it is restored, then already it is healed: and do not fear repetition.
If however the fistula has already reached to the depth of the anus, and is stretched from the excess of the body: then insert your finger into the anus, and inquire with it.
If therefore you feel a touch, and between you, and it is a linen from sifac, or flesh, and is near penetration: then there is no operation in that, except according to the way of trust and hope.
That is, because it is administered in it one of three ways: either to cauterize it, as we said: or to separate it, until you reach the depth of it, so that it is possible for you to insert bandage, and healing from nearby. And do not proceed much with the cut, so that you do not cut the muscle containing the anus, and it happens that the weak exit of excretion without will. Then care for it with what we said.
Perhaps it will be healed: or extend the same bandage, and cleanse it after you have dried it nearly up to near the anus, as we have said, or with another sharp-ended instrument. Then cleanse those filtered fleshy parts which are in the incision, as far as you can with thorough scrubbing.
Then attempt the healing of the wound entirely with the incision, and at the upper opening where it is solidified: and there remains an open fistula in the inner part of the anus, and it will be lighter on the weak one.
And sometimes the fistula will follow in this manner: and it is, when you insert the probe into the fistula: and it is on the side of the anus around the surface of the body with the skin and margin of the anus: then take the probe with sharp-ended extremities, which is like a needle made of aleskef, that is, prepared leather, in this form. And insert it into it a wrapped thread from five threads, and about it. Then insert the probe with thread into the fistula, until it reaches its concavity.
If therefore it penetrates into the inner margin of the anus near, then draw out the thread from that opening: so that you insert your finger into the anus, and draw out the end of the thread, and gather both extremities together: and tie both, and let it go on one day, or two days: and as much as the thread falls on the flesh, tie it well, until those fleshy parts which are between the two ends of the thread fall off: then care for the wound, until it is solidified, and healed.
But if the opening of the fistula is not penetrating: then make it penetrate in whatever way is prepared for you, unless it is very deep. For it is not necessary for you to do this because of the shoulder, so that you do not cut it.
Then treat her as we said, until she is healed.
The shape of the Spatula's spinous process, in which the fistula is found, has a very sharp curvature, and the other part is not sharp, so that it does not cut what is not necessary, as you see.
Chapter 81.
On the stitching of hemorrhoids, from which blood flows from their incisions: and the treatment of fissures.
Hemorrhoids are of two kinds. For indeed they are inside the anus, like coal or plums: or rather they are like the grains of wheat. And from them there are small and large ones: and blood flows from them always, and it is one, and they are many. And they are outside the anus, and at its extremities.
However, those that are outside the anus, are for the most part few in moisture, from which yellowish water flows, or little blood flows constantly: and they are according to the color of the body.
And the treatment of those that are inside the anus is, that you order the sick person to sit on a stool: and it is expressed, until the anus opens, and the fissures appear to you. Therefore also hang them with hooks: or hold them with your nail. Then cut them at their roots.
But if they are not held in them with hooks, because of their moisture and softness: then take them with a rough cloth, or with a rough cloth made of double woolen fabric, and extract them with your fingers. Then, make an incision on them and apply hot powder on top of the incision some powders, so that they remain in place as a cauterizing agent. Or cauterize them according to what was mentioned in the previous chapter on cauterization. Then care for them with the remaining cure until they are healed.
If the patient does not obey the call to defecate, then apply a small amount of clyster in a clyster containing a small amount of bitter herbs, so that it cleans out what is in the anus and obeys the call to defecate quickly when the patient excretes.
But if the thorns are outside the anus, then the matter is light and easy: and it is to take them with your nail, or take them with a spoon, and cut them. Then care for them with what we mentioned, until they are healed.
And if one dislikes the incision with a knife, then it is necessary for the administrator to suture them according to this method. Take an untwisted thread, and insert it into the needle. Then take out the thorns to the top, and make it penetrate with the needle from the root on the other side: and untwist the two ends of the thread in the lower part of the needle, and they should be wide apart: and tie the thorns with a strong knot. Then tie the thread, and take out the needle.
Do this with all the thorns, and take out one from them: and do not let it run out of it to prevent excessive bleeding.
Then place a piece of cloth soaked in rose oil or carron oil on the anus and place it on the anus: and order the sick person to rest. Then take it out when it falls off.
When, therefore, the hernias fall, take care of them with ointments and other means of healing until they are healed.
¶ On the Care of Wounds. For often, due to the dryness of dung and the constriction of nature, many wounds occur.
When, therefore, they are dry and do not respond to medicine: then it is necessary to scrape them with the spatula of Spatam, or with your ointment, until they become moist, and remove the upper skin that prevents their consolidation. Then care for them until they consolidate as they should.
But if they do not consolidate: then repeat them with a stronger blade than the first, until they bleed much, and then peel them, and care for them until they are healed.
¶ On the Care of Turned-Over Bones, and Not Turned-Over; and Hernias of Scorpions, and Ants.
Chapter 82.
You should know that an Almirmar is not other than a round knot similar to the head of a nail: and it forms throughout the body, especially in the lower parts of the feet, and fingers: and pain occurs from them during walking.
Therefore it is necessary to follow what is around the head of the nail, and hold it with forceps, or with a hook, and remove it from its root.
Then care for that: and if you wish to cauterize it according to what preceded in its chapter.
From the hernias that are dry, one is a small elevation, rough, filtered, round above the surface of the body. And often they occur in the hands of children.
And its care is, that you extend the hernias, and cut it: or string it with a silk thread: or with hair, until it falls. And if you wish, cauterize it according to what was previously mentioned with fire or with sharp medicine: and now the ingrown hairs will be eradicated, and not with the instrument that I say.
The ant is also a small bumpy, porous, and rough surface on the body, leaning into a very deep valley: and when it finds cold, it feels like an ant bite in it, and it happens throughout the body: and it does the most harm to the hands.
And its cure is that you take a cannula from the feather of a goose, or the feather of a strong-winged bird: and place the cannula on the ant, until it contains a circle of the cannula from its parts. Then turn your hand with the cannula until it separates what is in the circumference of the ant: and place it in the deep flesh, and remove the ant from its root.
And if you wish, do it with the cannula of air, or iron, according to this form.
Let the upper cannula be pulling the dull uncovered, so that it is relieved from the apprehension of its height and its rotation.
And if you wish, cauterize the ant according to what was previously mentioned in the cauterization of ingrown hairs in the chapter on cauterization.
Chapter 83.
§ On the forms of instruments that are administered to cleansing in the ailments of the anus, and the solution of the belly, and the colon.
Sometimes cleansing is made of silver, or of gold-plated, or of bronze, or of hammered.
And sometimes it is made of these instruments small and large, according to those in which they are administered.
That which is administered for the treatment of small children should be of a small quantity: and those whose anuses are weak or painful, so also their stools.
A large stool.
The cannula of his, that is, the upper part in which the uterus is tied, should be large according to this manner: and there should be a distinction for it so that the uterus is tied as you see, and the lower part which enters into the anus, should be deaf, that is, not open, soft, rather drawing towards subtlety: and in one of its sides there should be two holes, and in the other side there should be one hole.
And the width of the hole should be according to the thickness of the rays, and a little less, and the uterus in which the medicines are placed from the animal's bladder: or from the small paper which is according to the form of the asafetida root, whose root is one palm.
And it should be pierced through the holes as it unfolds, and there should be a space which is the thickness of a finger between each hole. Then introduce into those holes a strong thread from raw silk, which is from ten threads, or about that, and gather with it a jug like the asafetida. When therefore it is placed in that uterus, it should be tied at the head of the stool with a strong constriction between two distinctions. Then draw up the stool with it.
And this is the form of the circle of these utensils and holes drawn here.
But the quality of drawing up the stool with it is: that you fill the jug or bladder from the medicine which is heated according to the quantity of the weak tolerance: and beware that it is not very hot, or very cold.
Then the sick person should lie face downwards on their back, and raise their legs upwards: and place a cloth or linen underneath them.
Then apply oil, or a yellow ointment, or mustard plaster, or something similar, to the extremities of the Clisteris. Then insert it into the anus with ease. Then the attendant should take a jug with both hands and squeeze it forcefully until all the contents of the Clisteris are emptied into the intestine.
Then remove the Clisteris and raise the sick person's legs against the wall.
If the medicine makes him want to go to the bathroom, then hold onto it as much as possible. And if he sleeps with it all night, it is more likely to be effective.
But if the Clisteris is used during the illness of diarrhea, and he wants to go quickly: then repeat the Clisteris until he is healed.
But if there are hemorrhoids or painful abscesses in the anus, then the Clisteris should be fine, very mild, and made from the same Clisteris that children are treated with.
And this is the form of a fine Clisteris on top of which there is tight skin.
Chapter 82.
I have already said in the division of the treatment of wounds that it was convenient for this book, and now I will say here the treatment of them with hand, and with medicines according to the complement.
I say therefore that wounds are diversified according to how they become wounds, and according to the place on which the wound falls.
The wounds that are made frequently are like the throw of a stone; they are either from the cutting of a sword or knife, or by striking with a lance, a stick, or an arrow, and similarly from many other things.
However, the wounds that are made according to the parts of the body are like a wound that falls on the head, neck, chest, abdomen, or back, and similarly from other limbs.
And I am telling the cures for some wounds, so that I may set forth a reason and rule for all other wounds.
And I will begin with simple head wounds, because the memory of compound ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
I say therefore. When a simple wound occurs in the head and there is no fracture of bone, consider whether it is from the throw of a stone or similar things, and if it has already broken the skin only: and it is a large wound, and you fear for the bad outcome of a hot abscess: then hurry, and let blood from the cephalic vein immediately: and do not delay in doing so: and remove from him according to the amount of its power: if there is nothing preventing bleeding from phlebotomy, especially if it is little blood that flows out of the wound. And let the bleeding be from the opposite side of the wounded part.
And let the bleeding be from the opposite side of the wounded part. And let the weak one beware of overfilling himself, and wine, and coarse foods.
But if something prevents him from having a diet, then he should be reduced in his food, and not approach meat, nor wine.
And put on the wound if it happens to him an abscess hot, cotton infused in rose oil alone, or with wine in which there is astringency.
If you are secure from the hot abscess, then place on the wound, if it is recent with its own blood, and has not changed the air, the powder that I will tell you about shortly: and if it has already changed the air, then place on it certain ointments until it heals.
But if the wound is large, or is from a sword cut, and similar: and if the lips of it do not come together with gauze, then stitch it together according to what I will tell you about wounds of the belly regarding their stitches.
But if the wound has already been removed from the bone, and hangs, and there is no retention of it except in a small sling: then cut it. Then care for the wound with medicines, and restore hard flesh to the place of skin, and order the sick person to be fed on foods in which there is bulk, such as heads and cooked wheat, until it is like a porridge: and similar things.
If you find putrefaction in the skin, and it does not stick to bone: then cut off the whole putrefied part, and throw it away: then care for that.
But if there are these wounds an artery, or a vein from which the blood flows: and it is not cut through by medicines, then examine the artery. Then if you find it not cut, then secure it with a ligature, or tie it. But if necessity provokes when it does not bring what we said: then cauterize it, until the blood is cut off.
But if these wounds are small, simple, then the matter of them is easy, light: so that powder is placed on them this powder: because it consolidates them before it changes them from the air.
The method of making a powder for flesh wounds is as follows: Recipe for treating a wound with the juice of garlic, two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of unburnt chalk: Grind all the ingredients thoroughly and sift them. Apply this mixture to the wound and bind it tightly with a bandage until it adheres well and coagulates with the blood.
Then bind the wound from above with bandages and leave it undisturbed until it heals, without removing the bandage prematurely to prevent reopening of the wound. For this remedy will not be removed until the wound is healed.
And sometimes chalk alone can perform the same function in many large wounds when it is applied and bound, especially when the wound is fresh and still bleeding, as air has not yet altered it.
If the wound has already been altered by air, especially in the summer season, then this powder is not suitable for use: therefore, treat it with the remedy mentioned earlier and apply some digestive ointments or bandages made of barley flour mixed with water and honey until the pus is expelled. Then continue treating it with the remaining remedies until it heals completely.
If indeed a small fragment of bone is embedded in the wound, then remove it with a pair of forceps: and I will now describe the treatment for broken bones in the following section.
¶ On Wounds of the Head
If a wound occurs on the head, there is no difference in treatment between a simple wound and a more complex one.
If the nerve or artery has already been cut, there is no cure for it except with strong hemostatic agents such as zinc, zegi, and similar substances. Because they harm the eyes and contract them.
And do not place anything very cold on the wound at all, for the substance of the nerves is cold and its continuity is with the brain, which is higher than the limbs: and let that which heals be taken from medicines that are mild, such as chalk soaked in sweet water several times infused with oil, or with rose oil and turpentine, when it is washed even with sweet water; and the remaining mineral stones, in this manner, and wet ointments.
But if the wound is large, then administer a suture: or cut the lips of it with cotton. Then take care of it until it heals.
But if the wound is deep, or it occurs in it a sinus in the lower part of it, in which already pus has accumulated, then perforate it in a more depressed place in it.
But if the artery has already been cut in the wound and blood flowed from it: then separate, or dry it, and ligate it: or cauterize it, if necessity requires this.
But if the spinal cord of the neck has already occurred, or all of it, and the larynxes have been saved: then gather the lips of the skin with a suture on a tube of the neck, and do not touch the neck, but rather even it, and reduce it to its natural shape. Then bind it with a proper binding, and leave it for several days. Then take care of it with ointments in which there is styptic and drying, until it heals.
But if the wound has already made an impression on the bone, then seek it: then if there are fragments of bone in it, extract all of them, or what you can from them: and that which is not prepared, leave it, until the wound rots, and its discharge separates and heals.
If the wound is recent, then apply powder on top of the powder I mentioned. But if it appears that there is a bone in the wound and a fistula forms, then treat it along with the one I mentioned in its own chapter.
Chapter on Wounds in Forceps.
If it is a puncture from a lance or knife, and you see its depth, then consider. If therefore gas escapes from the wound when it is difficult for the patient to breathe from it, then know that the wound is mortal.
But if it is not deep and is recent with its own blood, then do not apply powder to it from the first hour, nor bind it up, so that the blood does not remain in its depth and return to the heart and kill the patient: but apply an attractive ointment to it and dissolve it twice a day.
But if indeed the ointment is not present to you, then place a piece of old cloth in the wound opening, so that it sucks out what escapes from it due to moisture: and make the patient sleep over the wound, so that what collects in it may pass.
But if indeed three days or more have already passed since the wound, and no spasm has occurred to the patient, nor a bad trembling of the heart, nor tightness in breathing, and you see other dispositions of it are good: then know that the wound is safe. Therefore treat it and with liniments, and with the rest of the cure, until it heals.
But if indeed the healing of it is excused, and it always opens, then know that it has already become a fistula. Therefore, treat it from its own chapter.
And if the wound is from an incision by a sword or knife, and it is simple on the surface of the chest or back: then treat it with what preceded from stitching, if it is large; or with powder, if it is small.
But if it has already made an impression on the bone, and it has cut from there fragments: then inquire about the wound, and hasten to remove those fragments, if they are separated. But if they are not separated, then leave them until the wound rots, for it is relieved by their extraction.
But of the remaining wounds that have occurred in other members, the judgment in their treatment is the same as what we said.
Concerning wounds of the belly, and the exit of the intestines, and their exit.
The rupture that occurs in the belly is great, and medium, and small.
From a great one, sometimes the intestine exits, or the number of intestines.
Therefore, their introduction is, and their stitching, more violent and difficult.
And the small rupture also becomes difficult from another way. Therefore, it follows that their reduction is difficult, if you do not hasten to their introduction to their place immediately: because it swells, opens, and fills up: therefore, its entrance is difficult.
For this reason, the medium rupture becomes better: because with it, the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, as it is difficult in these two kinds.
You should know that the stitching of the belly is according to four modes.
Two common sutures meet in the ventral suture, and in the suture of other bodily wounds; and two other sutures properly communicate with the remaining wounds. However, they are more proper with the ventral suture; and I tell you each one with explanation, and declaration.
I therefore say, because when a wound is small, and something escapes from it into the intestine, and it becomes difficult to reduce it: then that is for one of two reasons. Either because of the smallness of the rupture, as we said: or because there is inflation in the intestine due to cold air.
When therefore it is so, then it is necessary to heat it, so that you submerge the sponge, or wet cloth in warm water alone. Or boil it in water with vinegar, and cumin, and clove, and embrocation with it the intestine, until the inflation is resolved.
Sometimes that wine in which there is astringency does it: and it is better than water alone in the resolution of inflation.
When therefore you see the inflation already resolved, then moisten the intestine with the water in which it was boiled, or warm. For through that it soothes the entrance of his stomach with a small amount.
But if the return of his escape after this cure is excused, then find in small rupture, with the instrument by which hemorrhoids are cut.
And the first cure is better when prepared, than section: and it is not forced to cut after necessity and lack of instrument.
Let one part of his be curved, sharp, and another part not sharp, and the extremity subtle not with subtlety Spatumilis, but rather obtuse: and it is that which resembles a lancet, as you see.
When a wound becomes large and enters the intestine, it is necessary to reduce it back to its natural shape in its proper place, if possible, because this is better.
When indeed the rupture is large in the lower part of the abdomen, then you should make the person lie on their back and place their higher legs above their head. And if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then place their head and make their higher chest higher than their lower chest.
And similarly if the rupture is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then place your attention and always consider this, that the part where the wound is should be higher than the other part.
And thus you should administer it in large wounds and in medium-sized wounds.
But in small wounds, place it according to what is prepared for you.
Then make sure that a pious assistant is present between your hands who holds the rupture entirely with their hand: and gather their lips. Then remove from it to him who follows a suture, something after something: and this is the common method of suturing one at a time.
And it is, that you take a needle, or a number of needles according to the size of the wound. Then let go from the end of the rupture a quantity of a finger's width, that is, a doctor's: and fix the needle one on the other, with two ends of the skin, with two ends of the sinew that is under the skin from the insides, until you make it penetrate from another part, and now you have gathered two ends of the skin, and two ends of the sinew: and four rows are made.
Then tie with a double thread around the wound, several times from two parts at once, until the two lips of the wound are gathered together decently by aggregation.
Then let go of the thickness of the finger, and fix a needle in it: afterwards, straighten it with the thread, as you did with the needle first. Therefore do not cease to do this with that which you need from the couch, until you complete the constriction of the wound entirely.
And let the needles be of medium thinness between thickness and fineness: for a thin needle very quickly enters flesh: and thick ones are difficult to pierce skin: therefore it is necessary that they should be of medium thinness in thinness and thickness.
And it is not necessary, that the needle should be fixed in both extremities of the skin near, much: so that flesh does not quickly enter, and the wound is opened before its consolidation, and they do not extend even with the suture, so that the wound is not prevented from consolidation.
Then cut the end of the needle, so that they do not wound the weak one while asleep: and put pullovers of cloth from all parts, which hold the ends of the needle: and let them go, until you know that the wound is already consolidated.
And this kind of suture with the couches is indeed more suitable for small wounds. For it is enough in their suture one needle, or two, or about those.
But the second suture is common, so that it gathers with the suture the ends of four: ends, two of skin, and ends two of silk in one vice, with the needle in which is the thread rolled up equally in thinness and thickness.
Then, when you have penetrated with the needle these four extremities, reduce the needle from the part from which you began, so that a thread soaked in oil may fall from the upper part of the wound: so that it may be a suture, just as they string together pieces of cloth. And place between every suture an amount of thickness equal to the little finger.
This suture, however, is known by men.
And with this suture, I closed the wound that had occurred to a man in his belly, who had been wounded with a knife, and the wound was a tear larger than a palm: and it had exited from the intestines about two palms from the middle intestine, and there was a tear in the middle of the belly.
I therefore reduced it after it had stood the intestine of his outside the wound for twenty-four hours.
The wound therefore became healed in the space that was about fifteen days: and I took care of him, and he was healed: and he lived after that for many years, returning to his former dispositions.
And the physicians had judged that he would not be healed.
And it was a miracle that I did not take care of him with ointment. Because I was in a place where ointment was not found, nor anything from the medicines. I therefore placed on the wound an old cloth twice a day, and I took care of his washing with honey water, until he was healed.
Two however species of suture proper I will say according to the narrative of the language.
And it is, so that you begin with a sharp suture: and you insert the needle from the outer to the inner part.
When therefore the needle penetrates the skin, and goes into the muscle going along the length and width of the whole body: let go the end of the suture in the side in which you inserted the needle, and make it to penetrate in the other extremity from the inner part to the outer in the other end.
When you have made it penetrate, then make it penetrate thus in the same extreme part from the outer side to the inner: and leave off the extreme part which is in this side, and make the acum penetrate into the other extreme part from the inner side to the outer: and make it penetrate with your penetration as you make it penetrate in that extreme part of the mirach, which is in its part, until it penetrates into the whole of it.
Then also begin from this same side, and pull out that itself with its extreme part, which is from the sifac on another side and outside, and draw out the acum from the skin which it has penetrated.
Then bring it back into that skin, and pull out that extreme part of the sifac, which is on another side, with this extreme part of the mirach: and draw it out from the skin which is on its part, and make one with the other, and make it one after the other, until you have pulled out all of it outside according to that example.
And the last of this stitching is that you stitch with the stitches by which they stitch the skins: so that you stitch one extreme part of the skin on one side with the other, until you have completed it.
The second kind of proper stitching, which he said Galen.
This his speech was told in order that you stitch it according to the likeness by which some physicians stitch them, so that they gather all part to its suitable corresponding part by nature: and they apply the extreme part of the sifac to its other extreme part, and the extreme part of the mirach to its other extreme part. And that is done according as I tell you.
You should make a groove in the tip of the mira near you from the outer side, and make it penetrate to the inner part within that soil, and release its two ends. Then turn the mira back, and make it penetrate from the outer side to the inner part within both ends.
Then turn both of them back, and also make them penetrate from the inner part to the outer side within both ends, in the two other ends of the mira which are on the opposite side.
And this method of suture is better than a common easy suture, and it is a suture preceded by remembrance.
Therefore, this is also the word of Galen.
And some said. The suture of the belly should be corrected with two needles. Which is, that you insert one thread into both of them: and begin with the insertion of the needle which is with you, and make it penetrate to the other side, according to the suture of those who equalize the hides.
And you should know that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly: then its suture is more difficult than the other parts of the belly.
The judgment of the medication of wounds, however, is the judgment of the other wounds.
Which is, because when you seek the recent wound with its own blood before it changes due to air: and you reduce the intestine, and its own, and make it suitable for itself: then place it on powder of flesh.
But if the air has already changed the wound: then place on it some ointments which are present with you until they make pus: and fall off the threads, and strengthen them again, and the mira. Then take care of that wound as you would with the treatment of other wounds, until it heals.
But if you do not have the necessary medicines at hand, then immediately place on it an old piece of cloth that has been used before, and change it twice a day as I taught you, until it heals.
For you do not need other treatment in many situations when the wounds are simple.
But if you fear that the wound will communicate to the main members in a fracture, then it is necessary to immerse a soft cloth in warm oil of tempered heat, or in rose oil: and place it in the circumference of the places that are between the groins, and under the armpits.
But if he feels pain, or pricking, or putrefaction in his intestines (for this often happens), then enema him with a strengthening wine, black, warm: especially if the putrefaction has already reached the intestine, and has become a penetrating one up to its concavity.
And know that what is from the large intestine is easier to heal: and that what is from the subtle ones is more difficult to heal.
But the intestine that is called the Jejunum does not receive healing from the wound that happens in it at all: and this is because of its multitude, which is from veins, and their size, and because of the subtlety of its body, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
But if that which proceeds from the wound is pus, and you seek it out recently: reduce it according to your reduction, by which you reduce the intestines equally.
But if it has passed a time, and it has already become green, or black: then it is necessary to tie it with a thread above the place that has become discolored from it, so that blood does not flow. For in the zirbo are the veins and artery.
Then cut what is beyond that ligament, and place the two ends of the thread hanging from the lower part of the wound outside it: so that the pull on you will be relieved, and the extraction of it in case of a zirbo fracture, and the discharge of pus from the wound.
Reminder of the wound that occurred in the intestine.
When the fracture occurs in the intestine and is small: then it is possible for some people to be restored: because I saw a man who was wounded in his abdomen with the impact of a lance, and it was a wound from the right stomach, and it was an old wound: and a fistula formed, and there was diarrhea and flatulence.
Therefore I placed the treatment, until I was not confident in his healing: nor did I stop sophisticating him, until he was healed and the place was consolidated.
After I saw the place already consolidated, I feared for the weak, that a bad thing would happen to him in his abdomen: and it did not happen to him from that bad thing. And he remained in better conditions, eating and drinking, and having sex, and entering the bath, and exercised in his meals.
And now some experimenters have said, that when the wound in the intestine occurs and is small: then it is necessary to bind it according to this method. And it is, that you take ants of large heads. Then gather two wound lips, and place one ant from those that have an open mouth on top of the two wound lips. When he places it on that, and clenches his mouth, cut off his head, for it sticks and does not come off.
Then place another ant near the first one, and do not stop doing that with the ant after the second one according to the amount of the wound for the whole.
Then bring him back, and heal his wound. For those heads remain attached in the intestines until the intestine is eaten, and healed, and no harm completely occurs to the sick person.
And now it is possible to tie the intestine even with a thin thread: which is removed from the animal's intestine, attached with it when it is inserted into the needle.
And there is, that you take the end of this thread from the intestine, and it is burned much. Then tie the thin thread of the line unrolled at its end. Then insert that thread into the needle, and heal it with the intestine. Then bring him back to the rupture.
And this method of suture with ants and intestine is not but according to the way of trust and hope.
You know that a wound which is large, wide, especially if it is in one of the thin intestines: then there is no cure but suturing, and there is no healing at all.
¶ Of the care of Zucchini, and Fistulas.
You know that every wound, or an apostema when it becomes old and aged, and becomes an ulcer, and does not consolidate, and emits pus always, and is not cut off: then it is universally called in whatever member it is Fistula, and we call it Zucchini.
A fistula indeed is truly a strained, hard, white swelling; it has no pain, and no concavity of a bird's feather; and because of this some call it a "pennam," that is, a feather.
And in certain hours it emits pus, which is moist. Perhaps the moisture is torn apart in certain hours. Sometimes this moisture is much and little, and it is coarse and fine.
I have already mentioned in the division, when I said wounds, that every ulcer which does not heal, and no flesh is born in it, is not that except for one of nine causes.
One of which is that because of the lack of blood in the body; or because of its evil nature; or because there is hard flesh between him and his lips, preventing the birth of flesh; or because it is full of dirt and filth; or because the ulcer itself is putrid, and the matter that is put into it is of bad quality; or because the medicine is inconvenient in its cure; or because corruption is falling in the region, which is a kind of pestilence, or by the nature of the region, as happens in Caesaraugusta, where digestion of sufferings becomes difficult, and healing of the abscess is delayed by nature; or because there is one bone, or a number of bones.
And I have already shown all these causes and signs of them, and their cures with medicines in the division; and it is necessary for me to make you know the cure of Fistula and Zukon, which is made by the way of operation with the hand.
Know therefore that a fistula occurs in all parts of the body. For from these are the fistulas that reach to great veins and arteries, or nerves, or sciatica: or to the intestines, or to the bladder, or to some part of the ribs: or to some part of the spine, or to the joints composed together, such as hands and feet: and from these are those that approach to the proximity of the main member, and similar ones.
Therefore, from these fistulas, according to this method, is difficult healing due to illnesses, and does not receive cure, and occupation with it is labor and ignorance.
But if it is from some fistula whose depth does not reach these places that I mentioned: and you hope and trust in its cure, and wish to approach to knowledge of it, then receive a probe from air, or iron, if the fistula tends towards straightness, and seek it with itself.
But if there is twisting in the fistula, then investigate it with a thin lead probe. Because lead, with its own gentleness, is relieved and cured around twisting.
But if the fistula has many openings, it is not possible for you to signify over it with a probe. Therefore, cleanse from these openings one opening from its own openings.
For the moisture by which you cleanse itself goes towards other openings, and runs out from them.
Then carefully investigate according to what manner it is possible for you: so that you know what is the bone, or nerve, and whether the fistula's concavity is long or near: or whether it is one fistula which has many openings, and stands on the whole of it, with utmost strength of yours: with interrogation of your question, by which you interrogate the weak one, and invention of pain at compression with your hand on the place, and similar signs and causes of abscess.
When you stand at that true station, then go to the cure according to your confidence: and it is, that you consider then, if it is a fistula near-appearing, or in a safe place far from the joint, or from the nerve, or artery, or vein, or one of the places I told you: then seal the fistula according to what was previously said by me, and remove what is in it from filtration, and corrupt flesh, which is born in its opening from the flesh, or scar tissue, and similar things: and cure that, until it is healed.
But if the fistula is of great depth, and is according to straightness: then it is necessary for you to seal it in the depth as much as is possible for you. Then cleanse it from all its corrupt flesh.
Then administer untouched linen in sharp medicines: and insert it up to the concavity of the fistula which you comprehended with iron: do with it several times, until the sharp medicine eats away everything that remains in the concavity of the fistula from corruption.
Then restore it with ointments which generate healthy flesh, until it is healed.
But if it does not heal by that, then cauterize it according to what we have said.
But if the cause of the fistula is a bone, and it is certified to you that it is so: then inquire into that, and seal it according to what I have told you: if something does not prevent you from the vein, or nerve, or principal member, as we said.
But if a bone is revealed to you, and there is something of corruption and discoloration in it: then scrape it, until the corruption of it is all removed. Then take care of that wound with the same thing that caused it, until it heals.
If it does not heal and emits pus as it did before, then you know that you have not reached the complete elimination of corruption.
Then clean it again with a second layer, and carefully make a thorough examination of it, and its cleansing with your utmost strength.
Then restore it. If it heals, then it is good; but if not, then you know that the corruption is deep within the body, which you have not reached. Therefore, it is not your ability to cure it, unless you let go of nature.
If the corrupted part is small and it is possible for you, then pull it out with fine forceps that are suitable for it.
But if there are many bones, then carefully make the extraction of all of them, and do not leave anything with your strength.
But if something gives you opposition from the moistures, and there is no fear or error in the incision of them, then cut those moistures and flesh, if they are there, and free the bones.
But if you do not have the preparation to remove the bones at your time, then place on the wound that it may putrefy itself: and let go of it, until what is in the vicinity of those bones from flesh and moistures putrefies.
And guard the wound so that it may not consolidate. And be bound the incision that you cut in your operation. But if you fear, then place on it, a piece of cloth soaked in finely ground sulfur with oil: or a piece of cloth soaked in Egyptian ointment, or some green herb of unguents.
When those moistures putrefy, and the bones are separated from them, the removal of them is relieved, and their attraction.
If however there is one great bone, such as the thigh bone, or the hip bone, and similar to them, and what is corrupted from it is a large part: then shave it with the last reason, until that blackness and corruption is removed. Then restore the wound.
But if what is in it corrupted is a large part, and corruption has already followed the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to saw it, and cut it all the way to where corruption reached: then care for it, until it consolidates.
And I tell you zuken, which happened to a man in his thigh: so that you may place that example and help on your operation.
There was a young man about thirty years old, to whom pain came in his thigh, from a cause that moved over him within the body, that is, from inside, until the matter reached the leg, and there was a large abscess: and he did not have an external cause.
Therefore he was extended with him for a time with the error of doctors, until the abscess was opened, and many matters came together with him. And the cure of him was postponed until the leg was fistulated, and there were made in it many openings: all of which emitted pus and body moistures.
Therefore he was cared for by many doctors for about two years, and there was not in him a wise one in the art of hands, until I was called, and I saw his leg, and the matters that were running out from those openings with great speed: even all his man's body had become shriveled, and his color was yellow.
If you insert a probe into one of the body's openings, and it reaches the bone.
Then I examined all the openings: and I found that they all reach each other from all parts of the leg.
I therefore cut through one of those openings, and I found that the bone itself was rotten: which was already decayed, discolored, and rotten, and perforated, until it reached the marrow.
I therefore cut off what was found by me, and prepared it from the rotten bone.
And I appointed that there was not in the bone except that corruption which I cut and prepared. And I had already removed it.
Then I placed the healing of the wound with consolidating medicines for a long time. And it was not consolidated.
Then I probed and cut above the first detection, and I found continuous corruption with the bone: and I prepared what appeared to me even from that corruption.
Then I attempted its healing. And it was not healed.
I therefore cut through it again, and I did not stop cutting the bone individually, and trying to heal it: and it was not healed until I cut through the bone almost a span, and extracted it with its marrow.
Then I healed it with medicines, and it was quickly consolidated and healed: and there was no need for this repetition in the operation of it, and its cutting, except because of the weakness of the infirm person, and the scarcity of his tolerance, and my fear of him regarding death: because he was dying from excessive evacuation diseases every hour.
The patient was healed by a complete cure: and flesh was born in the place of the bone, and it was good for the arrangement in his body, and his strength returned to him: and he returned to his proper conditions: and he did not do him any harm at all in walking.
But if the bone is already broken in the place of the body: then it is necessary to bind it thus: and it is as follows: take a bandage, and tie it at the end of the protruding bone: and order someone to pull it upwards: and put another bandage made of thicker wool first. Then tie it over the flesh, which is under the bone: and extend its end, so that you can pull the flesh downwards: and cover the flesh on the place that you want to saw, so that it does not cut the flesh.
Place a piece of wood, or a board under the lower bone, because when you do this, it does not prevent the flesh from becoming rotten.
And it is necessary that the cut be on the place of the corruption for a little while, so that there is no corruption in the hollow of the bone: and it does not appear in its appearance to the sense, and forces it to its own purpose another way.
But if the bone is corrupted, and it is not protruding, but rather it continues with its part: and the corruption is in the middle of it, or in its own part: then cover the flesh from all parts completely. Then place the wood underneath.
Then saw it from the first side, where the corruption is, until the cut continues from the other side: and let the cut be according to the length from the corruption for a little while, as we said.
But if the corruption is in the joint, cut the corrupted joint, and saw the bone from the other side where it continues.
If indeed there is corruption in the continuity of two joints, then there is no skill in it except for amputation.
If however the corruption is in the pectine of the hand or the pectine of the foot, then the matter is quite difficult indeed. However, you must indeed investigate how the corruption appears to you. And amputate it, and clean it according to any possible arrangement that is possible for you, and with any ingenuity, correct it for you, when it does not give you opposition of the vein or nerve.
And know that there are many teeth and saws for cutting these bones according to the position of the bones, and their preparation, and their thickness, and subtlety of them, and magnitude, and parity of them, and hardness of them, and rarity of them. Therefore, you must prepare every kind of instrument suitable for that operation.
And know that these operations signify to you above the kind of instrument that you lack, when with you is the study of a long time. And knowledge of this art is a testimony of the ways of ailments, for then you will already find through yourself that which is suitable to him from the instruments for every infirmity.
And I am strengthening you at the last number of this chapter's instruments, which you will place examples upon which you will cut, and proof by which you experiment on others.
The form of another saw.
The Form of the Razor for Joining Wounds. The head of this razor should be shaped according to the star-shaped form of a claw hammer, and its points should be in the form of the points of an eyelash.
It is not suitable for anything other than to rub against the heads of joined wounds when they are decaying, or for a large mouth, and it is very large.
The Form of the Larger Razor.
The Form of the Wide Razor.
The Form of the Razor with a Hollow.
The Form of the Other Delicate Razor.
The Form of the Other Curved-Handle Razor.
The Form of the Small, Delicate Tentative Razor.
This resembles a saw, and its handle is like a serrated edge: it will be shown in many places due to the reason of bones.
The Form of the Razor that is suitable for its reason which is perforated from bones.
Its handle is triangular, and its tip is sharp.
It is made of indigo. And similarly, it should be made of all the things we have said from razors, and saws, and serrated edges.
On Incising the Extremities, and Sawing Bones.
The extremities putrefy, either from an external cause or an internal one.
When therefore you have cured that corruption with medical treatment, and the cure does not take effect: and you see the corruption spreading to a member, which nothing rebounds against: then it is necessary for you to incise that member as far as the corruption follows, so that the weak one may pass through it from death, or from the malice which is greater than the defect of the member.
And the sign that this happens is that the limb becomes discolored, until it is thought to have been burned by fire or has decayed after a gangrenous condition: until that putrefaction spreads to the following limb, and spreads throughout the whole body.
Therefore, as soon as the incision is made, and if the cause of corruption is from the impact of certain poisonous creatures: such as sea scorpions, and vipers, and rattle snakes, and similar ones.
If therefore the corruption or impact is at the end of the finger, then cut the finger, and do not leave space for the corruption, so that it does not spread to the rest of the hand.
And similarly if it happens in the hand, then cut it from the root of the forearm, and do not leave space for the corruption, until it reaches the elbow.
And if it invades it, then cut the arm at the elbow in its joint.
But if the corruption passes through and you see it around the elbow: then there is death of the weak one. And to administer besides that from the cure, is a quantity of power.
And similarly do with the foot, when the corruption invades in the finger, then cut it at one joint: and if it reaches the patella of the foot, then cut the foot entirely. But if it climbs up to the knee, then cut the leg at the joint of the knee.
But if the corruption has already reached above the knee, then there is no cure in it, except release, and leaving the weak one to death.
And the way of cutting the limb, or of clamping it is, to tie the ligament in the lower part, which you wish to cut: and tie the ligament above the place. The assistant should extend one of the ligaments downwards and the other superior ligament upwards. And you should separate the flesh that is between the two ligaments, with a narrow spatula, until the flesh is completely exposed. Then it is cut or squeezed.
And it is necessary to place bandages on all parts of the cloth, and not touch the healthy part with the saw: and an added injury occurs to the sick person, and a hot abscess.
But if blood flows internally while operating, then cauterize the place quickly: or place on top of it some powders that absorb blood. Then return to your medical treatment until it is completed.
Then bind the wounded limb with the appropriate ligament to it, and care for it, until it heals.
And I tell you what happened to a man in his foot, the same thing that I am telling you.
That is, because blackness occurred in his foot, with burning that resembles the burning of fire: and that corruption first occurred in his finger, until it began to affect the whole foot.
Therefore the man removed himself from himself, after he saw the corruption spreading in his member with its intensity, which he found from the pain and burning of it: and it happened to him at the junction, and he was healed.
And after a long time had passed, the same corruption happened to him in his finger of his hand index.
Therefore he came to me, and I tried to recover that excess with him which I put on his hand from medicines after the cleansing of his body: and the excess was not reflected back, and it began to spread to another finger: until the corruption began in the hand.
He therefore called me to cut off his hand: and I was unwilling to do it, hoping for a reflection on the excess of that fluctuation: and I also feared even for him at the time of the cutting off of his hand. Because the power of man was over the fall.
After he therefore gave up hope in me, he returned to his land: and he came to me from him, because he hurried, and he cut off his hand entirely: and he was healed.
And I did not bring this story, unless it be a help on that which falls from this kind of sickness: and that there be a signification by which it is signified, and according to which it is done.
On the care of sinews, and the quality of cataplasm with medicines.
When an abscess occurs in certain fleshy members, and the time of the abscess is prolonged until it makes a collection of pus: then it bursts or is pierced, and what is in it from the pus goes out, and the place remains empty as if it were a vessel: and the skin that is on top of it like a fabric that has already become thin: and it does not reach to its final corruption, nor does it touch the mouth, nor the nerve, nor the ligament: it deserves to be called a sinus: and it is not called a fistula: but if the time of its duration is prolonged until it touches any of these members with corruption, then it is called a fistula, or zuken.
And its care is, that I cut off that skin entirely as it rolls back: and especially when it has become thin, and made like a fabric: and you trust that it will not stick to the place, because of its corruption.
But if you hope that the skin will stick to the place, and that final corruption will not follow from it: and if there is thickness in the skin from flesh, then care for it with cataplasm: and it is, that you consider towards the sinus.
Then, if it is large and the pus that emits from it has a foul odor, cleanse it with the Egyptian medicine, which is acetum, oil, and zinziber, equal parts mixed together in a vessel. Heat them over fire until the medicine turns red and thickens like honey.
Then take what you need from it and dissolve it with water and honey, and cleanse the sinus with it. Close the opening and leave the medicine in it for two hours.
Then remove it with expression and do this for several days until the sinus is cleaned and the odor is removed.
And sometimes cleanse it with water and ash when you do not have this medicine present: take charcoal from willow or holm oak trees and throw water on it. Then wash it and cleanse it with it until you trust that the sinus is now cleansed.
If the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or water and charcoal, then cleanse it with water and honey to which some crushed zinziber has already been added. Or cleanse it with mixed honey and wine because of the property of honey that it cleansses and washes: and wine makes the sinus stick, especially when there is an excess of astringency and dryness in the wine.
When you do this several times and trust that the corruption is now removed, then cleanse it with what causes flesh to grow in it.
And it is, that you take from the plaster dyafinicon and dissolve it with rose oil and astringent wine: or cleanse it with certain other medicines and ointments whose properties I have written about in my treatise on ointments.
If the orifice of the sinus is narrow and does not accommodate a catheter, then slightly widen it with a needle: or place a piece of lint soaked in Egyptian oil or basilikum ointment inside it until it is widened.
Similarly, if the orifice is also large, then gather its lips with a suture and allow the amount that the catheter enters without adding anything.
Similarly, if the orifice from which the pus flows is elevated, then dry it in a lower position that is inside it, so that the pus flows out downwards: for when pus is confined in the depths of the sinus, it prevents flesh from growing in it.
If it is not possible for you to dry the sinus around its lower part as you wish, then try to prepare the member by the preparation by which the pus flows out of it with ease according to what is prepared for you. Try to ensure that nothing at all from the pus remains in it: and take consolidating medicines that are placed on the sign, suitable for what you wish. And extend them on linen cloth. Let the cloth be of such a quantity that it covers the entire sinus. Then cut with forceps directly into the orifice of the sinus, more than the orifice of the sinus slightly. Then extend from the mild ointments on another cloth, according to the quantity of the opening: and place it on it with a long position away from the orifice of the sinus, so that the exit of the pus from it is relieved: and do not remove a large cloth unless after several days.
But the one that is on the orifice of the sinus is the one that you remove every hour, so that what accumulates in it from the pus exits: and so that you know whether the thing that flows out of it is much, or little: or digested, or undigested.
And again consider this place of the sinus, whether the master feels pain there, or if there is no pain in it, and whether there is an abscess in it, or if there is no abscess in it.
Therefore, when your medication is applied in this way, and you see the material that issues from the opening of the sinus, then you know that the sinus has already adhered or is approaching adhesion: then therefore dissolve it in the morning, or on the third day: and when you heal the wound, then replace the cloth with a new one, and renew the ointment.
But if a subtle virus issues from the sinus after a long time, then do not despair of its adhesion, for its healing is approaching, because there are men who delay the generation of flesh in their wounds, and there are those who act contrary to that.
But if a undigested pus issues from the sinus after many days, then you know that the sinus does not adhere.
Therefore, if the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and its matter is prolonged: then add to the drying of the medicines, but let the doctors make them so that they are medicines in their wet substance and in their dry virtue, as is the ointment dyafinicon when superfluity of addition is added to it from zegi.
And from the last thing that is cured, it is, that you take the ointment dyafinicon and dissolve it with rose oil, and moisten it with equal old wine in its substance.
Then finish it with that, and use it.
And now he performs a similar action when there is no ointment dyafinicon present for you, honey, when you dissolve it, until it thickens, and use it. Take myrrh, aloe, and frankincense, pound them all together, and powder it over melted honey while it is still on the fire. Then apply the linen cloth above it, and tie it over the wound: and with the honey that you have boiled, while it is still hot, fill it until it is full: and powder the specified species on top of it, and place it on the cloth, and tie it.
And sometimes aristolochia longa, and the roots of the blue lily, and the lily itself, and the flour of the herb, and centaury are administered in it. Use them either simple or combined, grind them, and grind the mortar itself: and powder it on the honey that I have boiled, and use it.
If the wound persists and is not healed by this treatment, then you will know that there is corruption in its depths: or it has already made an impression on the bones, or on the other hard members, or ligaments: then cure it with the treatment of fistulas, as it was previously prescribed.
¶ On the care of onychia and the worn nail, and the incision of the finger added, and the section.
Onychia is an abscess that arises under the nail of the thumb of the hand, or of the foot: and perhaps it arises in the other fingers as well.
When therefore the matter persists and is neglected in its treatment, and it becomes an abscess with hot abscess: or it rots and emits pus, until it corrodes the root of the nail: and perhaps it rots it entirely, and perhaps the corruption reaches the bone, until there is a foul odor to it: and it becomes the end of the finger broad, and its color is dark.
When therefore you are treating it yourself, since as we said in the division, and you do not apply your own cure: then it is necessary that you cut with a knife all the remaining superfluity that remains from the nail. Then cauterize the wound after that. For a cauterizing iron is very helpful.
If indeed the mouth is healthy, and the nail is also healthy, and the empty spaces of the nail are already compressing the flesh to the interior, and they begin to prick it, and they wound it: then it is necessary that you place a fine radium under the angle of the nail which is pricking the flesh, and push it upwards: and cut the flesh with ease, and put on top of what remains of the flesh from medicines burning, corrosive, until all of it is removed. Then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
But if the corruption has already pressed into the mouth, then it is necessary that you cut that mouth, and remove it: for it will never be healed as long as the corrupted mouth remains in it.
But if you see the corrosion and corruption proceeding into the finger, then cut it at one node, according to what was previously mentioned. Then treat it, until it is healed.
But if an accident occurs to the nail, such as a break or blow: and pain occurs in it, then it is necessary that you let blood from the sick person first. Then cut the nail with a sharp spatula transversely from above to the sight.
And guard, that the cut does not reach the flesh which is under the nail, for you will cause an accident to occur through it above the sick person's severe pain, and it will be a cause of new birth of flesh in that place.
Then care for the place with that which soothes pain.
However, the digitus added to some people's hands, which is born in some people's hands, perhaps it is entirely fleshy: and perhaps there are bones in them, and perhaps there is a nail in it: and some of them are born at the root of the joint, or its birth is in some knots of the finger. Therefore, that which is born in some knots of the finger, does not move: and that which is born at the joint of the finger, perhaps moves.
Therefore, for him who is fleshy from among them, his cutting is easy. That is, so that you cut it at its root with a broad spatula.
But for him whose birth is at the root of the joint, his cure is difficult. Therefore, refrain from cutting it.
However, for him who is born in the finger at the last knot, then you should cut into the first flesh of his round cut up to the bone. Then saw the bone with one of those saws that are suitable for that. Then care for it, until it is healed.
However, the consolidation that happens to fingers together often happens from the birth of man, that is, he is born with it, or from the consolidation of the wound, or from the burning of fire, and similar things.
Therefore, you should separate that consolidation, until the fingers return to their natural form. Then place between them a lint, or cloths soaked in rose oil: so that they do not consolidate quickly, and separate between them: or place between them a thin sheet of lead, until the place consolidates as it should.
Similarly, if a consolidation occurs between certain fingers and the palm, then dry that consolidation according to how it is prepared and fits the figure of the member.
On Incising a Wound.
Veins are often twisted, thick, and full of melancholic superfluities that occur in many parts of the body: and their greatest event is found in the legs, especially in the legs of those who walk, work, and carry.
Therefore it is necessary for caretakers to frequently shake the body with strong shaking from black choler.
Then, the vein of the patient is bleeding in the basilica.
The cure of these with iron, however, is according to two modes. One of them is that they are dried and the black blood is drawn out. The other mode is that the vein is raised and all the blood is drawn out.
The section of it, however, is according to this method. First, warm water is applied to the leg, until the thick, dirty blood is dissolved. Then, the weak leg is tied from its upper part of the hip to its lower part with a ligature, with a rope. Then, the vein is cut in one place, or two, or three places, with a wide incision.
Then, raise it, that is, draw the blood from the lower part of the leg, upwards, and from the upper part, it is necessary for the phlebotomist to first. Then, cut the nail with a knife until it goes down to the blood: until the amount of blood that you see is enough and what the strength of the sick person can tolerate.
Afterwards, tie her up: and order her to abstain from foods that generate black bile: and repeat evacuation and phlebotomy when the veins are full, and it harms the sick person.
However, his evacuation is done in this way. Shave the leg of the sick person if there are many hairs on it. Then introduce him into the bath: or broil him in the leg of his thigh with hot water until it reddens, and the veins are full: or exercise strong exercise, if there is no bath present, until the limb warms up.
Then dry the skin directly over the vein section along its length: or at the last of his knee, or in the lower part of his heel.
Then open the skin with hooks, and scrape the vein from all sides, until it appears to the sense: and at its appearance, that you see it reddening towards the descending blackness. When therefore it goes out of the skin, you see it white like a string.
Then introduce it under it Radium, until when it is evacuated and goes out of the skin: suspend it with a blind hook, gently.
Then dry another section near that section three fingers. Then scrape the skin from the upper part of the vein, until it appears. Then evacuate it with Radii as you did, and suspend it with another hook, as you did first.
Then dry another section, or several sections, if you need that one. Then evacuate, and cut the last section at the heel.
Then remove it to the section that is above it.
And make him do this, until you extract it from the higher or more elevated section than all others, until when it comes out completely: then cut it.
But if it does not obey you in being extracted and raised: then insert a sharp needle with strong thread doubled, and tie it, and extract it: or insert under it Radium: and turn your hand to all parts, until it comes out. And beware, do not cut it. For if it is cut, it becomes difficult for you to raise it greatly, and enters into the weakest part of it, causing harm.
Then when you have extracted it all: then place it on the wound with immersed thread in wine and rose oil, or oil: and care for it until it is healed.
But if the wound is contracted, having a twisted shape to which there is no covering to all parts, and it is not as we said according to straightness: then it is necessary that you suture over it to all part of its twisted shape, and locations of its covering.
Then suspend it with sutures, until you raise it all: and beware at your cutting on it that you do not cut the vein, or wound: for it will be difficult for you to raise it, or extract it. Therefore preserve your wisdom.
The Form of Incision for the Healing of a Wound.
The Form of Suturing a Blind Wound.
It does not have straightness like other sutures, nor is it sharp at its extremities, so as not to wound the vein: and it is thick in its twisted shape, mild: because if it were subtle, it would cut the vein with its subtlety: indeed it should have excessive thickness, as we said.
On the Extraction of the Leg Vein.
This vein is generated in the legs in warm lands, such as those of the Almohads and the Arabs, and in dry, warm, thin lands, that is, where there grows neither herb nor tree.
And perhaps it is generated in other parts of the body besides the legs.
And its generation indeed is from the putrefaction that occurs beneath the skin, just as snakes and worms of ascarides occur within the bodies, and worms generated between the skin and flesh.
And the sign of the beginning of this vein is that which occurs in the leg, a severe inflammation. Then the location is incised. Then the vein begins to exit from that location of incision, as if it were the root of a plant or an animal.
When therefore it appears from that end of it, then you must wrap around it a fragment of lead, whose weight is from a drachma keil, up to two drachmas and the knot: and let the lead suspended from the leg.
Whenever therefore something exits from it to the outsides, wrap that in lead, and knot it. If it is prolonged much, then incise its part, and wrap the remainder. And do not incise it root and branch before it has all exited. Because if you incise it, it contracts, and enters into the flesh: and causes an abscess, and putrefaction in that location, and an evil wound.
Therefore it is necessary that it be gently handled, and extracted gradually, until it exits from its last part, and nothing remains of it in the body: and from this vein indeed some men exit with that which is in its length five palms and ten. And now he has reached me, because a man has departed from twenty palms.
But if it happens to you at the time of your medical treatment: then introduce the radium through its hole, and perforate it with a long one, with the body, until everything that is in it is evacuated from the matter: and administer putrefaction of the site with medicines for several days. Then care for him with the care of the abscess.
And this vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot, or in the foot itself: and many openings occur to him, and he goes out from every opening.
Then care for it, as we said in the division, and with that which was previously mentioned.
¶ About cutting the worms generated under the skin, and it is called 'Bouina Disease'.
This disease is called 'Bouina Disease' in a certain land among us: because often it happens to worms, and it is a small worm that is born between the skin and flesh.
And it goes through the whole body, ascending and descending: and it shows itself to the sense during its walk from member to member, until it breaks wherever it breaks in the skin, and goes out.
And its generation is from the putrefaction of certain humors. As worms and snakes, that is, roundworms and ascarides, happen in the belly.
And it is feared from its malice. Because when it goes through the body, and is raised to the head, and reaches the place: then perhaps it opens in it, and goes out, and destroys the eye: and this happens often.
When therefore you wish to cure him and extract him, then it is not done except at his walking and the appearance of himself to his sense.
Therefore, you must bind what is above him and what is below him with a strong bandage in constriction. Then cut above him, and extract him.
If it is deeply embedded in the flesh and you cannot find it, then place a hot iron on the spot until it dies.
And the greater danger is its corruption, by which it corrupts the eye, as we have said.
But if you see that it has already reached the head near the eye, then bind under it with a good eyebrow bandage. Then cut above him, and extract him.
And it is necessary that the sick person cleanse his body with a medicine dissolving foul humors badly.
And he should beware of foods that generate putrefaction in him.
¶ On cutting above a soreness of Nakir.
This soreness is called Nakir in our land: and it is a pain that occurs in certain members, then it changes from member to member.
And indeed I have already seen it myself, as I tell you. I was called to an ill woman in certain villages. And she exposed her arm, and I saw a small inflation in the vein of the forearm.
And after I remained for an hour, I saw one inflation moving with the fire, like a snake, ascending to her shoulder more quickly than is possible: so that it was like live silver when running from place to place.
The pain therefore departed from that place, and it was fixed on her shoulder.
Then I sat for one hour, and it rushed into the remaining body, until it reached another arm.
Then he told me that it was turning around in his whole body, as I had seen.
I was therefore amazed at the speed of its movement from limb to limb. And indeed, I had not seen this illness with my own eyes in this way before. Nevertheless, I had seen many who found pain moving from limb to limb, and I had not seen it with my own eyes as I had seen it in that woman.
And I do not think that it is otherwise than because she was from those who are from the dry uterus of the detected veins, hence it appears to the senses that this movement is caused by wind.
And it is necessary that they do not appear according to this reason in those who are delicate and have moist bodies, of hidden veins.
When therefore you wish to cure him, and the patient feels that pain: then if it is apparent to your eye, as we said, then bind quickly above it, and under it: and dry above it, until that windiness is confined: and cauterize the place.
But if you do not see it with your own eyes: then cure him with the shaking of his body, and with that which expels windiness, and charm them with fetid pills, and pills of juniper, and similar things.
CONCERNING THE EXTRACTION OF ARROWS.
ARROWS DIFFER ACCORDING TO THEIR KIND AND ACCORDING TO THE PLACES IN WHICH THEY FALL FROM THE BODY.
BUT THIS DIVERSITY IS GREAT, BECAUSE THERE ARE SOME WHICH HAVE LARGE AND SMALL, SHARP AND BLUNT POINTS: AND HOLEY AND DEAF ONES. And among them are those which have three angles. And among them are those which have a tongue. And among them are those which have stars.
Those however which are according to the members in which they fall, are according to two modes. For indeed the members are from the principal concave members, such as the brain, and heart, and liver, and lung, and kidneys, and intestines, and bladder, and similar things. Therefore when it falls into any of these members, and signs of death appear to you, which I tell you afterward, then you should avoid the extraction of that arrow from them, for death follows him in whom it is, in many positions. And when those evil signs do not appear to you, and the arrow is not hidden in the depth of the member, then extract it, and care for the wound.
For from the signs of the brain when the arrow falls into it, and penetrates the mouth, and exits that which is on top of the brain, there are: because they happen from it strong pain, scotomia, vertigo, redness in the eyes, inflation, redness of the tongue, spasm, and confusion of the intellect, and vomiting of cholera. And perhaps it exits blood from the nostrils, or from the ears. And perhaps speech is cut off, and voice is destroyed. And it exits from the place of the wound white fluid similar to pus. And it exits from that similar to the humidity of flesh.
Therefore if those signs appear to you, then avoid the care, and extract the arrow if it does not exit.
The signs of the arrow however when it falls into the heart are: that it is near the left nipple: and feels with it as if it is fixed in a hard thing, not in a vacant one. And perhaps the motion of an arrow is similar to the motion of a blow: and black blood runs from the wound. And then follows extreme coldness, and cold sweat, and syncope. Therefore know that death is certainly approaching.
And the sign of an arrow when it wounds the lung is the frothy discharge of blood from the wound: and the boils that follow around the neck become inflamed, and the color of the sick person changes. And he will breathe out a great, deep breath: and he will seek the cooling of cold air.
If the arrow falls into the breast, which is in the chest: then it is near the small ribs: and a great panting with intense pain, with a sigh: and all the limbs of the shoulders are moved.
And if the arrow falls into the stomach, then perhaps something undigested from food comes out of the wound.
And if the arrow falls into the belly, and is fixed in it: something of feces comes out of the wound, or a mass, or an intestine that is already torn. There is therefore no hope for his cure, nor for the extraction of the arrow.
If the arrow falls into the bladder, and urine comes out of it: and something proceeds from it to the outside, and the pain is stronger on the sick person: then you will know that it is mortal.
But the other limbs, such as the face, and the neck, and the throat, and the shoulder blade, and the ribs, and the wings, and the hip, and the leg, and the like are saved from these members according to many arrangements: when the arrow does not find an artery, or a nerve: and it is not a poisonous arrow.
And I tell you what I have seen of these arrows, as you indicate in your treatment.
Because an arrow fell into the lacrimal duct of a man's eye, at the root of his nose. Therefore, I extracted it from the other side, under the ear's fat: and he was healed, and no harm came to his eye.
And I extracted an arrow from a Jew, which had fallen into the fat of his eye under the lower eyelid: and the arrow was already hidden, and I could only get out of it except its small tip, with which it adheres to its reed: and it was a large arrow among the arrows of the Turks, with a weak iron, in which there are no ears.
The Jew was therefore healed, and no harm came to his eye.
And I extracted an arrow from the throat of a Christian.
And it was an Arabic arrow, and it is that which has ears. Therefore, I cut it above it between two tongues: and it was already submerged in his throat. I was careful with it as I extracted it: and the Christian was healed.
And I extracted an arrow from a man which had fallen into his belly: and we thought he would die from it.
After therefore thirty days had passed over him, and nothing changed on him from his dispositions, I cut above the arrow: and I peeled it off, and extracted it: and he was healed, and no harm came to him.
And I saw a man on whom an arrow had fallen on his back, and the wound was consolidated over it. After therefore it was after seven years, the arrow came out at the root of his thigh.
I saw a woman who had an arrow lodged in her womb and the wound was healed over it, and the arrow remained inside her: and there was no change in her posture or condition, and she did not find any harm from any of her natural functions.
I also saw a man who had an arrow lodged in his face: and the wound was healed over it, and he did not find much pain from it: and there were many similar cases.
I also extracted the arrow from a man of high rank, who had it lodged in the middle of his nose, and it had already begun to lean towards the right side a little: and the arrow was hidden completely.
I was therefore called to treat him after the accident with the arrow for three days. I found the wound of the arrow to be quite tight.
I therefore examined it with a fine probe, and I did not feel it: but he himself found a pricking and pain under his right ear. I therefore hoped that this pricking was from the tip of the arrow.
I therefore applied a plaster with a property that attracts and digests, confident that the wound would become an abscess and I would be able to see the sign of the arrow so that I could cut it above: and nothing happened in that place which indicated that the arrow had followed its path.
I therefore applied the plaster to him for many days: and nothing happened which was not intended, and the wound healed in the meantime: and he remained weak from the extraction of it for several days, until he felt the arrow inside his nose on a certain day. And he told me that.
And he told me that. I therefore placed a sharp and corrosive medicine on that wound for many days until it was open: and when I examined him with a fine probe, I felt the tip of the arrow which adhered to the wood.
Then I added to the incision of the wound through that sharp medicine, until the visible end of the arrow appeared to us: and it passed by me with it a certain period of time, approximately four months.
Then, after the wound had been enlarged, and it was possible for me to insert pincers into it and move it, but it did not obey my commands: then I did not cease to sharpen and devise various ways of using the pincers on it, until I began to extract it on a certain day with well-made pincers, according to the form of their ends at the end of the chapter, until I extracted it. Then I restored the wound.
And indeed, the doctors judge that the cartilage of the nose is not restored. I therefore restored it, and the wound was healed, and the sick person was cured with complete health: nor did anything at all harm him.
And I tell you the quality of extracting some arrows: so that you may place that rule and signification on that which I have not said.
Because the parts of this art and their distinctions are not comprehended with narration: nor does that book comprehend it, and a wise craftsman compares with little on much: and with what is present, he compares to what is absent: and he finds a new operation and a new instrument among the descents of things extraneous to this art when they happen.
I say therefore, that arrows do not exit from the members in which they are fixed, except according to two ways. Either by attraction from the place from which it entered. Or by the opposite part.
And that which exits from where it entered is either an arrow proceeding in a fleshy place: and it is attracted and exits.
If it does not comply with the outcome from the hour in which it falls: then it is necessary to let it go for several days, until the flesh that is around it rots: and its attraction is eased, and its exit.
Similarly, if it sticks to the bone, and does not comply with you for exit, then let it go also for several days: and repeat it with attraction and motion every day, until it exits.
If it does not comply with you for exit after days, then it is necessary to bore through the circumference of the arrow in the same bone from all parts with a thin drill, until the arrows are enlarged. Then attract it, and extract it.
But if the arrow is already hidden in the place of the body, and it is hidden and concealed from sense: then seek it with touch. But if you feel it, then attract it with some instruments that are suitable for its attraction.
If you cannot place it above the wound due to its constriction and the length of the arrow in a deep location where there is no bone, nerve, or vein: then pierce it on top of the wound until it expands, making it possible to extract the arrow.
If there are ears to which it can be tied, then free the attached flesh from all parts, with every skill you have, and skills, if it cannot be placed above the flesh in the fracture of the ears and their twisting, until it is removed.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any location, then use the twisting of your hand with forceps to all parts, until you make it escape: and with subtlest subtleties, so that the arrow is not broken, and it becomes difficult for you to attract it and extract it.
If you cannot place it above the wound in one hour, then let it go for several days until the rotten parts around it are putrid. Then repeat it: for the tunica will be healed if indeed it causes you opposition in the flow of blood, then administer what we said from the cure in its chapter: and guard your skill from incision of vein, or nerve, or string.
And administer skill in every way that is possible for you to escape the arrow: and let it be with facility, and tranquility, or slowness, and firmness, as I have told you.
And it is necessary that when you pull the arrow, it should be weak according to its shape, according to which it was at the accident of the arrow in itself. For it is more beneficial. But if it is not possible for you, then administer what is possible from the figures.
The arrow that exits from the opposite side of the other part, or has already begun to protrude from it towards the outside: or it causes a swelling at the tip of the arrow by sensation from the upper part of the skin near it, and you see it protruding: therefore cut above it, and make the incision according to the amount that the forceps can take in it.
Then pull it out: for it will become easy to exit.
If indeed it is retained in the bone, then twist your hand according to its roundness, until the arrow is pressed into the bone and expands itself: then pull it out.
And if not: leave it for several days: then repeat it, until it exits.
If the wood of the arrow is in it, then push it with it.
But if the wood has fallen off, and you want to apply a blow: then insert a concave instrument into it, so that its concavity enters into the tail of the arrow: then push it with it.
But if the arrow is concave, then push it with an inserting instrument. For the arrow is relieved by that.
But if the arrow is poisoned, then it is necessary to hollow out all the flesh in which the poison is: if it is possible for you. Then care for it with what suits it.
But if the arrow is falling in the chest, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the side: and it is near what you touch with a probe, and it is possible for you to cut above it: then cut, and avoid the incision of the vein, or nerve, and remove it.
Then care for its wound, if you see it, and heal it, until it is healed.
This is the form of forceps used for removing arrows.
The tips of these forceps are similar to a bird's beak, made of iron, and when they grip the arrow, they do not let go of it.
There are many varieties of these forceps, large and small, medium-sized, according to the size of the arrow, its flexibility, and the width and constriction of the wound.
The shape of the pusher is concave.
The shape of the pusher is blind.
This is the blind tip of the pusher, shaped like a radius, to facilitate its insertion into the concave arrow and to be pushed with it.
On bloodletting from veins.
The veins that are usually bled in the body are thirty.
Of these, there are sixteen in the head: two pulsatile veins behind the ears, called the "herbs"; and two arteries that are visible on the temples; and two veins at the corners of both eyes, called the "aspirants"; and a prepared vein in the middle of the forehead; and a vein at the end of the nose. And two jugular veins that are in the neck. And two veins that are in the upper lip of the mouth. And two veins that are in the lower lip. These are called the "alche-rich" veins. And two veins that are under the tongue.
In the arms, the veins that are bled are five in each arm.
One of them is called the cephalic vein, and it is located on the sulcus of the elbow; people also call it the arm vein. And the dark one. And there is the median vein, which is composed of a branch of the basilica and a branch of the cephalic; people also call it the body vein. And there is the basilica vein, which is located on the domestic sulcus; it is also called the titilous vein. People also call it the abdominal vein. And there is the brachial cord vein, which is located above the elbow; it is the one that is bled from and the one that appears above the thumb.
And there is the salivate vein, which is located between the ring and the little finger; it has two branches.
And in the leg and foot, there are three veins. One of them is located under the thumb arch on the sulcus of the elbow. And the second one is the saphenous vein; its location is near the heel, on the domestic sulcus. And there is the nesse vein; its location is near the heel, on the sulcus of the elbow.
And in the leg, there are three other veins similar to those mentioned earlier.
On bleeding from two veins after the ears.
Bleeding from the two veins that are after the ears is a remedy for ancient cataracts, hemiglanea, sahefati, and old head sores.
And the quality of the bleeding is as I have described. And it is, that the head of the sick person should be shaved: and the back of his head should be rubbed with a rough cloth in the place of the two veins. Then the sick person should tie his neck with a bandage until two veins appear. And their locations are behind the ears in two depressed places of the head. Therefore ask for them with your finger, and where you feel them pulsed under your finger, there mark with the caustic.
Then take a lancet phlebotomist, and he is called the Incisor. Then insert it under the vein into the skin, until the lancet reaches the bone. Then clean your hand with the vein and skin to the upper parts, and cut the vein with the Incisor incision. And let the length of the incision be the amount of two fingers joined together, or about that: and make it bleed out as much blood as you wish.
Then bind it with bandages, and let it go, until it is healed.
And now it has preceded at the beginning of the book, and their incision and cauterization.
Indeed, of the two arteries which are in two times of bloodletting, the benefit is to the ancient hemigranate: and it is bad for the sluggish, and frequent for the obtalmiam: and the course of the excessive, sharp, effused superfluities to the eyes.
And the quality of bloodletting from them is according to what I tell you. The sick person should tie his neck much, until two veins appear clearly to the sense of touch: and the pulse of them should be shown under your finger. Then indeed with cauterization.
Then elevate the skin above the wound with your index finger and insert a phlebotome from below, and elevate the wound to the top. And cut it, as you did in the two other wounds: and make it bleed according to the amount of your need.
Then dissolve the bandage of the weak, and place your finger on the wound for one hour. Then place a compress and swabs on it, and bind it above with a strong bandage: and let it go, until it is healed.
And now the reminder of them has already passed, and their cutting and extraction at the beginning of the book.
The remedy of phlebotomy of the forehead vein is after phlebotomy of the Cephalic, for old pains of the face: and for hemicrania, and redness: and foul ulcers.
And the quality of its phlebotomy is according to what I tell you. Bandage the weak his neck with a bandage, until the vein appears. Then take the instrument that is called the Fossorium.
Place the prominent point that is at the head of the Fossorium above the vein, and strike it with a pectine, or with another tool in its manner: and let the blood run according to the amount you wish. Then dissolve the perforation of the weak, and bind it, until it is healed.
And sometimes it opens with a wide phlebotome. However, it is not necessary for the phlebotomist to be sharp-witted like other phlebotomists, but rather should be broad-minded. And the phlebotomist should perform it according to transudation, as the mouth is close by: and perhaps the phlebotomist may be broken when he is delicate in that place.
However, the bleeding from the two veins that are in two lacrimal ducts of two eyes is for eye from scab and redness: and swelling in the eye, and facial pain.
And the quality of bleeding from them is that the weak person ties his neck with a cloth. Then the phlebotomist should perform it: and you should be standing on his head.
And the bleeding should be performed according to transudation towards the length a little, with a small phlebotomist, broadly a little, because there is no flesh in that place. For if the phlebotomist is delicate of the extremity, perhaps he is broken.
Then make him bleed out as much blood as is necessary for you. And place a compress on them, and tie them at night one time, and loosen them.
However, bleeding from the veins of the nose is for conferring to acute fever, and severe sweating, and facial pain, such as hemigranate, and redness that occurs in the face: especially when it is old.
And the quality of bleeding from them is that the weak person ties his neck. Then hold his nose with your left hand, and take a delicate phlebotomist, long: and fix him in the middle of the rabbit's ear, between that which distinguishes his nose according to straightness. Since the vein does not appear to the senses there, and because blood begins to flow immediately.
And it is necessary that you hold your last hand with the phlebotomist for a while: and you should make the blood flow according to your need. Then tie it up at night in one. For indeed it is quickly restored.
However, the benefit of vein bleeding of both Guidegi is for the constriction of breath, and the beginning of leprosy, and melancholic ailments, and impetigo and bad wounds, and corrosives, that is, herpetic ulcers.
And the quality of their vein bleeding is that the weak one should be tied under both armpits with a bandage: and the artist should stand over the head of the sick person, and the sick person should sit on a seat.
Then vein bleeding to the length of wide vein bleeding for a while. Then extract from the blood an amount that is temperate, or according to what you see from the need that is for it. Then do the same with another vein.
Then loose the bandage, and tie two veins with a middle binding: so that the weak one is not exposed. And let it go until morning. For indeed the wound is healed.
On the vein bleeding of the Algeberich. However, the vein bleeding of the Algeberich is beneficial because it brings to alcol in the mouth, and corruption of the gums: and bad wounds: and fissures of the lips, and bad wounds, even those that are in the nose, and around it.
The quality of bloodletting from those is such that you should make the sick person sit in front of you: and tie their neck with a cloth. Then unroll their lip, and look at the two veins: one is on the right side of their lip, and the other on the left. The indication of each is by the darkness of both. And that is true: because among them are small veins, black. Therefore cut both with a cutting instrument.
But if doubt is on you, and you do not know which of them is: then direct to the cutting of the larger of them, and their more apparent.
And likewise do with the two veins which are on the upper lip: and most of all custom is with that: and cut the two veins which are on the lower lip.
§ On bloodletting from the vein under the tongue after cephalic bloodletting. However, of the two veins which are under the tongue, bloodletting is a remedy: because cephalic bloodletting is for prefacations which are in the throat, and pain of the jaw, and pains of the mouth.
And the quality of bloodletting from them is such that the sick person should sit between your hands in front of the sun: and raise their tongue, and look under the tongue from one side a vein, and from the other side a vein: and the color of each descending to darkness.
So bloodletting both: and guard, lest your last hand in bloodletting them. For under them are arteries, and perhaps it may happen that blood flows from those arteries.
The three veins that are bled in the arm, it is customary to bleed from them in all people.
And bleeding from them is done in two ways. Either by pricking with a broad-leafed bleeding lancet, or by olive oil for its subtlety of the incline, or by cutting with a knife and a bleeding bowl, and it is called Alnesil. And this is its form.
And from them are the species of broad and subtle according to the width and constriction of the veins. The form of the bleeding lancet should be broad, as you see. And it is suitable for opening deep, full, protruding, visible, thick veins, and those that contain thick, cloudy blood.
And this bleeding lancet is of smaller width and more subtle at the tip.
And it is suitable for bleeding from thin veins that contain thin, yellowish blood.
The basilica, which is one of these three veins for bleeding, is a support. Because it draws blood from illnesses that are under the chin and neck, from the chest and abdomen, and follows the course of the body. And it is suitable for the bleeder with the bleeding lancet to be careful and have caution from it because under it is the artery. If therefore he errs and adds to the puncture of the bleeding lancet, he will cut that artery, and blood will flow. Therefore it is necessary that he not bleed it with the bleeding lancet pricking: rather he should be cutting with Alnesil.
If the Basilica does not appear manifestly, then you should change it with foreign ones, or ask for a branch of it: or perform phlebotomy in place of its arm's cord. For it is indeed manifest, and dry it with a phlebotomist's sponge, as we have said.
But if you wish to perform phlebotomy on it, then you should do it before the stricture of the arm, touching the place until you know the place of the pulse. Then mark the place with a hot iron, then the arm, and dry the vein with a hollow cut with a phlebotomist's sponge, as we have said. And beware that the blow does not fall through the space from the place of the artery.
And when you see, with your bandaging, the swelling in the place which you marked with the hot iron, then that swelling is the swelling of the artery: therefore avoid it.
But if you see blood coming out at the phlebotomy, like the urine of a child, and it is thin and red: then you will know that it is from the blood of the artery. Then therefore hasten, and put your finger on it for a long space, then remove your finger. If therefore the blood is cut off (for often it is cut off), then bind the arm, and let it go: and beware that the weak one is not moved from its motion: and let it be on the fear of it.
And do not move it for several days until it is healed.
But if the blood is not cut off, and it overcomes you: and there is no medicine present for you at your moment, then cut the artery if it appears to you. The extremities are contracted, and the blood is cut off.
Or take a piece of bandage from the fist, and apply it: take half of it, and tie it over the wound site properly, with a ligature and cotton up to another day.
Then if the blood is cut off, it is good. And if not: then care for it with the one who preceded its remembrance from the place of dust removing the blood flow: and the cutting off of his blood is not difficult in many positions, because of the small wound location, and the possibility of a ligature from the arm.
But the great vein is a good thing for bleeding, which draws blood from the upper part of the head, and the lower body: because it is composed of the branch of the Basilic, and the branch of the Cephalic, as we said.
And it is fitting for the bleeder to be above the fear of from its bleeding, because under it is a nerve. If therefore he adds to the bleeding point, and finds a nerve, it happens in her stupor, and difficult is its cure, and perhaps not completely cured.
And this nerve often appears to the sense. But if it is hidden in some men, and is subtle, and does not show: then it is necessary that you put your bleeding where the bleeder, cutting with a needle, and separation of the nerve with your strength.
That if the vein is between two nerves, then find the vein in length.
About the Cephalic vein. Phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is a remedy, because it draws blood from the head and brings it to eye ailments.
And it is proper in this vein, if you wish, to perform phlebotomy by puncturing with an olive oil phlebotome or a myrtle phlebotome: because it is safer than all veins, since it does not have an accompanying artery or nerve.
However, it is appropriate for you during phlebotomy to direct the phlebotome towards the head of the lizard and seek a less painful spot: and it does not harm it if it is not found with the first blow, but can be repeated with phlebotomy several times.
However, it may perhaps abscess in some people when it is not performed with the first blow, but it does not harm them with that abscess in some place.
On the usefulness of phlebotomy and precautions to be observed in it. The quality of phlebotomy and its accidents from which you should think of its correction.
First of all, you should know that phlebotomy is not administered except for the preservation of health and its continuity, and caution against the onset of ailments.
And so that phlebotomy may be performed in one of the three veins that are in the elbow, namely the cephalic, fusca, and basilica. And so that phlebotomy may be performed at the beginning of spring on fasting, in spring, and in summer: and in autumn and winter after eating, when the signs of repletion appear.
And it should be performed on the first day, or on the third, after three hours have passed since the previous day.
Phlebotomy, which is administered in ailments, does not have a determined hour: but when it is provoked by convenience and necessity to that, at night, or at day, and in every hour, and in every time.
And it is not necessary for children to be bled until they reach fourteen years of age. Neither should a pregnant woman be bled, unless from the fourth month until the seventh. Nor should elderly people who have already passed sixty years be bled.
When therefore someone wants to be bled for any reason whatsoever, it is necessary that he clean his intestines before the bleeding with a mild enema, if there is much feces retained in them: so that the veins at the time of the bleeding do not draw out from the intestines superfluous putrid things harmful to the principal members.
Nor should a patient with nausea, that is, satiety of vomiting, be bled, nor one who is full, nor one who avoids drunkenness, until it is removed from them. Nor a sick person with hydropsy.
And let it be guarded against bleeding again after colic pain, and vomiting, and diarrhea, and multiplication of coitus, and labor, and exercise, and vigils, and fasting, and every thing that dissolves the strength from the body or animal.
Then consider the subtlety of the humors before that, if the blood is thick with food and drinks, and medicines: if it is possible for him to have that.
Then he should enter the bath, if nothing prohibits it: or he should be exercised in some exercise, so that the blood is made subtle.
And place a bloodletting on his chest, around the third day, as we mentioned: and try to make him vomit his chest that day from all the animal misfortunes: such as distress, anger, and fear: and from all bodily misfortunes, such as labor, punishment, and excessive sweating, and similar things.
And let his bed be present with the things of which he became accustomed to use through custom among people from aromatics, and perfumes, and dancing and similar things by the amount of possibility.
Then the bloodletter should sit on a pillow, which is higher than the pillow for bleeding: afterwards he should draw his arm, and rub it with his hand twice or three times. Then he should tie a bandage with a roller, and wrap it twice.
And let the binding be temperate, because when the binding is unequal, or by excess in the binding, then it prevents the course of blood: or in softening, then also it prevents the course of blood.
Then after the binding, it is necessary to rub the bled person with his hands simultaneously, until the veins are filled and the sensation is lost.
Then the bloodletter should clean the bled person with a little oil, anciently properly.
Then he should place his finger of his left hand on the vein under the place where he wants to bleed, a little: so that the vein does not escape, and it is covered by the blow. Because from the veins is what is found as a fleeing cord at bleeding: and from them is what is full of venosity: and when you place the bled person on it, it contracts under the bleeding, and deceives the bloodletter, and does not open the vein: and if it opens it, it is tight: for that reason therefore it is necessary to strengthen the bloodletter, and to be careful in all these things.
Then remove the phlebotomist. If therefore a vein is opened from one wound, then it is good. And if not, then repeat that wound another under that place slightly, or above it with haste: if the location does not become an abscess.
But if it becomes an abscess, or the weak man swells, then let him go on the day, or two days: and do not tighten the bandage. Perhaps the abscess will attract hot. Nor should he enter the bath.
Then repeat the phlebotomy, if he loves it.
But if the opening is small, or the blood flows slightly: and you fear that not to come out of the blood quantity as you wish: then repeat the phlebotomy in the same hole according to straightness, and add in the operation slightly.
And do that with haste, before the location becomes an abscess, for the location becomes an abscess in many men at the small operation.
But if you see him already swollen, then do not repeat on it at all, for not to excuse anything to you. And put on it something from the oil of faeces: because it will relieve the course of the blood. And it is better in this place than the oil itself, and than the other oil.
And similarly administer the oil of faeces in all your phlebotomies, where the phlebotomist veins at the prohibition of the course of the blood: and they make it tyriaca alfarach, and sagzenea, when it is put on one of them over the location.
For the blood thins and dissolves, when it is thick.
But if an abscess happens in the location of phlebotomy great, for often it happens, especially to him who is not phlebotomized except that vein, or is a small opening of the vein, then hasten and put on the location sponge soaked in water and salt, warmed slightly: and tighten it at one hour: because it will dissolve.
You should perform this procedure after the blood has stopped flowing from the same vein or another one, with its own completeness.
If there remains any discoloration or yellowness in the place after several days, it does not harm to apply something on top of it, such as a solution of aloe, myrrh, or some mint juice, that is, calamint or something similar.
Frequently, abscesses and swellings occur after bloodletting from the basilica vein.
Therefore, place your hand on it, and if you find softness at the compression of your hand, then that swelling is bad. Therefore, apply something on top of it as we mentioned earlier. For perhaps blood may flow from the artery through it.
But make an ointment with that which has stoptic properties, so that the place hardens. Then take care of it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
And it is necessary to draw blood from every man according to the quantity of its virtue. And what appears by the color of the wine on top of the blood.
For if the blood is black, then let it go out until it turns red: and similarly if you see it thick, then let it go out until it becomes thin: and similarly if it is sharp, then let its sharpness be removed.
And it is necessary for him who is full, strong, and needs bloodletting once, that the phlebotomy of the vein be increased, and he be a side phlebotomist: and in him who is weak, let the opposite be the case.
And it is necessary to draw it out at regular intervals, and that there be a narrow opening: and better what is administered in the bloodletting of the vein is that it be a transverse section, not a puncture.
This method of bloodletting is beneficial for stopping blood flow and preventing nerve cuts, and it is more praiseworthy and safer than bloodletting through width and length.
For those who are accustomed to reaching the phlebotomist with syncope, it is necessary for them to eat a little bread soaked in water with pomegranate juice: or seeded barley, if he is hot; and then draw out three times, or four.
And if he is of a cold constitution, then he should take before bloodletting bread soaked in syrup of honeydew, or in aromatic syrup with species, or in fragrant aromatic syrup.
If syncope occurs during bloodletting, and this is the cause of much blood loss, then it is necessary for him to drink water of flesh and aromatic syrup: and to use aromatics with algaia, and to bandage his chest with it: and to use the other things that we mentioned in division on syncope from evacuation in the chapter.
But whoever wants to end his arm and solve his blood second: it is necessary for him whose bloodletting is for much evacuation, and its virtue is weak, that he solves the blood gradually by the amount of virtue in continuous days.
But whoever wants to end his arm and solve his blood second, and his body is strong: then he should do this after seven hours, or nine from his first bloodletting.
But whoever wants to draw blood from his body to the opposite part to which he leans: it is necessary for him to end in the second day, or in the third.
If the body in which there is much blood that is already heated and sharpened, and causes fever, it is necessary to let out a large amount of blood from it in one flow, and to remove a great quantity from it, and to enlarge the opening until it reaches the veins: after you have preserved all the conditions of phlebotomy, and so that your hand is placed on the wound while the blood is flowing, so that death does not occur in place of the veins. For indeed it often happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and through negligence.
And it is not necessary when you wish to solve the arm, and to solve the blood afterward, when already the opening of the vein is closed, and difficult exit of the blood is made, that it be prematurely placed on top of it with force, and cured extended quickly. For that is a great evil, indeed let it go, until the second bleeding.
Or remove with the sharpness of the phlebotomy that has coagulated from the blood in the opening of the vein, and place on it something dissolved salt in water. And place on it something from the Tyrian alfarsch, or sagazenea, and place it with gentle compression, until the blood comes out.
But if indeed the vein has already boiled, then let it go, and do not press it until the abscess is settled.
But if necessity provokes to solve the blood afterward, and there is no excuse, then either with phlebotomy on that place, or in the arm another in another vein.
But the cord of the arm is bled at the place of the Fusca and the Basilica, since they are not found, and are hidden, because it is composed of them.
The quality of this bloodletting is that the sick person should put their hand into warm water until it reddens, and the vein appears clearly.
Then it is tied over it with a bandage of moderate tightness. Then the bloodletting is done according to the transversal direction gradually, not too widely, and not along the length: and let it be a wide opening, and let your bloodletting be on the joint of the hand for a short time.
If the outlet of the blood is forbidden, then repeat putting the hand into warm water, and let the blood flow into the water until you fulfill your need.
But if you are in the days of summer, then you will be excused from repeating putting the hand into warm water. Indeed, the most is placed on the course of the blood in warm water in the time of winter.
And this vein's bloodletting is safer than all other veins, because there is no tender or nerve under it.
The bloodletting of the Saloetel hand's right, is relieving liver ailments.
And the quality of this bloodletting is that you tie the hand with a bandage or with your hand after you put it into warm water until the vein is punctured, and the sensation is very clear. Then the bloodletting by transversing. And if you puncture it completely, it will not harm him in any way.
And preserve, do not put your last hand with the bloodletting. Under it are the nerves of the fingers bare from the flesh.
Then repeat putting the hand into warm water, and let the blood flow into it. For if you do not repeat it in hot water, the blood will coagulate in the opening of the vein and be prevented from flowing.
Therefore, when you have drawn out the necessary amount of blood, then place oil and salt on the vein: so that it does not harden quickly.
And similarly, you should do with every tight branch.
However, the remedy for that phlebotomy from the left hand is: because it is conducive to splenic discomforts: and similarly do in its phlebotomy, as you did in the second one, evenly.
However, the remedy for that phlebotomy from the saphenous veins is: for discomforts that are in the lower part of the body, such as uterine discomforts, retention of menstruation, kidney weaknesses, and old ulcers of the thighs and legs, and similar discomforts.
And the quality of that phlebotomy is: for the infirm to put his foot in hot water: and make friction on him until the veins are full: and tie above the joint of the foot with a bandage. And the veins indeed are at the heel, appearing towards the big toe: and they branch from there into many branches of the foot.
Therefore, bleeding from that larger branch of it, or at the heel in its aggregation: because it is better and safer.
If you bleed from the face of the foot, then beware of the nerves that are under it on the face of the foot.
And place your bleeding where the vein from transudation, as if you wish to pierce it: and let the bleeding be Nesil.
If however the outlet of the blood is prohibited, then repeat the stamping of his foot in warm water: and let the blood flow into it, until it is evacuated.
But if the phlebotomist errs in the first vein, then repeat the phlebotomy to the upper part, for this place is safe, and you should not fear harm from it when you cut the nerves, as we have said.
And likewise with the other Saphena of the foot equally.
But the veins of the Sciatica are, as we have said, located at the heel on the silvery side.
And the relief of this phlebotomy is, to the pain of the heel, when it is due to hot blood.
And the quality of this phlebotomy is, that the sick person should enter a hot bath quickly, and tighten his leg from the side of the heel up to above the heel with four fingers, with a thin long needle: for it does not appear otherwise than because of this.
When therefore it appears, then perform the phlebotomy according to whatever skill is possible for you, or by transversion: and it is better, either to cut it with an incision, or to separate it with a section. For this place is safer, and it is hidden in many people greatly.
For this place is safer, and it is hidden in many people greatly. But if you do not find it, and it does not appear at all to the sense: then perform phlebotomy some branch of it, and that is the one which appears in the back of the foot, and towards the auricular: and beware of the nerves, and let the blood flow out in the amount that you wish.
Then dissolve the bandage, and place the skin on the place of the phlebotomy, and tighten the place. This is easily healed.
Of Ventilation and its Quality
Ventilation is made from horns, air, and glass.
Indeed, ventilation is made in two ways. With incision and extraction of blood: and the other is ventilation without incision.
And this ventilation that is without incision is in two ways. For indeed, it is with fire. Or it is without fire.
And ventilation that is administered with incision and extraction of blood are fourteen locations of the body. Of which one is, Ventilation of the Almonds, and is the last of the head: and Alkehel, and is in the middle of the neck: and ventilation of the Alhagdahim, and are two layers of the neck from two parts at once: and ventilation of the mouth, and is under the jaw in the lower part of the mouth: and ventilation of the two spoons: and ventilation of the Alachosos on the end of the tail: and ventilation of the two foci, and are in the middle of the two arms: and ventilation of the two legs: and ventilation of the two calves.
And ventilation indeed does not draw blood from you from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and therefore its virtue does not fall out of them, as is the case with its effect from phlebotomy. Nor is it necessary that ventilation be administered with fire or without fire in any ailments that arise from overfullness until the whole body is evacuated.
But if necessity provokes ventilation from ailment or for custom, we administer it in every hour at the beginning of the month, at its end, and in the middle of it, and at whatever time it is.
Because there are men who, when the blood multiplies within them, until they need its extraction through ventilation, find a swelling and an ulcer on their head, and they heal it.
And from them is one who finds a swelling and redness on their face, on their head, and on their neck. And from them is one who finds itching on their face, and on their forehead, and darkness, and dimness in their eyes.
And from them is one who itches the place of their ventilation. And from them is one whose laughter multiplies. And from them is one who finds the taste of blood in their mouth: or their tongue swells and they vomit blood. And from them is one whose sleep multiplies. And from them is one who sees in their sleep blood and redness, and dead people, and wounds, and things similar to them.
Therefore, when we see something from them, and if it is truly in the third day of the month: we command then for ventilation to be done, after two or three hours have passed since sunset.
However, the remedy for ventilation of the neck is: because it brings about heaviness in the head, and what is poured out to the eyes. However, it should be after the evacuation of the whole body.
And this is indeed ventilation in the place of cephalic phlebotomy.
And it is not allowed to use it for those who are of cold complexion, or in whom there is a catarrh. For it brings about great harm to them.
And therefore, it is not allowed for the elderly, and in whose head there are cold pains.
Whoever becomes accustomed to it develops a habit of it.
And therefore you should command the Windblower to lay his hand briefly on the lower parts, fearing the generation of habit.
Ventosatio or Alkehel is a place for phlebotomy of the Fusco and Basilic veins, and for that reason it helps with asthma, constriction of breathing, splitting of instruments of breathing, cough, and repletion.
And it should be applied briefly to the Windblower Alkehel, because if it is placed below, it generates weakness in the heart and stomach.
Ventosatio alhagdahim actually helps with accidental headaches, and obtalmias, and hemigraneas, and perforation, and pain in the roots of the teeth: and it is a place for phlebotomy of the Basilic vein.
And you should command the Windblower not to press his hand with scarification: so that he does not cut the artery, and cause bleeding.
Ventosatio however under the chin helps with alcolae in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and similar things from ailments that are in the mouth: and it is a place for phlebotomy of the alieherich veins, which are in the two lips.
Ventosatio however of the spoons helps with alchafacham which is caused by repletion and heat.
Ventosatio however of the interior parts of two focilium helps with the onset of phlebotomy of three veins, Basilic, Fusco, and Cephalic: because it draws blood from all the small veins that are in the flesh: and those small veins draw blood from other grosser veins until the attraction reaches the three veins.
And you should instruct the incisor to not proceed too much in scarification, as the area is exposed to flesh and under it are nerves and arteries.
However, the ventouse that is used on a lancet, applies to hemorrhoids of the anus and lower ulcers.
And you should instruct the incisor to be a large ventouse and made of air, as the area requires strong suction and perhaps delicate ventouses are broken: and it will be scarified with a large scarification.
However, ventouses of the thighs diminish manifestly: as they attract blood from the whole body and apply to old pains in the kidneys, womb, and bladder: provoke menstruation, and apply to bothor and ademenul: and stand in the place of phlebotomy of the two saphenar veins and alhorcobeni.
However, they weaken the body greatly, and cause syncope to occur in many people.
And the benefit of ventouses of alhorcobeni is close to the benefit of ventouses of two thighs.
The quality of the position of ventouses is that you should place a ventouse in the first empty space and suck with tempered suction: and do not prolong the position of ventouses but place them quickly and remove them quickly, so that the humors come to the area evenly: and do not cease to repeat this and continue until you see the area already red and inflated, and the appearance of blood redness: then therefore scarify and repeat suction gradually. Then consider in the positioning of bodies.
For who is from men is of delicate flesh, rarely of pork, it is necessary that you scarify him once, not more: so that the area does not hurt.
And command the Ventosator to enlarge the incision and make it a bit deeper: and regulate the suction in ease, speed, and motion.
If there is a lot of blood, then it is necessary to make two incisions. In the first incision, the path for the thinning and watering of the blood is opened, and in the second incision, the path for the precise extraction of thick blood is prepared.
If indeed the blood is very foul, then a third incision should be made: to reach the end.
And finally, when we want to extract the blood gradually or a little at a time, one incision is sufficient for us. If we want to extract the blood in large amounts, then we make many incisions.
And if we measure the blood to be thick, then it is necessary to make a deep incision: and the limit of equality in the incision is the depth of the skin.
What is that which must be administered from oils at the position of the Ventosators, and what should the ventosator beware of.
In that case where the skin is thick, hard, dark, and the pores are narrow, it is necessary to anoint the places of the Ventosators with oils that are open, softening, and resolving: if it is in the time of summer, as is the oil of alkermes, or the oil of violence, or the oil of sweet almonds, or the oil of cucumber seed.
And if it is in the time of winter, then the oil of narcissus, or the oil of lily, or the oil of camomile, or sarbatin: and similar ones.
If indeed the excess is thick and cold, then the oil should be myrrh oil, or oil of balsam, or white oil, or oil of wormwood: and their likes.
If indeed the pores are wide and of tender flesh, then it is necessary to prohibit the use of oil, and it is necessary for them to wash the locations of the pores after ventosation with rosewater, or with cold water, or with water of solace, or with water of cucumber, or with water of purslane: and their likes.
But he whose blood is much moisture, he should wash the pores with vinegar, or with water of myrtle and sumach: and their likes.
But he whose excesses are thick, he should wash his pores with old wine, or with water of sambucus, or with the decoction of wormwood, or with chamomile: and their likes.
And it is necessary to avoid ventosation in the bath, or at the edge of the bath, indeed it is necessary to administer after exiting the bath for an hour, or for two hours.
And it is not necessary for someone to sleep after ventosation.
What is it that one should be regulated with before ventosation, or bleeding?
And then, after that, you should first consider: if the one who has been ventosated or bled is choleric, and they have sharpness and inflammation on their blood: then it is necessary for him to receive cooling things, such as pomegranate museum: and also every evening with vinegar and lettuce, and secaniabin, and julep: and their likes.
And he should put his food, chickens, and meat of sekebiget, and foods preserved with aspresta: and their likes.
And if its constitution is cold, it is necessary for it to drink a syrup made from honey, or almonds, or seacanibin made from seeds: and it should drink an aromatic wine, which is between old and new: and it is advised to use little food. And let its food be chickens, and honeywine: and sparrows, that is, small birds: and it will eat the young of doves.
And it is necessary that its drink on the days of ventilation and phlebotomy be more than its food: and it is necessary to give in the drink to certain men in hours tyrian alfaroch, or a medicine made from musk, that is, musk, or aleselithe before ventilation: and before phlebotomy, or after: so that the principal limbs are strengthened, and the blood is thinned. And it is not necessary for them to drink hot water.
¶ On Venting without Scarring Venting without Scarring, however, are those that are placed on the side, and spleen, and podagra, and on the belly, umbilicum, and the locations of the kidneys, and the hips: because these limbs do not suffer scarring on them.
And nothing is sought through them, except for the attraction of blood from a limb to a limb: as we place Venting on the breasts in illness of bloody discharge from the nose. And we use them to dissolve from the limb cold ventilation that has been frozen in the limb: as we place Venting on the belly, and umbilicum. For it does indeed rarefy the limb, and warms it, and removes pain because it has dissolved that ventilation.
Even a bandage is placed on the kidneys when it occurs there swelling, or stone. For its own sake of attraction perhaps opens swelling, or removes the stone from its place.
And similarly it does when it is placed on the spleen, and the spleen to be rubbed in both of them.
And these empty ventosities are administered with section alone. And sometimes they are administered with fire.
And sometimes they are administered full of warm water in pleurisy: and that is, to fill the ventosity, and it is great, hot water alone, or water in which cooked are herbs that agree.
FORM OF VENTOSIITY ADMINISTERED WITH FIRE.
LET THE WIDTH OF ITS MOUTH BE TWO OPENED FINGERWIDTHS, ACCORDING TO WHAT WE FORMED: AND LET ITS QUANTITY IN DEEP BE HALF A PALM: AND LET IT BE IN SIDE OF IT IN PLACE WHICH IS AROUND MEDIUM OF IT, A SMALL HOLE, ACCORDING TO QUANTITY THAT ENTERS ITSELF ACUS: MAKE FROM AIR SIMULTANEOUSLY, OR YELLOW, MARGIN OF ROUGH, LENGTHENED, EQUAL, WASHED: THAT NOT HURT MEMBER AT ITS POSITION ON IT: AND LET BE IN MIDDLE OF IT TRANSVERSE STICK FROM AIR, OR IRON, WHERE PLACE IS CANDELA WITH FIRE.
AND NOW THIS VENTOSIITY IS MADE GREAT, GREATER THAN WE TOLD, AND LITTLE LESS THAT ONE, ACCORDING TO ITS AILMENT AND AGE WHO USES.
FOR VENTOSIITIES OF BOYS, AND WEAKENED ARE OTHERS, THAN VENTOSIITIES OF MEN, AND ROUGH BODIES.
BUT THE QUALITY OF PLACING THIS VENTOSIITY WITH FIRE ON MEMBER IS, THAT ACCEND LICINIUM WITH FIRE FROM LINEN DECENTLY, OR SMALL CANDLE FROM CLAY: AND PUT IT OVER MIDDLE OF TRANSVERSE STICK WHICH IS IN MIDDLE OF VENTOSIITY: THAT BE ACCENSED FIRE ABOUT LOWER PART OF VENTOSIITY, THAT NOT BURN BODY WEAK.
Then place it on the limb: and let the finger be on the hole that I mentioned, until when we grasp the puffy part: while we lack, we remove the finger, and the steam comes out through that hole, and the puffy part is dissolved immediately.
Then apply the lime according to its usual method, and repeat it if you lack that.
However, in the puffy part that is administered in the pain of pleurisy with water, it is not a knife that passes through, nor a hole: and it is not administered, unless because the water is filled, and it is placed on the limb only.
And this is its form.
And this puffy part, the greater it is, so that it can hold much water, is better.
¶ On the suspension of Sanguisugarum.
Sanguisugarum are not administered in many places, unless in those limbs in which the position of the puffy parts is not possible, due to their size, such as the lip, and the jaw, and the like. Or in a limb stripped of flesh, such as the finger, and the nose, and the like.
And the quality of using them is: that from the puffy parts that are in sweet waters, clean from putrefaction.
Then they are released during the day and night in sweet water, until they are hungry, and there remains nothing in their stomach. Then the body is purged in the first place with phlebotomy, and with puffy parts. Then clean the limb of the sick person, until it reddens. Then they are placed on top of it.
When therefore they are filled, and fall, and it is possible to suck the place with puffy parts, then it is more final in the cure: and if not, then wash the place with vinegar. Then, with much water, it is rubbed and squeezed out.
If the course of the blood is prolonged after the amputation of the Sanguisugar, and there is dripping: then pour cold linen cloth into water and place it above, until the dripping is removed.
If the blood multiplies, then powder is sprinkled on top of it, such as Zigi crushed, or galbanum, and similar things from stoptics: until the blood is removed.
Or they are placed on the place of the cut open beans: and they are let go, until the beans stick in the place, because the blood is removed.
And it is necessary if it is necessary to repeat the amputation of the Sanguisugar, when it is possible, to change them.
But if the Sanguisugar are prevented from hanging, then the place is cleaned with fresh blood. Or a plug is placed in the places, until something comes out of the blood. Then they are placed, because they themselves when they feel something from the blood, stick immediately.
When therefore you want them to fall, powder is sprinkled on top of them something from crushed aloe, or salt, or ashes: and they fall immediately.
This chapter is also often necessary in the art of medicine, and it is the restoration of fractures, and dislocations of accidents in bones.
Know, O sons, that fools of doctors and the common people, and those who have never examined an ancient book, nor read a letter from it.
For this reason, this method is lacking among our earthly sciences. And I never used it well at all, and I did not obtain from it that which I have obtained except for the length of reading ancient books, and the study beyond understanding them, until I extracted knowledge of it from them.
Then I adhered to experiment and study throughout the course of my life.
And now I have described to you from that in this Chapter all that contains my knowledge: and over which my experiment passed, after I had abbreviated it for you, and released it from the occupation of length, and abbreviated it at the end of abbreviation, and showed it at the end of declination: and I formed in it many forms from the forms of instruments which are administered in it, since it is from the addition of declination, as I did in two preceding Chapters.
Chapter 2.
It is necessary for us to say in the prologue of this Chapter, summaries of speech and chapters, concerning which understanding is required by the first craftsman at the station of their truth: namely that you, and those who are prompt, know or learn this noble art, and others from us.
I say, therefore, that when it happens to someone a fracture or dislocation or twist or accident: then one must hurry in the first place to bleed him and to resolve him himself, or both at once: unless something prevents, such as weakness of strength: or he is one to whom something happens from those boys, or old men decrepit: or it is a time of very great heat, or very great cold.
Then he should be content with his food, consisting of cool herbs, and meat of birds and lambs: and prohibit wine, and coarse meat, and filling up with food and all food that fills the veins with blood. Until when he is secure from the abscess hot, and does not fear the outflow of matter to the member: then the sick person should return to his first diet with which he was accustomed to his custom.
Therefore when he begins to restore his broken jaw, then the sick person should be fed with nutritious food, much, coarse, heavy, in which there is viscosity: such as made from cooked wheat with water, and rice, and heads, and feet, and bellies of animals, and eggs, and fresh fish: and thick wine, and similar to them. For this diet makes the healing of the broken jaw faster and better.
And you should know that when bones are broken in men who are in their first old age, and the decrepit, it is not possible for them to be continued and consolidated according to their natural way always, because of the dryness of their members: and they are consolidated and continued what is from them in the end of lenity, as the bones of small children.
However nature connects something similar to glue on the broken jaw from every part, in which there is thickness, so that it sticks and binds it, until they are continued together, and tied together, until it comes to the end of strength and firmness, as it was in the first place, until something does not prohibit it from its operations: and for this reason it is necessary, that you put food of the sick person, in which there is heaviness, and viscosity, and thickness, as we said.
And know that the appearance of fractures varies according to the diversity of the limbs, for a fracture of the thigh is different from a fracture of the skull, and a fracture of the ribs is different from a fracture of the spine, and similarly all other limbs differ one from another, and I come with remembrance of all kinds of fractures exposed in their respective chapters distinct from one another. The appearance of fractures also varies within themselves.
For it is broken in an arc shape, besides what happens to it in the stars. And sometimes it is broken along the length of the bone, and its fractures are like stars and additions proceeding, as they are in a reed when it is fitted with a knife for writing. And not proceeding, and there is a fracture with a wound and disruption at the head, and there is a small fracture.
And there is a proper skill or instrument for every kind of fracture, according to which the remembrance of it will come, distinct in its places.
And from the fact that a fracture of a bone is known, there is its curvature and its prominence, and its appearance to the senses, and its sound when you grasp it with your hand.
When therefore there is no curvature appearing in its place, nor sound when you touch the bone with agitation, and you do not find a great weak pain, then it is not a fracture, but possible that there is a curvature or small fracture. Therefore, you should not move it with your hand and compress it at all, indeed put on it from medicines of which the remembrance comes after the moment that suits its place: then it is bound tightly with a thin bandage.
And know that when the wound is incised, it is divided into two parts, besides which certain signs may occur in it; however, all part of it should be removed: then you must begin to correct it from your own hour, equalizing it before it becomes hot and inflamed.
But if an inflammation occurs in it, then leave it for several days until the inflammation subsides. Then equalize it according to any possible manner from lenity and skill.
And know that the restoration of it and its equalization is easier than bone, in which certain signs may occur.
Then bind it, according to what will come to your memory of it.
But if the signs are in bone, then extension of this broken member from two parts is necessary, if the hand is, or the foot: or with your hand, if the member is small: or with two ropes, or with a rope and your hand.
And your position should be where you place the member on an equal place, according to its natural shape, until when the parts of the broken member are extended: then try to make those additions with all skill, and in any manner you can in their places: and beware according to your strength, that pain or injury does not occur from your operation, and try according to your strength, to apply one of two bones with its joint, according to better shapes.
And at that hour, you must try and touch it with your hand. But if you see something different there, correct it, and equalize it by the quantity of your skill.
And beware of violent extension and strong compression, as many fools do. For many often occur as a result of their operation, an abscess causing heat, or contraction in a limb: as we have already seen from their operations many times.
Then after the equation, and a proper operation, and the contraction of that limb, and quietness, and tranquility: and advise the sick one over it. And make him take care, not to move himself at his own watchful hours, and during his sleep, and his awakening, and his agitation, and his excretion, and all his movements with his last power. And that he may take care, not to be in a position of the limb which follows pain. Which is, because when he feels pain in the position of the limb, or injury: then it is necessary to change him to a different position from that with which he does not feel pain.
And take care with him, that his position be that one equal, straight: so that no curvature may occur in the limb when restored.
And the quality of the contraction of the broken limb is, as I tell.
Know that limbs broken vary in their size, and their magnitude, and their form.
Which therefore from them are small, such as the arm, and the finger, and the phalanx, and similar to them, then it is necessary to be a covering of soft cloth, fine. Which however from them are large, such as the hip, and the leg, then it is necessary to be a covering of wide, hard.
Because the broad ligament connects the large limb, and binds it from all parts of the contraction equal, so that it does not enter it spot.
Then after your evacuation, begin to place the suitable liniment on it, in soft wool on the place of the fracture itself. Then begin to wrap the ligament over the place of the fracture with three or four folds, according to what the member requires: and press your hand slightly against the ligament.
Then go with him to the upper part from the place of the fracture, and press less than the pressure you used to press the broken place. Then stretch yourself with the fold from the place of the fracture slightly, and soften the pressure gradually until you take a large piece from the healthy place.
Then take another clean piece of cloth and wrap it again over the place of the fracture with folds. Afterwards go with the fold to the lower part from the fracture. And your operation should be in the pressure of the fold and its softening, as we said in the first fold above.
Then place between the folds a soft wool or cloth with which the crookedness of the fracture will be equal if there is crookedness in it: and if not, you will not put anything on it.
Then wrap another clean piece of cloth over it. Afterwards balance the well-made small stars on top of the folds immediately, if there is no inflation in the place, nor hot abscess.
But if there is inflation or abscess in it, then place on top of it what sits that abscess and removes the inflation: and let it be left for several days. Then press the stars on top of it then.
And the stars should be made from the middle of a wide cane, smoothed, wisely formed: or from the wood from which cribbas are made, that is made from pine, or gerard, that is, branches of palm, or calingi: and the size of all the stars should be according to this form, and this same figure.
However, it is necessary that the nipple placed on the incision should be slightly larger and wider than the other nipples, and its length should be according to the size and strength of the limb.
Then tie another thread on top of the nipple, according to the first tightness. Then tie it with threads from above, as we mentioned about the tightness, and it is that your tightness should be longer over the fracture site, and the farther it is from the fracture, the looser the tightness.
And it is necessary that the threads should be of medium thickness and softness, and made of soft linen.
For if the threads are thick, as I saw from the operations of foolish people who used twisted linen threads, it is a great mistake, because the tightness falls away from them in quality.
And thin threads do not hold again, because you will not catch with the tightness that which you wish.
And it is not necessary that there should be less than a finger's width between the nipples.
If the weak person is harmed by the ends of the nipples after the tightness in healthy places, then place under them a soft wool or carminative wool until nothing is harmed from it.
But when there is a fracture with a wound, and disruption in the skin occurs, I will come again with a remembrance of it in the chapter according to its singularity.
And you should know that not every broken limb needs to be tied with nipples from the first day. That is, because the limb when it is large, should not have nipples placed on top of it, unless after five days, or seven, or more, according to your safety from the event of hot abscesses.
This is the method of applying plasters that the ancients used for healing fractures and dislocations.
The common method of applying a plaster for healing fractures, suitable for many body types, especially women and children, as it is made from a material that does not burn or freeze.
And it is made from the dust of a millstone, which is the fine powder that clings to the walls of the millstone near the moving millstone. You should make it as it is, except for adding some crumbs and the white of an egg. Then place the mixture on the injured area, not too thick or too thin. Then use this plaster.
Another method of applying a plaster for healing fractures, dislocations, and twists. Recipe the following ingredients and grind them: myrrh, laudanum, acacia, enulae, and mugath. Then add equal parts of water and alethil, and grind and mix everything together with alethil water, or with the white of an egg if the patient's body type is weak and prone to heat. Then use this plaster. This plaster has a good composition and heals broken bones quickly and is suitable for many people.
Another method of applying a plaster that also helps with fractures and twists. Recipe the following ingredients and grind them thoroughly: mugath, laudanum, white aloes, myrrh, acacia, and Armenian powder. Then grind and mix everything together with water or the white of an egg, and administer it.
This method of applying a plaster is used for joining bones that have been separated from their original positions, and it soothes the pain caused by the separation of bones, as well as the cut or fracture. The wool is cut, and immersed in vinegar and heated oil, and then placed on a surface.
However, this plaster does not have the power of restoration, but it is good for sedating hot abscesses and expelling pain appropriately.
The method of the plaster that restores a broken jaw. Take the leaves of a silent fig and the leaves of a wild papyrus, and grind all of them, and make a plaster from both.
The method of the shortened plaster, applied for the restoration of a broken bone: and when you want the resolution of the remaining abscess. Take the root of tall althea, and chamomile, and the flowers of wolfberry, and the flour of herb, one equal part of each: grind all of them, and make it into a plaster with wine, if there is no heated limb.
But if indeed it is heated, then make it into a plaster with water of coriander, or with water, and use it.
Another method of the plaster for stronger resolution than this first one, when an hard abscess occurs during the restoration of a limb. Take the root of tall althea, and the seeds of linseed, and balm, and melilot, and sage, and the flowers of wolfberry, and chamomile, one equal part of each: grind all of them, and make it into a plaster with water of willow, or with sweet water, or with wine. All of that according to the heat of the limb, and the quietness of its warmth.
Hippocrates indeed did not say in his book that it should be placed on the broken limb during its restoration, unless it is a bandage made of clay and oil: nothing else: and he said that it should be a medium between thickness and thinness.
According to Galen, it is advisable to place on a broken limb during its restoration those things in which there is a loss of heat, such as myrrh, aloes, and frankincense, and similar substances from among those we have mentioned.
The method of making a plaster that promotes healing and relieves pain. Recipe for making a plaster using equal parts of lupine and chickpea flour, human hair from the incisors, or bird feathers, and salt: grind them together, sieve them, and make a plaster from it.
However, the amount of plaster that should be used is such that it can remain on the bandage without causing pain or itching to the patient, and without moving the broken bone from its place: if this does not happen, do not remove the bandage for many days. If, however, it happens that he has severe itching or pain, or inflammation: then hurry and dissolve the bandage in the hour, and remove the plaster from him: and take a soft cloth or a marine sponge, wet and warm, and dip it in warm water, and wash that place with it until the itching stops and the pain subsides.
If, however, it happens that he has severe itching or pain, or inflammation: then hurry and dissolve the bandage in the hour, and remove the plaster from him: and take a soft cloth or a marine sponge, wet and warm, and dip it in warm water, and wash that place with it until the itching stops and the pain subsides. Then let the limb rest for one hour. Then place on it a piece of dry wool soaked in vinegar and oil, or rose oil: and bandage it overnight, until you are sure that there is no hot abscess, and the inflammation of the limb subsides, and the pain is removed.
Then repeat this tightly and with a small amount of plaster: and do not bandage it with your first tightness and thin strips until it is healed.
If you see that the abscess, redness, pain, inflammation, and all other symptoms have disappeared completely, and you need plaster and bandage, then repeat it as you did at first, evenly.
If something does not happen to a member within the things we mentioned, then you should not remove it unless after three days, or four, or five, or seven. And when it is released after twenty days, according to what appears to you from the removal of the member, as we said, until when the fracture sticks and the coagulation of flesh approaches over it: also add then in the constriction more than your first constriction: and also add in the thickening of the food for the weak, according to what preceded the remembrance of it.
But if you see the place of the fracture already dried up and thinned out more than it should be: then you know that nourishment is prevented from reaching it. Therefore apply it with warm water at every place where you are removing it, and let it be in all three days, and relieve the constriction a little.
Therefore through this operation nourishment reaches the member, and it heals quickly.
But that which the foolish restorers do from the fracture of the member, when it is not restored in the first place according to what it should be, and is restored according to its twist: is an error from their operation, and great fear: and if it were right, they would have said that in their books, and operated with it.
And I did not see any trace of them at all in that: and it is better that it not be done.
¶ On the making of an accidental wound on the head.
The species of fractures are diverse, and their forms are many: and their causes are distinct.
For from a fracture is that which is made by impact with a knife: and the impact removes the whole bone until it reaches the siphac, which is under the bone, just as it does in wood: and because of this this species of fracture is called Axial.
If the knife cuts into a bone and cuts its surface, but does not penetrate to its deepest part, this is called a "Kalaan" fracture, which means an absolute fracture.
And there are two types of wounds from fractures, either major or minor.
From a fracture, there is a type of injury called "contrition" or "attrition," and its cause is being struck by a stone, falling on a stone, or something similar.
This type of fracture is also "penetrating," which approaches the periosteum, which is under the bone, or is on the surface of the bone: and this wound of these two types of fractures is also either minor or major.
From a fracture, there is also a type of injury that is hidden within the bone in its fineness of hair-like structure: and it is a small fissure, and because of this, this type of fracture is called "Capillary.
From these, there is also a type of fracture that occurs by chance, or by being struck by a stone, and similar things that cause the lamina of the bone to enter its interior, and a depression is formed in that place, as happens to copper pots when they are struck, and part of them enters their interior.
This happens most frequently in the heads of moist bones, such as the heads of children's bones.
All these types of fractures have separate signs of displacement, and I will return with a reminder of all of them in their place.
We recognize all these types of fractures by examining them and inquiring about them, and removing the corrupted flesh that is on them.
The "Capillary" type of fracture is recognized by this, that it is scraped over the bone, and cleaned, and smeared with caustic on top of it, for the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of fractures, first consider the accidents of the infirm person: then, if you see from these accidents that it indicates a clear meaning above fear, such as vomiting of cholera, extension, loss of understanding, loss of voice, syncope, acute fever, and egression of the eyes, and redness of them, and similar things to these from the accidents in many arrangements, certainly not healed: and if you see accidents that do not frighten you, and hope for salvation, then begin his cure.
That is, if he comes to you wounded in the first place when he is wounded: and this is in winter days, then it is necessary for you to strive in the removal of the bone before the fourteenth day according to every arrangement.
And if it is in summer days, then it is necessary for you to hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, before that which is under the bone from the cloth rots, and those accidents happen that we have mentioned.
That is, if the fracture of the bone has already reached the cloth touching the brain, and it is small, and attracted: then it is necessary for you to cut off the part that is broken, and worn away, according to what I tell you.
And it is, to scrape the head of the wounded one: and to uncover the bone as much as possible for you: and according to the shape of the wound, and what is light on the infirm.
That is, if it happens to you at the detection of the bone bleeding blood, or hot abscess: then place it with what is necessary for it. And it is, to fill the place with soaked cloths in wine, and rose oil: and make the wound rest, until the abscess sets, and you are secure from bleeding blood. Then begin with the treatment of the bone and its removal.
And this is done according to one of two methods.
One method indeed is to cut the bone with a sharp-edged incisor: and this is its form.
Another method is to administer another incisor after the first one, a bit wider: and this is its form.
Then also administer another incisor even wider than the second.
The second method is to have a number of different incisors with you, some of which are wider in certain places, and some of which are shorter in certain places: and they should be sharp at the ends of their teeth, and made of iron or bone: and use ease in striking on the incisor, so that it does not shake the head, and does not hurt it.
If however the bone is strong and hard: then it is necessary to make holes around it before you administer incisors, with drills which are called Terebra not penetrating deeply: and they are not so called unless because they do not pass through the end of the fleshy part to that which is after it: therefore, because the Terebro is a round end above it, which is under the sharp head, similar to the edge, and a small circle prevents sinking and passing through the density of the bone.
And it is fitting for you to take from these drills a number of them, each of which fits the thickness of the bone, until you have all the drills present with you: whose sharp end in length and breadth should be according to the thickness of that skull.
And this is the form of three kinds of drills, or trephines.
The quality of drilling around the broken bone is: to place the drill on the bone, and turn it with your fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated. Then exchange the broach to another location, and place it between all the holes according to the thickness of the radius, or approximately that.
Then cut with the incisors what is between all the holes from the bone: and make it as thin as possible above that from the fine edge, as we said, until you remove the roots of the bone, or by your hand, or with some other instruments which you prepared for that: such as thin scissors and forceps.
And it is necessary to guard against the pits in every precaution, lest the broach or incisors touch anything from them.
When therefore you are drilling around the bone and it has been separated from the pits, if it is continuous with it, and you have removed it, it is necessary to scrape, and make equal the end of it that remains in the bone with another instrument similar to an incisor. But it must be thinner and more delicate than other incisors.
If there remains anything small from the bones and shavings: then take them with ease, with that which is at hand from your instruments. Then care for the wound after that with liniments, and ointments which we said.
And another method of operation is easy, completely far from fear: which he said Galen, and praised it greatly: and this is his word. It is necessary for you in the first place to begin to uncover a part of the bone from the place where the fracture is more and clearer: until when you have uncovered that part, and placed the end of this lenticular incisor under it, whose this is the form.
And the lenticular part does not cut anything: and the sharp part on both sides of it wandering in its length, as you see: so that the lenticular part is hanging over the pits, with its face facing the sharp part in the bone.
Then strike with a small mallet on one side of the Incisorium until you have cut through the entire bone with ease, as it is rolled back. And be secure from the cloth that nothing accidental may happen to it, which you fear entirely.
And if the physician were not more foolish than men and more ignorant of it, nor were he sleeping, then if anything remained attached to the bone from the cloth in certain places, he would cut it off from him with the extremity of the lens-shaped incisor, and free it from him with ease. For it is freed from him without harm, and without fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate to the cloth, and that which is cut off from the bone is its face, and there remains in it roughness and subtle thorns: then it is necessary to scrape away that roughness, and uproot those thorns with fine rasps of which you have prepared a variety of sizes, so that it may be possible for you to administer in every suitable place more and better of them, and more and better of their own kind, according to what leads you to the operation, and the fractured bone, and its shape. And it is necessary for you to administer in your own ratio, by which in the first place you cut the bone, more widely of those rasps. Then use after it with finer ones.
And it is necessary for you to administer in your own ratio, by which in the first place you cut the bone, more widely of those rasps. Then use after it with finer ones. And do not cease to do that according to its continuity, until you reach administering thinner and more subtle of all.
In each of the remaining cracks, wounds, and fine fractures, it is necessary for you to administer care, according to what leads to its correction.
And there is a matter which does not remain hidden on all, in this art, and it has stood above that which we wrote and showed in the case of great fractures.
If, however, the bandage is detected and retained when removing the bone: then it is necessary for you to take a cloth of linen, according to the size of the wound, and dip it in rose oil, and place it on top of the wound opening. Then take another cloth doubled or tripled, and dip it in wine and rose oil, and place it on top of the first cloth: and make it as light as possible on top of it, so that it does not weigh heavily.
Then administer the wide bandage above it: and do not tie it, unless by the amount that holds the wound only: and leave it with this care on one day or two days, until you are sure of no hot abscess. Then dissolve it, and administer the following remedies with which there is excessive dryness: such as lily roots, and herb flour, and frankincense powder, and aristolochia, and similar to them: and it is that you make from these remedies a powder, which will be sprinkled on the wound as dry.
And universally administer all the remedy of its property to cleanse and not to bite. And beware according to your skill, that the wound in your treatment is clean: neither is there in it grease of ointment, nor dirtiness.
And beware according to your skill, that the wound in your treatment is clean: neither is there in it grease of ointment, nor dirtiness. Nor dismiss the virus to accumulate in it at all: for when the virus accumulates on the bandage of the brain, it corrupts it, and rots it, and a great evil occurs after that on the weak one: and already it has happened in the head, when it is cleaned by it, especially when its care is neglected, blackness on its surface.
Therefore consider then, if such accidents happen to the weak one as we have said, you know that it is certainly dangerous.
If the blackness does not occur except from the medicine that is placed upon it and is in the power of that medicine to cause that blackness, then it is necessary for you to take a part of honey, three parts of rose oil, and linen cloth with them. Then place it upon the siphac: afterwards, care for it with the species of healing that come together, until it is healed.
¶ On the Restoration of the Nose when it is Broken.
You know that the nose is not broken except from its two upper parts at once, or one of them, because it is two bones: therefore, since the lower part of it is cartilaginous, it is not broken, and only attrition, twisting, and swelling happen to it.
If one of the two parts of it is broken, then it is necessary for you to insert a small finger into the nostril, and make equal that fracture with your index finger and thumb, until the nose returns to its natural form: and do this with skill and ease. And beware, lest pain occur from your operation upon it.
If the fracture is in the upper part of the nose, and does not reach your finger: then it is necessary for you to make equal the end of the radius, where there is a small swelling.
If indeed the fracture is in two parts, then do the same as that: and hasten with the restoration of it on the first day after the fracture, if it is possible. And if not, then on the seventh or tenth day, at the warm baths of pus,
Then insert into the end of the nose a linen cloth, if the fracture is in one part: or insert two linen cloths if the fracture is in two parts: and let the swelling be of such quantity that it fills the nostril.
Certain ancient healers said that linseed should be infused in butter and changed every day. However, I do not see that it is necessary to infuse linseed in butter, but rather with lime in the form of powdered millstone. Then dismiss the linseed until the bone hardens and the cartilage becomes firm.
And sometimes a goose feather is inserted into the place of linseed in the nose, after it has been covered with a soft cloth: so that it holds the broken nose more firmly and does not prevent the weak one from breathing.
This is not a necessary matter. If you wish, do this; and if you wish, make linseed.
If it happens again to the nose while you are operating on the abscess, apply warm plasters of nasal ointment with lime, or with cotton soaked in rose oil, or with a little diaqualon.
But if the abscess does not occur again while you are operating on the hot swelling, then it is necessary to apply plasters of flour of sissam with powdered turpentine and lime in butter. Then place a soft cloth on it, and do not bandage the nose at all.
But if the bones of the broken nose are crushed or broken into small pieces, then it is necessary to split them and remove them with the instruments that are suitable for them. Then sew the cut, and care for it with what heals and consolidates it from suitable plasters or ointments.
But if a wound occurs between the nose and the bone, then it is necessary to care for it with linseed: and administer a lead tube until it heals.
Concerning the restoration of the lower jaw when it is broken.
When the lower jaw is fractured and the fracture is not accompanied by a wound, observe if the fracture is only deformed and not broken into two pieces, and if it can be treated internally: then the diagnosis is easy.
Therefore, if the fracture is in the right jaw, insert the index finger of your left hand into the weak bone: similarly, if the fracture is in the left jaw, then insert the index finger of your right hand: and push with it the roughness of the fracture from inside to outside with your other hand from the inner part of the bone properly, and with it make it even.
If the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two pieces, then it is necessary to apply extension from both parts, according to straightness: until it is possible to make an evening.
But if it has already happened that the teeth are displaced or broken, then tie them with thread made of gold, silver, or wool. Then place a bandage over the fractured jaw. Then place over it a double layer of cloth, and place on the cloth a large star-shaped piece of skin evenly, in the length of the jaw.
Then tie it from above, according to how the ligature is prepared for you and its application fits, until it is not destroyed: and order the weak one to use it with tranquility and quiet: and place its sucking on soft food.
But if you think that something is already changing the shape in some ways: then hurry, and dissolve it on the third day. Then correct what has been changed from it, and make plasters of it from the flour of the mill, with egg white, or with semolina, after you have removed the bandage: and place a soft cloth over the plaster.
While the adhesive plaster remains attached to it and the bone's position is not altered, let it go, do not tear it off, until it heals: or bind the fracture. For often this fracture is bound up for three weeks.
If however meanwhile an hot abscess occurs, then administer what we said should be often given for its sedatio until that abscess is removed.
And if the fracture is with a wound, consider. Now the fragment is already separated from the bone, or from the splint: then carefully take out that fragment of the splint with it which suits you in its removal from the instruments.
But if however the wound's opening is narrow, then enlarge it with a lancet according to the amount of your need.
Then when you have removed that splint, and there remains none of it, then close the wound's opening, if it is large: and if not, place on it from the plasters which suit it, and cover it, until it heals.
¶ On the restoration of the Clavicle, when it is broken.
The clavicle is indeed most often broken from its anterior part on the side of the arm, and its fracture occurs in two ways.
For indeed it is broken and separated into two, except that some splints happen to be in it: and it is easier for its restoration.
Or thus, that some happen to be in the bone of the splints: and it is more difficult for its restoration.
Or thus, that it is a fracture with a wound.
And the operation in it when the fracture is without a wound, is that you make present two assistants, so that one of them holds the instrument following the broken clavicle, and the other extends the neck towards the side.
Then make the fracture of your fingers equal, until it becomes its form, according to what is necessary: and there should not be any projection or hollowness in it.
If you need more extension, then you should place under the infirm sphere a ball of cloth or wool: and its size should be according to your need: and extend, and raise the hook, and cut the sphere with your hand, until it becomes equal to the fracture, according to what is necessary.
If you cannot pull the end of the hook to the outside: because it reaches deep: then you should bend the infirm person on their shoulder: and place a pillow medium in size under their arm, and press their arm downwards, until the hook is raised that is in the depth upwards: and then correct the fracture, and make it equal with your fingers.
If however you feel splintering from the hook, and it moves: then you should chip over it, and extract the splintered part with ease.
If however it is stuck in the bone, then use your skill in the incision of it with one of the prepared incisors, after you have placed under the hook the instrument that will hold the splinter: and this is an instrument made of wood, or of iron. And this is its form.
It resembles a spiral that does not have a hollowness.
And its width should be according to what you need from the size and shape of the bone. Its length indeed also according to what is possible for you in the operation.
And it should have two ends, as you see: and one end should be wide, and the other narrow.
If, however, the disruption of the wound that you cut when extracting the splinter of bone is wide, and you secure yourself from suppuration by heat: then bring together the two lips of the wound with a suture.
And if the disruption is small, or you fear suppuration by heat: then fill the wound with cloth and cotton according to the amount of the wound's cut.
If, however, suppuration by heat occurs, then pour cloth with rose oil, vinegar, and wine, and place it on top of it.
The bandaging of bone when there is no wound and no cut is, to place on the bone a plaster made from flour of molding with animal glue. And place a soft cloth on top of it. Then place a sphere under its tongue, if you need it. Then take a reed, that is, a stick which the Saracens hold, which is long and large: and its width should be that of one palm or about that. Then place a doubled cloth on top of the plaster. Then take a small board from a thin one, whose width is that of three fingers, and in length similarly. Then wrap it in cloth. Then wrap the cloth with the small board in the place where the reed falls on the fracture and the place. Then place the reed on the fracture as it is rolled, and wrap it around his neck, and under the healthy tongue and under the sick tongue: and reduce it over all parts, and how you see that the bandaging holds the fracture properly: and this is what should not be hidden from you, and all of it, so that the small board is not removed above the broken bone. And for this reason, you should examine the sick person every day. When the ligament is softened and you see the star already moving: then correct it and tighten the ligament.
Then place the sick person's sleep on his back, and place a small pillow under his chin during his sleep, so that his support can be raised from his side. Therefore, the fracture of the furcula is raised by elevation of the arm.
Or bind the arm to his neck: and do not release the ligament if it does not occur in the place of accident from itching, or from abscess, until the twelfth day.
Then renew the plaster if you see his face towards it. And add in the stricture, and let him go until he is restored and coagulated.
And the fracture of the furcula is tightened and strengthened as much as possible in twenty-eight days: and sometimes it happens in some people in less than that.
¶ On the restoration of the fracture of the Spatula.
The spatula rarely breaks, and in the wide place of it: and they are not broken from it except its margins.
When therefore it is broken from that place, and broken in the middle of it, and is not known except by touch: then according to what is the figure of the fracture attempt preparation of it. And reduce it to the natural shape in every way by your skill, which is possible for you.
Then place on the place of dust from the mill with white chalk, and woolen cloth, and put a small pillow on top of doubled cloth. Then place a wide flat dish on top of it according to the quantity of the thin plate, or slightly larger than that.
Indeed, if there is a hollow in any part of the thin plate under the dish, then fill that hollow with soft cotton until the dish descends evenly.
Then tie it up from above with a long rope, with proper tension and strength of the dish, until it is not moved from its place.
And consider the rope every day. Whenever the rope becomes soft, tie it again, and if the dish is moved from its place, let the weak side lie on the healthy side.
The thin plate, however, will be restored in twenty days or in twenty-five days.
When this number is completed, then untie the rope: and you will be in safety. For it is from bones whose union should not be feared nor their dissolution.
But if a bone fragment proceeds and punctures under the skin: then cut above it, and remove it. And do what we said about the fracture of the rump from the suppression of abscesses with warm compresses if something happens from it.
Paragraph: On the Restoration of a Fractured Chest.
The chest sometimes breaks in the middle of it, and this rarely happens. Its extremities are broken and crushed most often due to accidents.
When its middle is broken, which leans to the lower parts, and pain and difficulty in breathing, and cough occur, and perhaps vomit blood, and the hollow in the fractured bone is not hidden from sensation, its restoration is that it should be bent weakly on its back: and place between the thin plates a pillow.
Then press his shoulders and gather the ribs from both sides with your hands: and thin them out in their plane, as much as possible and as it is suitable, until they return to the shape of the bone, according to what is required.
Then place a plaster and bandage on him, and place an asterisk above it from a thin board of willow or cherry wood, and similar ones in lightness, after you have wrapped it in cloth. Then thin out the bandage that is tied over the broken jaw, so that it does not move: and go with the bandage according to its roundness towards the back several times, and tighten it with a proper binding.
Then consider the bandage every hour, and whenever it becomes soft, tighten it: and if necessity provokes its dissolution at a sore, or corrosion that happens in the place, or pain, or abscess: then hasten, and dissolve it, and remove the plaster, and correct what has happened with the mode of its cure.
Then reduce the plaster, if you see it to that face: and attach it to a bandage, until it is healed.
¶ On the restoration of the ribs, when they are broken.
Know that the fracture of the ribs does not occur except in places that follow the back and from the ends of them from the front part. And they do not break except for this reason, because they are cartilaginous. And the knowledge of it is not hidden from the sense with the fingers in examination.
And its restoration is made so that the fracture with the fingers in a possible way, until it is equal to the figure, according to what is required. Then apply plasters and bind a fractured jaw with splints, if necessary.
And if the fracture of the ribs is inclined towards the interior: then it happens that the patient experiences severe pain and puncture, as that puncture which occurs to him who has pleurisy: because the bone presses the bandage, and also to him there occurs difficulty in breathing, and cough, and vomiting of blood: and this is difficult to cure.
And already the ancients have been skilled in this with many ingenuities: and from them are those who say, that you should place foods of the sick which generate inflammation and diarrhea, so that the belly is inflamed, and stretched, and the fracture is moved towards the exterior.
We indeed abhor, that there not be a quick cause to make an abscess hot, if it does not occur. But if it has already occurred, then you add to it.
And some of them said: place it on a wet place, then suck it with strength, and it is similar to reasoning. However, one should be afraid that the wet place attracts excessive fluids to the spot, because of the disposition of weakness.
And some of them said: it is necessary that the spot be covered with wool which has already been submerged in hot oil: and they place pads between the ribs, until it is filled: so that it may be a bandage equal when you roll it according to its roundness.
Then the sick will be cured of pleurisy by food and medicine.
But if the sick person is strongly compressed, which he cannot tolerate, and the bone presses the bandage, and wounds with the puncture, and we fear for the sick: then it is necessary, that you cut above the spot, and remove from the broken rib. Then we will place upon these matters an instrument that preserves the tooth, of which mention was previously made: and we will cut through the bone with ease, and we will cut into it.
Then we will gather together two lips of the wound, if it is large with a suture: and we will care for it with plasters, until it heals.
If however an abscess occurs meanwhile, then hurry, and pour warm cloths in rose oil, and place it over the place: and let the sick person be cared for with what is fitting for an abscess.
Meanwhile also it will be bandaged on the side over which he sleeps, until it heals.
Concerning the restoration of a fracture of the spine in the back and neck.
Indeed the bones of the neck sometimes suffer a fracture, and rarely wear away: and similarly the spine in the back also. When therefore it happens to someone, and you wish to know whether he will be healed or not, then consider. For if you see his hands already softened, and stupefied, and dead: and he cannot move them, nor extend them, nor contract them: and when you contract them with your fingers, and prick them with a needle, he does not feel it, and does not feel pain in them: then know that he is not healed, and in many cases it is mortal.
But if he moves them, and feels contraction in them with your fingers, and pricking: then know that the neck of the bone is saved, and that the sick person will be healed with treatment.
But if he suffers a similar fracture in the spine, and you wish to know whether he will be healed or not, then consider his feet: then if you see that they are softened, and what happens in the hands happens to them: and when he lies on his back, wind and excretion come out without his will: and when he is turned on his stomach, excretion comes out without his will: and when he is turned on his back, and wishes to defecate, but cannot: then know that it is mortal. Therefore, do not labor in his care.
If however something does not happen to him from that, the matter is lighter.
And the treatment of what happens from that is, that you try to seek sedatio
Place on that one several times a day until when the boil is sedated: then place on the location one of the strengthening, drying, and binding plasters: and instruct the sick person to use rest and tranquility. Nor should he sleep on the side with which he found pain, until he is healed.
If however something happens at the attrition of the bone sathaiatum, or anything that is already separated from it: then it is necessary, that you separate yourself from the skin, and remove that. Then gather two wound lips, if it is large, with a suture. Then care for that one with some fleshly, from the ointments, until he is healed.
If however the last bone of the tail is broken, and it is the end: then it is necessary, that you insert your left hand's thumb into the anus, and equal the broken bone with your other hand, as possible, and secondarily in equality.
Then place on it, and remove it: and care for the wound with the healing that preceded, until he is healed.
¶ On the restoration of the ankle.
Chapter 11.
The bones of the ankle rarely break. If however they break, then the fracture of them is not, except comminution in the extremities of them: and they are broken in length, and decline to the interiors: and happens pain in the place, and puncture: and astonishes the leg that breaks.
The restoration of it is indeed that you extend your hand upon him, until you stand over the fracture, as its figure is.
But if the fracture is only in its extremities, then equal that fracture, according to what is prepared for you from equality, until it resembles its natural figure.
But if the fracture is in its length, or already inclines to the interiors: then make the sick one lie on his belly, until the restoration of that fracture is prepared for you. When therefore you have equalized it, place upon it a plaster: then place upon it a splint from wood, or from skin: and bind with a bandage above which you do not fear the change of the fracture, nor the removal of the splint.
And equal the concavity of them with that which fills it, until it receives the bandage according to equality: and command the sick one, that he lie on his back, or on his sound side.
But if an abscess hot occurs to him: then cease from the extension of it, and his restoration, until the hot abscess sits: and place upon him that which sits him, according to what preceded, then return to his restoration: and bind him as it ought.
But if indeed it occurs in the bone shattering, or is crushed, extract it.
¶ Of the restoration of the fracture of the humerus.
The aid is that which is between the elbow and the head of the spoon.
But if it is broken, then its restoration is according to one of two methods.
One of which is: that you take a flat piece of wood of medium thickness, according to this form, which follows.
And two ligaments are tied at both ends.
Then it is hung from an elevated place, and the weak one sits on a seat. Then he throws his broken arm on a piece of wood, until it reaches the titillus, in which the middle is attached to the curved wood.
Then something heavy is hung over him, so that he extends himself towards the lower parts. Then the doctor balances the fracture with his hands at the same time, until the fracture returns as it should be.
And another way is that the weak one lies down on his shoulder: and hangs his hand from his neck with a ligament. Then command two assistants, that one of them holds that which is above the fracture with his hands: and that the other holds below him, and extends each of them to his part.
And if you want, that the extension be stronger, then tie under the fracture with a ligament, and above it with another ligament: and each of the two assistants extends to his two parts.
If therefore the fracture is near the end of the arm, then it is necessary that one ligament be placed under the titillus, and the other under the fracture towards the elbow.
And similarly if the fracture is near the elbow: then it is necessary that the ligament be placed on that place, and on the elbow itself.
Then balance the fracture with ease without labor, until when the fracture is balanced according to what it should be, and applied with good application: then tie it, if not an abscess of hot water occurs.
But if indeed an abscess of hot water occurs, then let go the tie until the seventh day. And place on top of it succulent wool soaked in vinegar and rose oil, until the abscess calms down: then bind it: and the way to bind it is, such that you place a plaster over the fracture.
Then place a new cloth bandage on top of the plaster. Then attach the arm to the support itself, and place her hand open on her shoulder.
And place a cloth, and bind it on top of the arm support, so that the arm stands in the position of the stars: if he does not forbid you from him anything, nor anything is changed above you from the broken bone.
But if you fear that something is changed above you from the broken bone, then use the stars: and it is, such that you place on top of the fracture itself the star that is wider and stronger than the other stars. And place between every star width of a finger: and let the length of the stars be according to the fracture with the addition of three fingers from every part.
Then bind on top of the stars the binding that I said at the beginning of this chapter.
And it is, such that your binding be over the place of the fracture tighter. And the more the fracture extends, the less the binding.
If therefore you see the position of the stars and the binding, as we said, at the hour when you restore the member immediately, then do: and if you fear the warm abscess, then release the binding and the stars up to the seventh day, as we said.
Then consider the bandage in all three days, so that it does not occur in the place of itching, or inflation, or food is prevented from coming to the member, because of the position of excessive binding. So, we will correct this entire thing, as we said.
If indeed you are of good faith, so that nothing unpleasant happens from it, then do not dissolve the ligature until after three days or more.
And let the sick person sleep on his back, and his hand on his belly; and place under his support a stuffed mat filled evenly with wool.
And consider at every hour of the night or day, so that the broken member's figure is not dissolved, nor the ligature softened. So, correct this entire thing by your virtue.
And place the sick person's food according to the order we prescribed, so that the food is subtle in the first place, until he begins to swallow: then it is necessary to make his food thicker.
For the habit of the support and leg is that it should be swallowed in forty days: therefore it is necessary to dissolve, and administer a bath, and treat with ointments that rectify that.
If the fracture is foul and worn: then do not dissolve from it the ligature and stars until fifty days, and until two months.
¶ On the restoration of the fracture of the Arm.
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called two forearms.
One of which is short: and that is the one that follows the thumb. And the other is large, and that is the one that is placed under the small from the lower part.
Perhaps it breaks only the larger forearm, or the smaller: and perhaps they both break at once.
When therefore the smaller forearm is broken above, then its restoration is easy, and its healing is easier.
When the lower part of the bone is broken, it is a bad fracture, and its healing is difficult.
And it is worse when two bones are broken at once.
Therefore, if the bone that is broken is slightly above the lower part, then it is appropriate for the physician to use a gentle extension with ease until it matches it.
However, if the bone that is broken is large, then it is necessary to use a stronger traction quite strongly.
And it is necessary to place the shape of the hand and its extension on the mattress during healing. And the thumb of the hand should be higher than all the fingers: and the joint below all the fingers, or others, and the weak person sitting squarely on himself, and the mattress in front of him, or directly in front of him, at a height, so that the weak person does not incur labor.
Then the servant should extend the arm from the lower part, or with his hand, or with a bandage. And another servant should extend it from above in the same way.
Then the physician should match the bone until he reduces it to the best possible shape.
If there are splinters in the bone fracture, then try to reduce all the fragments to their place by your strength.
However, if it appears in him that the splinter is separate and pierces the skin, and there is no hope of its healing, then cover it over and remove it according to the method we mentioned in those things that were previously mentioned.
However, if the fracture is with a wound, I have already dealt with that chapter alone, therefore take its healing from there.
However, if an abscess with hot pus occurs at the beginning of your healing, then make a linen cloth with a thin layer of rose oil, and white wax, and it should be between thickness and fineness: and bind the cloth over it with a fine traction, until when the abscess is calmed: then remove the wax, and place a prepared plaster made from flour millstone with albumen on it. Then place a splint, and let the splint that is placed on the fracture itself be slightly wider and stronger.
And know that the number of splints for the arm is six in many arrangements: whether the fracture is in one fossa, or in two fossae at once.
Then place your bandage on the stronger and more powerful part of the fracture, and a little more with the bandage towards the upper part of the fracture, or towards its lower part: or place a softer bandage with the bandage for a while, according to the previous mention of it at the beginning of the chapter.
And let the bandages that are wrapped around the fracture be soft, moist cloths: and not hard, rough. And let the thread that is used to tie it be a linen thread, of medium thickness between thin and thick, as we have said.
And consider the limb and the ligament after days. If something happens that requires correction, such as itching that occurs in the limb: then it is necessary to embrocate the limb with warm water until the itching subsides, and let the limb not be constricted until it is quiet, then repeat the bandage.
If the bandage has already become soft, and the bone has already been removed, and similar things: then correct all of it by your virtue, and consider again.
For if nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb because of the excess of the bandage, then it is necessary to soften it a little, and let it be loosed for several days until the nourishment reaches it, then bandage it again.
But if nothing of the things we said happens to the sick person, then it is not necessary to loosen it, unless after twenty days, or about these.
Then suspend the hand of the sick person around his neck. And let his neck be equal, and guard it by its own strength against jerky movements. And make him sleep on his back.
And know that this fracture is healed in thirty days, or in thirty-two days, and perhaps in eighty days. All of this is according to the arrangements of the humors and the arrangements of strength.
§ On the healing of fractures of the hand.
Know that a fracture of the fingers and the knuckles of the hand rarely occurs. And it does not happen to him, unless there is repeated wear.
When therefore a fracture or wear occurs in the toes: then it is necessary for the sick person to sit squarely: and there should be a seat according to equality. Then place his hand on that extended one.
Then the servant should extend the broken bones, and the physician should equal them until they are joined together in a good connection.
Then it is necessary to place a plaster and bandage, if there does not occur a hot abscess. Then place a splint above according to the amount of space: and you have already wrapped it in linen cloth.
If however the fracture is towards the lower part around the belly of the foot, then make a similar sphere from the cloth: and order the sick person to cover it with his broken foot: then it is bound with a long cloth.
And the splint should be from the hide, in which there is softness, so that the hide may be applied to the body of the foot: and bind it, according to what is necessary.
If the fracture is to the outside, then it is necessary to place a splint above and another below in the plantar region, and let the hand be open and straight. Then apply a bandage as the hand is bent, and extend between the fingers with a ligature.
If a fracture occurs in one of the knuckles of the fingers, then if it is the thumb, it will be adjusted according to what is appropriate. Then it will be bandaged with the plantar region: and if it is a deep wound, place a straight splint, small: so that the fracture is elevated and not moved.
But if the fracture is in the other fingers, such as the middle, and index, and auricular, and annular, then it will be adjusted and bound with the healthy finger that follows it: or all will be bound according to continuity: and this is better. Or place a small splint on top of it, as we said in the thumb.
And consider in your restoration, and after the arrangement of abscesses with hot compresses: and place it with what is appropriate, when something occurs from it, according to how its story repeats.
¶ On the restoration of a fracture of the hip.
The hip bone often breaks, and is felt, because it turns to the inner and posterior part.
And its restoration is made so that the ligament is bound above the fracture, and another ligament under the fracture. And the sick person is stretched out on their face.
Then stretch out all the bandage assistant to their part according to equality: and this, when there is a fracture in the middle of the bone.
If, however, the fracture is near the root of the hip, then the ligament should be tied to the part of the patella, so that the extension falls upwards: and another ligament should be tied under the fracture.
And in a similar manner, if the fracture is near the knee, then the ligament near the knee should be tied, so that the extension falls downwards.
Then the physician should equalize the bone with both of his hands, until he reduces it back to its natural shape: and he should join the bone with a good union.
Then one should apply a plaster and bandage, unless it does not happen to the member aphtha. But if it happens to the member aphtha: then let him leave it for several days, until the abscess becomes warm, then return to your treatment.
The bandage of it should be thus. It is necessary to cover over the fracture above with a hard leather, that is, a bandage: and double it twice, or thrice: and there should remain some excess from it. Then cover the leg, until it reaches the calcaneus at the root of the buttocks.
And insert a long rope between the hip and the leg near the knee to the lower parts, and let the ends of the rope come from the upper part of the two parts. Then roll up the excess on the leg and hip from the leather.
Then place above the hip in the place of the fracture some stars, and place one star on the knee joint.
Then fill the spaces between the leg and hip with soft cloths, so that the bandage may be equal.
Then begin with a strong bandage from the middle of the place of the fracture with three turns, or four. And the more you lengthen with the ligament from the place of the fracture, your constriction will be less and softer, and gentler.
Then bend it towards the two ends of the thread, which you have inserted between the hip and thigh. Therefore tie with both of the three stars that are above. Then go with both ends of the thread downwards, until you reach the heel of the foot. And with both also tie the ends of the stars from the other side: so that the ligament will not be removed from its place.
Then let go of the constriction above that, while it remains, so that no corrosion, nor abscess, nor inflation, and similar things to them, will occur in the member. If something happens from that. Then quickly with the solution of it, and correct that which happened from it all, according to what we said many times.
But if in the bone there is a piece from the bone which pricks: then it is necessary, if you can, to make it equal. And if not, find above it, and remove it: and take care with the one of which its remembrance preceded, until it is healed.
And sometimes this fracture of the hip is bound, besides that stars are added to it, as we said in the aid and arm.
However, in the restoration of such a fracture, the weak does not experience limping. And if it is restored alone, besides that the other leg is applied to it, then it is necessary that he who owns it will always limp.
And know that the hip is bound in fifty days, or a little is added to it, or a little is subtracted from it: all of this is according to the diversity of the humors, and the other arrangements.
Translation: On the restoration of a broken kneecap.
Know that the kneecap rarely breaks, but it often becomes worn out.
If indeed it does break, then only a fissure or a hole will be found in its parts. And this is with a wound, and without a wound. And it is treated with the whole body, with sensation.
And its restoration is thus, that it will be made equal to what was broken from its parts with fingers, until it is gathered together and joined together as much as possible according to the equality and facility, and the making.
Then place a plaster made from semolina or milled grain with egg white on top of it: and place a round button on top of it if you need it: and bind it above with a bandage suitable for that.
Then consider all the positions that we have mentioned for other fractures: as boil hot, and similar to it: so, that you place everything with an accident that is suitable for it, until it heals.
Translation: On the restoration of a broken leg.
Know that the leg bone is two bones, of which one is thick and is called the leg bone: and the other is fine and is called the shinbone.
And it happens to both of these from the species of fracture that it happens to two bones of the arm: and because of this, its restoration is made, like the restoration of the arm, equally, and the operation is one.
If both bones are broken at once, the leg is turned to all parts.
And if the fine bone is broken, it turns the leg to the front part.
And if the bone is broken roughly, you will find it below: and there are among them what do not hide from you.
Then apply the extension, equality, and ligation of the stars according to that equally.
However, if the fracture of the leg is a foul fracture, having many splinters, then the extension should be less and gentler according to your relief.
And in the leg itself is something from the operation on the arm: and it is that when you equalize the stars and complete all your operation, then take two bands made of pinewood, which is used in the construction of sun dials that are placed under the tables: and they are made from the fingers of the palm: and choose from them what has a small thickness, and not from the small ones: and let their length be according to the length of the leg from the knee downwards.
Then roll it up on each cloth with two folds according to its length. And place one part of the leg on one side and the other on the other side: and let them be from the knee down to the foot.
Then tie two bands in three places from both ends and the middle. For when stricture is prohibited, the leg leans to the right and left, and stands in a good position.
And indeed, the cradle will be applied according to the length of the leg, and placed in it, the leg, so that it may keep it from movement.
And indeed, you must do this very much in a fracture when with it is a proper wound.
Then consider the leg every day, and study with it with the last effort to avoid suppuration, or swelling, or other things. If therefore something happens from those, then apply to it with what is necessary until it heals, if God wills.
Translation: On the Fracture of Bones in the Foot and Toes.
Fractures of the heel do not occur completely.
Fractures of the bones of the foot and toes do occur sometimes, and they also occur infrequently: and they do not occur to them except from wear in many positions.
If a fracture occurs to the bones of the foot and you see those bones elevated above each other, then place your weak foot on prepared ground, as if walking.
Then stand up and place your foot on that which is elevated from those bones: then press, or step on it: and make it even, until it returns to its places.
Then place a plaster and bandage on top: and place under the sole of the foot a small board, which has two flat heads.
Then bind it with the foot with a proper binding, after you have rolled it up with cloths and other things that are necessary.
Therefore when three days or four pass by him, then loosen the bandage. For you will find the bones evened, whether they are fractured, or dislocated. Therefore the operation in them is as you see.
But if some fingers are broken, then restore them, and make them even as I have told you in the restoration of the fingers of the hand. Then place a splint on your finger according to the length of the finger, and let it be a little wider than that: then place under the foot this board which I have told you, and bind it with a proper binding.
But if that which is broken is from the bones is two, or three, or more, then place on all the finger of its quantity, rolled up in linen: and bind the board in the lower foot: and let it stand on one head of the board outside the sole of the foot, so as to hold well with retention.
And it is fitting for you that you not forget, but rather consider all things that I have told you about the other fractures from the accidents that we mentioned: and oppose each accident with what is appropriate.
On the fracture of the vulva of a woman, and the bone of the beak, and the virgin of a man.
When the vulva of a woman is fractured, then make her sit in a square position. Then lean her towards the back part of her own body, and hold her from behind.
Then the midwife should fill her vulva with cotton, until she fills it: and let it be made into a sphere from that.
Then shake the woman, and elevate her back gradually. For that cotton comes out, until it becomes before the vulva like a sphere, and the fractured bone returns.
Then place a compress on her back. When therefore she wants to urinate, remove the cotton with ease, then she urinates: and reduce it back according to the manner in which you introduced it first: then return to her own compress first.
Let her do that for seven days, or about, for the bone itself is restored.
And if you want, take a catheter, and tie it over the hole of the bone with a reed, and introduce the catheter entirely into her vulva. Then blow in the cannula with force, until the bladder is inflated within the vulva, for the fracture returns.
Then it should be filled with cotton, and let her stand for several days, according to what we have told you, until she is healed.
And when the bone of the beak of a man or woman is fractured, then administer in its restoration, and according to its equality that we have told about in the bone of the anchor.
And the straight is not hidden in these fractures that are close to each other, especially for those who have some study or experience.
And understand my book, for the fracture itself indicates to you in many arrangements the straight path in its restoration and its healing: understand therefore.
But in the penis of a man when it is broken, take the neck of a goose and insert the rod into it. Then place a wrapping of cloth over it and wrap it up, and let it be released for three days or thereabouts, and it will heal if God wills.
¶ On the restoration of bone fractures when there is a wound.
He who has experienced the fracture with the wound, especially if it is large, such as the hip bone, or the shoulder blade, or a similar one, so that you can act quickly, and perform a bloodletting immediately: if the conditions for bloodletting are confirmed to you, as we have previously mentioned.
If the wound bleeds, then you should act quickly to remove it, so that you sprinkle powdered charcoal on top of it: if you do not have any other present.
Then begin to restore the fracture in that same day: and do not postpone it, unless an abscess does not occur.
But if indeed an abscess occurs hot, then let the restoration of it be postponed until the ninth day, until the abscess settles. And do not approach it on the third and fourth days at all, for you would be causing it to suffer bad accidents.
If however the fractured bone is prominent above the skin exposed: then you should try to reduce it, and equalize it with your hands with facility and slight extension.
If, however, you have not prepared an extension for it, and its equality is not achieved by your hands: then reduce it with this instrument. And there is an instrument that is made of iron, whose length is a quantity of seven fingers, or eight: and its width is according to the quantity of the wound. And therefore it is necessary for the physician to take from them three, or four, according to the quantity that he needs for that from the treatment in every kind of fracture.
And let it be round: and let there be a small bulkiness on it, so that it does not double up under compression upon it in an hour of the operation: and let it be sharp at its extremities, with a margin on its extremities. And let it be above its bulkiness from the middle of it up to the lower parts.
And this is its shape.
In this operation, it is necessary to place the sharp end of it curved above the prominent extremity of the bone: and push it with it with one force, until when the bone returns and is made equal by some equality.
Therefore try to make the extremities of the fracture equal again.
If its extremities are subtle, and it does not receive the instrument with good reception, then it is necessary, that you cut the extremity of that bone, until the instrument has power over it.
If indeed you cannot reduce them with the instrument that we have mentioned, then cut it with that which is fitting for it from the knives that we have mentioned: or a saw with one saw in whatever possible way is to you.
Then plane it which remains in the bone from roughness and small bones.
When therefore the bone is reduced, and it finds an infirm person after its reduction suffering from a violent pain, then you know that the bone has not returned to its natural place.
Do this then. For you confer a great comfort to the sick, when your restoration is completed which you make of bones.
Then immerse the cloth in astringent wine, black. And truly if it is in summer. And you do not place on the wound a poultice, nor anything in which there is oil: so that it does not cause decay and putrefaction in itself.
Then administer astellas at the hour of your completion of the restoration of bone. And let the detected wound heal: thus, so that you cut with forceps a hole in the folds according to the amount of the wound.
And beware with all caution, so that you do not tie the wound with a fracture. For many times have the foolish physicians done this: and they caused to happen to their sick ones either death, or corrosion, or zuchum, that is, sain. And your binding should be soft, gentle, different from the bindings of the remaining fractures.
But if the wound is evil, or is a great wound, and you fear some bad accidents which we have mentioned, and you find pain in the hanging place: then it is not necessary to place on it astellas. And make for them folds from hard cloth in the place of astellas, and tie it with them.
But when it is after one day, or two days, and you see the wound beginning to generate pus: then take away from above it the cloth which you placed on it with wine. Then administer liniments, and ointments with which from our custom it is to heal wounds: such as tetrapharmacon oil, and similar to it.
And it is fitting for you to loosen the ligament. And consider the wound every day in the morning and evening, until it is healed and becomes healthy.
And it is necessary to prepare the limb in such a way that pus flows down from it to the lower parts with ease.
But if many days pass by and the wound does not heal, nor is the pus removed from it, then you will know that there are small bones underneath. Therefore, it is necessary to examine the wound with a probe. How many of those small bones are separated, remove them, and take them out. And those of them that are not separated, and pierce the limb, and cause pain, try to cut them, and remove them in any way that is possible for you to do so.
But if a wound becomes infected with pus, or ekileten, that is, estiomenus, or any other sign of corruption and putrefaction, then you must apply to each of them the remedy that is appropriate for it from the cure, whose previous description is in its own chapter.
And in the place where it is necessary for my discourse to stand, and to which you should direct your present mind when a bone breaks and protrudes from the limb, such as the thigh bone, and the shoulder blade, and similar ones from large bones, it is that you do not assume its attraction, for often death occurs from it, indeed, let it go, until it putsrefies.
Perhaps it will fall off by itself after twenty days, or thirty.
Then therefore cure the wound, if it seems to you: and otherwise, let it go.
¶ On the cure of Nodation in the stump of a fractured limb.
This suture is often used for healing a fracture in the hoof. Especially, this one which is near the joints, and it becomes deformed from its figure of a member. And perhaps it prevents the limb from performing its natural function.
Therefore, consider if the suture is recent: administer in it medicines which have astringency, such as aloe, and frankincense, and myrrh, and sarsaparilla, and acacia, and similar to them.
Thus, you will take some or all of these: and mix them with astringent wine, or with egg white, or with vinegar: and place them on the suture in cotton, and tie them over it with a good ligature.
And leave the ligature, but do not loosen it for many days. Then loosen it, and repeat another, until the suture is removed.
Or tie over it a leaden strip properly. For lead is the property of removing everything that is feared from the limbs.
But if the suture has already turned into stone, and is tight, and urgently requires removal: then cut off the superfluous part from above it, and shave it with some razors, until it is removed: and care for it, until it heals.
§ On the cure when the limb is restored, and remains after that delicate, not according to its natural condition.
When the fracture of a bone is restored, and the limb remains after that delicate, weak: then it is not made except for many reasons. One of which is, the excess of the solution of the ligament and its ligature, not according to what it should be: or because of the superfluity of the bandaging of the ligaments, until the nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb: or because of the excess of unnecessary embrocation at an inappropriate time: or because of the lack of blood in the body of the weak person, and its debility.
The treatment for this is to feed the sick person and make his body tender, until the blood multiplies within him. And apply a bath. And bring joy and happiness to him.
Then place the mustard plaster on his limb: so that the mustard draws nourishment much to him. And he should frequently apply the ointment with warm water, until the nourishment is cured, and he returns to his natural shape.
On the treatment of broken bones when they are being straightened.
When it happens that a member already restored after its healing is twisted, and the prominence of the bone broken, or the knotting: and it is deformed by this form of the member, nevertheless the member is not prohibited from its natural operation: then it is not necessary to receive the word of him who thinks that the member should be broken again.
And there have been many foolish physicians and restorers who have done this in our land.
And indeed this operation is very reprehensible, leading to death, or great fear, so that indeed it be mortal.
But if the limping and knotting are recent: then it is necessary to be rubbed with warm water, in which have been boiled softening herbs, such as high hemp, and its root, and melilot, and similar ones. And let an ointment be made for him with a softening plaster, such as diachylon made properly.
Or let the mucilage of the root of high hemp be taken, and be beaten with chicken fat, or with sesame oil: and it is to be plastered with it.
Or they take ripe figs, and crush them with clay from a dovecote, and similar substances which are called 'diminishing consolidations' in medicine.
And sometimes the contraction is solved with frequent, old-fashioned friction, which is done with wet hands. And motion of the member is given to all parts at every hour.
But if the twisting has already preceded, and it has become strong, and has turned into a stone, and necessity has been provoked for its cure with iron: then it is necessary to follow above it, and to dissolve the continuity of the bone, and to cut off what superfluously arises from the twisting or the bone with delicate knives: and to give ease in that with solicitude and study.
Of speech in dislocation.
Dislocation is the exit of some joints from their place. Therefore it is prohibited from its motion, and the figure of the member is deformed. And it causes to happen over the weak pains, and violent injuries.
Therefore when it happens to someone, then it is necessary to hasten to its restoration: nor does it delay it at all.
For if it is delayed, the place becomes an abscess, and perhaps with it the reduction of the dislocation.
Therefore it is not necessary, that it be moved, nor stretched in the hour of its abscess. Because often it causes to happen spasms, and painful injuries.
But when it happens, then it is necessary, that you hasten to the bloodletting of the weak. Then it is dismissed, until the abscess rests.
Then the affected body part should be rubbed with warm water and oil. Then it should be returned with ease.
And all the body parts should be treated with that which is mentioned in its place.
Indeed, I have already arranged the chapters of dislocations according to what preceded in fracture, from the upper part of the body to the lower part of it.
¶ On the care of the dislocation of the lower jawbone.
The two lower jaws rarely dislocate.
And the dislocation of both occurs according to one of two ways. Either indeed they are moved from their places by a slight movement, and softened for a short time. Or they are dislocated completely, and until they soften to the chest part, until the saliva of the sick person flows out, and he cannot hold it, nor can he close his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped with speech.
But when the dislocation of it is small, then it returns to many positions by itself with a little bit.
But if the dislocation is complete and whole: then it is necessary that the reduction of it be administered quickly, and not entirely delayed: and it is necessary for the nurse to hold the head of the sick person: and the physician should insert his one finger of his hand into the root of the lower jaw dislocation between his teeth, if the dislocation is on one side. Or he should insert two fingers of his hand at once, if the dislocation is from both sides. And the other fingers of his hand should be outside, which he balances.
And command the sick person to clean his jaws, and to make them ready for eating at all parts. The doctor balances the mandible and pushes the mandible until it returns to its place.
If it is difficult to return it, especially if both mandibles are involved at the same time, then apply heat with hot water and oil until the reduction of both is easy: do not delay the reduction of both at all, as we said.
Therefore, when they return and balance, and the mouth of the sick person is closed and not softened, then place on them cloths of cloth with wax that has been made from wax: and with rose oil.
Then it will be bound with ease with soft ligatures.
And let the patient sleep on his back: and his head should be between two cloths, so that he does not move it to the right and left: nor should he try or be forced to chew anything: rather, give him soft food, until when the pains are removed, and the jaw is bound: then he eats what he wants, and is given it with ease.
He should not labor over the operation of his mouth at eating and drinking, and swallowing, until the jaw is bound, and he is healed.
If it is difficult to return both mandibles when they are dislocated at some time and do not return to their places, then often fevers and frequent diarrhea occur from this: and perhaps the belly of the sick person is loosened, and perhaps he vomits pure bile.
Therefore, when you see this, then you will know that it is a loss, and often that person dies within ten days who experiences this.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the sternum and the extremity of the arm.
The sternum is not dislocated from the inner side, because of its continuity with the chest. And it is sometimes dislocated towards the outside: and this is indicated by sensation.
And its restoration is that the sick person lies on his back, and extends his arms. Then cut the place with your palm firmly, for it will return.
Then place on it a plaster, and bandages, and bind it.
In fact, the extremities which follow the arm, and are connected with it, do not usually become dislocated, except rarely. But if it becomes dislocated on some day: then it must be reduced and adjusted according to what we said, and that which is prepared for you.
Then place on it a plaster, and bandages, and bind it. And command the sick person to stick to tranquility and quietness until he is healed.
And when this same cure reduces the extremity of the arm, even if it is separated from its place.
¶ On the reduction of the dislocation of the arm.
You should know that the arm does not become dislocated, except in three ways.
One of which is, that it becomes dislocated towards the part of the shoulder to the lower parts. The second is, that it becomes dislocated towards the part of the chest. And perhaps it becomes dislocated towards the upper part of the arm: and this happens rarely.
And it does not become dislocated to the backs, because of the spatula. And it does not become dislocated to the fronts, because of the nerves.
And it is most often dislocated and removed towards the lower parts towards the shoulder: especially in those whose flesh is little. Because I go out of them quickly, and enter quickly.
But in those whose flesh is abundant, it is the opposite, that is, he goes out with difficulty and enters with difficulty.
And perhaps it happens to some people that they are hit or fall, and the shoulder becomes an abscess with heat, and it is thought to be because of that, since it has already been dislocated.
Therefore, one must try this until you are certain of its truth, and then proceed to its cure.
And it is known that the dislocation is when it is towards the inferiors against the acromion: and you distinguish between the dislocated shoulder and the healthy shoulder. For you will find among them a manifest difference, and you will find in the head of the shoulder a hollow, and under the acromion at the touch of the head of the shoulder as if it were an egg: and the weak one cannot reduce his hand to his ear, nor move it with all movements.
And similarly, if it is dislocated towards the chest, or upwards: then you will find a clear touch, and it does not hide.
And this dislocation is easily reduced when it is recent, or the boy is weak.
And its reduction is that the assistant raises his hand to the upper parts. Then you place your thumbs under his acromion, and raise the joint with strength upwards to its place: and the assistant raises his hand and extends it upwards. Then he should put it down below, for it returns quickly.
If not, and if the days since it happened are many: then one must bathe the weak one in hot water, and apply an embrocation that softens and soothes, as if they were boiling the roots of althea, and foenugraecum, and melilot in water, and apply.
Then the sick person should lie on their back: and place a sphere and wool under their chin, which should be equal in softness and tightness.
Then the doctor should place their heel on the sphere, and lift up the arm with strength, and pull the hand of the sick person towards the lower parts.
And if you wish, reduce him according to this manner: and it is, that you make present a man who is longer than the sick person, and stand on the side, and insert his arm under the chin of the sick person: and lift up their chin to the upper parts, until the sick person is suspended in the air. And another assistant should pull the hand of the sick person towards the lower parts of their belly. But if the sick person is light: then it is necessary, that he be suspended with something else, which weighs him down: for the dislocation returns immediately.
And he is also reduced according to another manner: and it is, that a long piece of wood be shaped on the ground, whose head is round in figure: like the handle of a mortar: which is not thick, nor fine. Then place it under the sick person after they have placed cloth over his head on the piece of wood: and the sick person should stand according to the length of the wood.
Then stretch his hand towards the lower parts on the other side, and stretch his body from the other side with strength: for the joint returns to its place with speed.
But if his reduction through all that we have said is difficult: then use this care: and it is, that you take a piece of wood whose length is the quantity of two biceps, and its width is the quantity of four fingers, and its thickness is the quantity of two fingers: which has a round head, so that its entrance into the depth of the chin is eased, according to this form.
Then, clean the round head of the needle, so that it does not wound the weak wood.
Then, place the weak needle under the tilt, so that the hand or arm is stretched over the wood until the lower part: and tie the wood on the support and the arm and the end of the hand.
Then, place the arm on the width of the ladder step, and stretch the hand to the lower part, and let go of the remaining body hanging from the other side. For the joint enters immediately.
Therefore, when the entrance to it is completed according to any possible mode: then it is necessary to place under the tilt an equal quantity of woolen ball from the lamb. Then, place the prepared plaster from the flour mill with bdellium and egg white on the entire arm, as it rolls over.
Then, tie under the tilt a decent binding: and roll the bandage over the plaster above: and attach his hand to his neck, and let go, and do not move his hand for seven days.
And it is necessary to place food for the weak one, until the member is strengthened: because it is faster for its healing.
Then, place a larger one after seven days or five, and exercise it with movement. If therefore it is strengthened and not softened, then it is already healed.
But if the joint is often dislocated due to moisture that happens to it, or for another reason: then it is necessary to administer a cautery in it with three holes, according to what was prescribed in the chapter on cauterization.
But if this is all done, and the bandage is dissolved after seven days, and the joint is not strengthened, and the plaster and binding are rolled back over it several times, and it does not strengthen, and it falls, and it cannot be raised to the upper parts: then you know that the nerves of his arm which are near the head of the humerus, have been cut, or stretched, or softened: and you know that the joint will never be in its place.
For dislocations that occur towards the chest and breasts, or towards the back, reduction is achieved with impulse and extension of the hands: until it returns to its original position, and it is treated with the remaining bandaging and care, until it heals.
If, after healing, there is a severe injury in the limb and slowness in its movement, then the patient should frequently use the bathhouse, until that severity is eased, and it returns to its original nature.
§ On the Treatment of Dislocation of the Elbow.
You should know that the joint of the elbow is dislocated with difficulty, and it also returns to its original position with difficulty: and indeed it can be dislocated in all directions, and especially towards the front or the back.
And its dislocation is not hidden from you: for it falls under the sight and touch, in whatever shape it is dislocated. And when you join the dislocated elbow to a healthy one, it is clearly shown to you. For indeed the joint is bent, and it cannot double the arm, nor touch its own shoulder with it.
And it is necessary for you to act quickly and reduce the dislocation immediately, before an inflammation of hot pus occurs in it.
For if an inflammation of hot pus occurs in it, its reduction becomes difficult: and perhaps it will not be healed at all, especially when it is towards the back. For indeed it is worse in all kinds of dislocations, and more intense pain arises from them: and it often dies along with it.
And its restoration when it is from those that can be reduced, is to extend the hand with both hands: and the arm is expanded, and the hands of the physician are above the elbow and below it, and he pushes the joint with his fingers or with the root of his palm, until it returns to its original place.
Or rather, it is a dislocation towards the front: then he should return as follows, so that he doubles his hand with his own hand, until he strikes with the root of his palm his own elbow which is dislocated.
But if the dislocation does not obey reduction, then administer strong, very forceful extension: and it is, so that two assistants extend the arm, and two assistants also hold him, so that he is not moved during extension.
Then the arm should be rolled back to all parts after it has been unrolled over his hand, with a long doubled cloth or broad ligament.
And when the physician touches the joint with his hand, he should anoint it with oil: so that it is from those which help in the lubricity of the joint with facility. Then he should push the joint with strong impulse, until it returns.
And after its reduction, it is necessary that it be placed on it a plaster, in which there is stipticity, and exiccation with whiting: and it is bound with a proper bandage. And the arm should be suspended from the neck of the weak: and let it be released for several days.
Then it should be unbound. But if the joint is strengthened in its place, then unbind the ligament from it, and let it be released.
And if you see the joint not well bound, then repeat the plaster, and the ligament, and let it be released for several days, until it is bound. Then unbind it.
But if a seriousness occurs to him after the reduction of the joint, and the position is in motion: then administer moisture in bathing, and gentle friction, and compression, until it is lined, or place on the joint, that is, the fat of a young ram. Then bind it up and let her go on that day and at night. Then remove it and put him into a bath. When he sweats, then gently rub the joint with moderate friction. Then repeat the application of the ointment once, and twice, and three times with entry into the bath, until it is soothed.
And if you wish, place on her the warm dung of a cow, moistened with hot butter, and wrap it around him.
Do this several times. For she is indeed soothed, and returns to her proper condition.
¶ On the treatment of dislocation of Almahassem.
Almahassem's hand is often dislocated, that is, the joint that is between the arm and the hand.
And its reduction of dislocation is easy. On the contrary, the rest of the joints. However, it is necessary that the speed of the reduction of this dislocation be in the hour in which it occurs, before the wound closes: or an hot abscess occur in it.
And the reduction of the dislocation is such that one places Almahassem's weak hand on a table, and extends the minister's hand: and the physician places his hand on the prominence of the joint, and pushes it, until it returns.
However, it is necessary to consider if the palm of the hand has already receded to the wrist: then one places the weak back of his hand on the table at extension and reduction: and if the dislocation is proceeding to the back of the hand, then the position of his hand is inside on the table, that is, the inner part of his hand is placed on the table, so that the hand of the physician falls on that prominence of the joint.
If he returns immediately, it is good: and if not, then bind it with a plaster containing a styptic for the stoppage of the abscess, and do not repeat this.
For if he does not tolerate it, and you are unable to apply further reduction to him, after the days pass by, nevertheless the union remains according to its curvature: and nothing harms the sick except that the hand becomes soft, and cannot bind anything: then you know that the nerves have been cut or torn.
There is therefore no other skill in it than to bind it with a cauterizing iron near the wound. And perhaps it does not heal anything.
When therefore Albucasis does not return, then apply the plaster which we have mentioned to him. Then he is bound and let go for five days: after that, it is dissolved and let go, and the hand is exercised.
But if his movement is lost, and something heavy occurs to him: then ease it with warm water, and friction several times, until it is eased.
¶ On the Cure of Dislocations of the Fingers.
When the finger is dislocated from any of them, or the finger from the back of the palm, or its belly: then extend the finger, and push the dislocation with your fingers, until it returns.
Then support the head of the finger, and suspend it turned towards the part to which it is dislocated, and let it go for two days.
Then suspend it, and extend it, until it becomes straight on its day.
When therefore it is night, bind it according to the same account: and do not cease to dissolve it in the day: and exercise it with movement: and bind it at night.
Do this for several days until it is tightly bound.
And do the same with it if it is dislocated towards the palm of your hand: and bind it to that part, and perform your first operation on it until it heals.
And do the same with it when it is dislocated towards the other parts.
¶ On the treatment of dislocation of the sacrum in the back.
When it happens to someone that the sacrum in the back or the neck is completely dislocated, or many spines are moved from their places: then there is no cure for it, because death approaches the weak person.
And the sign of this is that the sickness of the weak person passes out without will, and he cannot hold it: and often some of his limbs are softened from it, or both his legs, or both his arms, or one of them: or one spine is moved from its place.
For often it is moved, because often the movement of them happens to four parts.
Those therefore which are moved towards the back, are called Gibbosity.
The cure of this however is, that you consider at that time, if Gibbosity happens from childhood: then there is no cure for it, nor is there any healing at all from it.
In that however which happens by chance, or by blow, or by similar things, the ancients have already spoken of a lengthy method of cure in their talk. Of which very little returns with profit.
I however have already abbreviated from it, of which little excuses it from much of its proximity to my intention: and from my exposure which I exposed it, and formed an instrument of it in a different way than they showed it, and exposed it.
I say therefore, that in the hardness which occurs from the front part, there is no skill, nor healing from it.
And similarly in that which is made on both sides also.
And it is not treated from them, except that which occurs on the back properly, when I say: and it is, that the weak one be stretched out on his face on a board near the wall: and the wet cloth is spread under him, so that he is not harmed by his chest.
Then a straight piece of wood is placed on the floor, in the end of the board, near his head: and another piece of wood near his feet in the other end of the board: and the servant holds the wood, and it is not firmly fixed in the fork. And the other servant holds the other.
Then he is rolled over on the weak one's head, and under his tongue a strong bandage, firm: and extend the end of the bandage to the wood that is by his head: and tie it in it.
Then tie another bandage above his heels, and above his knees, and by his calves. Then gather all the bandages, and tie them on the other wood that is by his feet.
Then all the servants stretch out to the part of the wood where the bandage is tied, and the two woods are not moved from the places where they are fixed: but they are not tightened, as we said.
And the doctor puts his hands on the spine with strength, until he returns: or puts a board on it. Then he connects his feet on the board, until he returns.
But if he does not return by this cure, then take a board whose length is about three arms. And also prepare a location on the wall that we mentioned is near the weak one, where the end of the board can enter. Then place the middle of the board on the Spondyle. And let the doctor put his feet on the other end. And he should tie it well until the Spondyle is covered, and then return to his place.
Then if you wish, operate with the saw that is wrapped around your hand: and it is to make two pieces of wood on the ground near the head of the sick person in the last of the feet, whose length is the arm of one: and at his head in the last of the feet, two pieces of wood.
And its length should be the same as every wood, a palm: and now there is a hole in every place where the saw ran: and all the wood is firmly fixed on the ground, so that it does not move at all.
And the round wood is inserted: and there is a saw in which the ligament is rolled up in two holes of two pieces of wood.
And at its end is a hole, in which the wood that is firmly fixed, whose length is the same as that which rolls up, is in two other pieces of wood.
Then tie the ligaments that you tied in the chest of the sick person with the saw that is at his head: and the ligaments that you tied in his legs with the saw that is at his feet.
Then stand by every saw, which turns the hand with the leather, with which the saw is rolled up: and the doctor balances the Spondyle, as we said.
This is the shape of the saw that follows.
Then when the Spondyle returns and the place is balanced, then you should put an evaporative plaster with egg white. Then, a bandage. Afterwards, place a stellate bandage above the plaster, whose width is three fingers, or about that. And its length is the amount that will cover the sacrum and on the healthy spine.
Then it is tied with the bandage we mentioned. And the sick person should use this delicate nourishment until he is healed.
If something remains prominent in the place at the end of healing: then it is necessary to administer medicines that soften and alleviate, with the administration of the tablet we mentioned for a long time. And now it is applied to that lead sheet.
And sometimes a prominence occurs at the last spine of the back: and it is thought to be due to dislocation, and that is the bone that already protrudes. Therefore it is not necessary to make a presumption about him with this medicine: for perhaps he will cause death to happen.
Chapter on the treatment of a dislocated ankle.
You should know that the joint of the ankle and the joint of the arm do not occur except in dislocation alone: nor does it happen to them that what happens to the other joints from slight removal and concavity.
And indeed the joint of the ankle is dislocated according to four parts. That is, because it is dislocated towards the front and the back.
And it is very much dislocated towards the inside: and a little dislocated towards the front and the back.
And the treatment of the dislocation towards the inside is because when you join the leg of the sick person with the sick, it is longer: and his knee is higher than that of the healthy one, and the sick person cannot double his foot near the groin: and the place that follows the groin is swollen with hot abscess, therefore because the head of the hip has already reached there.
And its sign, which occurs when there is a dislocation to the exterior, is that it is opposite in nature to these accidents.
And its sign, which occurs when there is a dislocation to the front, is that it stretches the healthy leg according to its complement: however, it does not double it without pain in the knee: and if it tries to walk, it cannot step forward: and it retains its urine, and it develops an abscess in its groin, and it limps when walking, stepping on its heel.
And its sign, which occurs when there is a dislocation to the back, is that it does not stretch the knee, and it cannot double it before doubling the groin: and its leg is also shorter than the other: and the groin is softened, and it is the hip joint at the place of the other.
The reduction of this type of dislocation is indeed, that you should consider whether the dislocation is old and has already outlived its time in the one who has it. Then if you administer its reduction, and it remains according to its position, then there is no cure at all in it. Therefore, it is not necessary to make a complete assumption of it.
But in the one whose dislocation is recent, and it is of a type of four dislocations: then hasten to this, that you fold the joint, and extend it both to the interior and to the exterior, and move it with your right and left hand: for perhaps it returns, and does not require any other cure.
But if it does not return in this way, then you must prepare a strong assistant, and extend the leg from the lower part: or with your hands, or with a bandage that is tied above the leg on the knee: and another assistant extends his hand above, so that he may insert his hands under the tendons of it. Then he ties with a thin ligature over the root of the thigh bone, and holds the end of the other ligament.
And it should be extended from the front part of the groin to the part of the backbone, or from the back to the part of the back.
And it should be extended with one pull of equal strength, until the weak one is lifted up with his body from the ground, and remains hanging.
For this kind of extension is a common kind among the four kinds.
If therefore the dislocation returns with what we said, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary for every kind of that which I will say about its proper cure.
In the proper reduction of it, however, when the dislocation is to the insides, it is necessary that the weak one should lie down on his sound side. Then let him place the ligament over the root of the thigh bone, in that which is between the hip joint and the part under the groin. Then let him extend the ligament upwards from the part of the groin to the higher part of the body, to the part of the backbone.
Then let another strong assistant take his arms, and reduce the large part of the weak one's hip, and extend it to the outer extension with great force. Now indeed it returns to its place.
And this kind is easier of all kinds of cures by which this limb is reduced.
But if it excuses itself to you, and does not obey you with this kind of cure at all: then it is necessary that two weak feet should be bound together with a strong ligament, and a thin one, over the two heels, and over the two knees; and the length of each should be equal to four fingers from its corresponding part: and the weak leg should be extended more than the other by the length of two fingers.
Then the sick person is suspended over the head of a tree, which is in the house, and its length should be equal to the distance from the ground to the armpit of two men.
Then command a strong young man to protect the hip: and suspend him with the sick person in another place: and push the other young man, protecting the hip with strength, for the joint returns to its place with speed.
However, in its proper reduction, when it is a dislocation to the outside, it is necessary for the sick person to lie on the stool, as we mentioned in one with gibbosity. And the tendon is tied over his leg, the sick person properly, and on his chest.
Then two beams are placed, one at his feet, and the other at his head. Then the additional beam is placed in the middle of the foot, firmly fixed: on which wet cloths are laid, so that it does not hurt the sick person: and the beam should be between his hips, so that it is not pulled downwards during extension.
Then all the servants stretch to their part, and the doctor equalizes the reduction by his hand.
If therefore it obeys the return, it will be good.
And if not, place a board on it, and press it evenly, as we said in gibbosity. However, it is necessary for the sick person to lie on his healthy side.
And when the dislocation is to the front, then it is necessary for the sick person's leg to be stretched quickly: and it is according to this same narrative on the stool: and the doctor places his right hand palm on the sick person's hip. Then he binds him with his other hand, and with that binding place him stretched towards the lower part to the knee.
If the dislocation is to the rear: then it is not necessary for the injured person to be extended downwards and raised up on the ground: rather, it is necessary for them to be placed on a hard surface, just as it is necessary for them to be placed in such a position if their ankle is dislocated outwards, according to what we said about their reclining position on two ankles: and the ligaments are stretched, as we said recently.
And it is necessary to apply compression with a board even on the place from which the joint exits, when the reduction is completed according to what is necessary.
And the sign of its reduction is not hidden from you: and it is that you extend both the injured legs: and when you see them equal, and the injured person contracts their leg and expands it without any excuse: then you know that the limb has already returned, according to what is necessary: then join the two thighs and apply a plaster, and bind with imemati, that is, a wheel: in such a way that the ankle does not move towards any part of the body: and let the injured person remain quiet for three days or four.
Then loosen the ligament, and the plaster, and compare the leg with the other: then if you see them equal in position, then you know that the dislocation is already firm: therefore complete the injured person for walking.
And if you see anything of softening: then return and apply the plasters again, and bind it according to your first binding: and let it go for three days also.
Then loosen it and make it slow in walking on both sides for several days until it is strong again.
On Dislocation of the Knee
The knee is dislocated in three ways. The dislocation is directed towards the externals, internals, and inferiors, namely towards the posteriors.
And it is not dislocated towards the anteriors.
And the sign of its dislocation is that you command the sick person to apply his leg to his hip. But if it does not stick to the hip, then you will know that the knee is dislocated.
And the restoration of all its modes of dislocation is to make the sick person sit straight, so that he can extend his leg as much as possible over it, and his back against his face: and place his foot between your feet.
Then hold the knee with your hands, and straighten them across your fingers above the knee. Then apply with your hand two sides of the knee with force. And another servant extends his foot until the knee returns to its place.
And the sign of its return is that the leg sticks to the hip in ease, not with difficulty.
Then apply plasters to him, and make the leg stick to the hip. Then bind it together with a bandage and a splint for three or four days. Then unbind it.
And the sick person should not use walking for several days until he is healed.
But if he refuses to reduce it to you, then apply strong extension with bandages, of which the previous description is given in the cure of the ankle, until it returns.
On the cure of the dislocation of the heel bone.
The heel bone sometimes moves slightly and sometimes is dislocated according to the complement. And its dislocation is made, either towards the internals, or towards the externals.
The sign of its dislocation is that you see the calcaneum (heel bone) inflated, protruding towards the part to which it is dislocated.
However, its cure and removal are easy to restore: and it is to be stretched gently with the hands, and evened, until it returns.
In its cure however, when it dislocates according to the complement, it is necessary that you make the patient sit upright: and hold it firmly with a strong helper from the posterior part of his back, in the middle of itself.
Then hold you with your right hand from the upper part of his foot, and with your left hand from the lower part of his foot in the place of the heel.
Then pull the foot towards you with your right hand. Then with your left hand in two ways.
Then stretch with your left hand, and push the foot's chest towards the leg without labor.
Do this twice, as we have said.
Then push the foot's chest towards the leg in the third way, and you pull the heel.
If therefore it returns to the first way, or to two ways according to this method, and you see the foot evened, it is good: and if not, then repeat the operation on it: for it returns.
But if it is prohibited to you to reduce it with that which we have said: then make the patient lie down on his back on the ground, and fix a firm board in the ground strongly, so that he falls between his hips: and you have already uncovered over him the cloth, so that he does not hurt the patient.
Then let the helper receive his hip: afterwards let the helper extend his foot, or with his hands, or with a band that ties on the neck of the foot. Then every assistant should stand against the extension of his equal: and a staff should be standing between the two hips of the sick person, holding him so that he is not drawn by his body towards the lower parts during the extension.
Then the physician equalizes the dislocation with his hands, and the other assistant holds the healthy leg towards the lower parts. For dislocation returns quickly.
Therefore when the dislocation returns and you are told of its health of return: then place a plaster and bandage, and bind it firmly with bands, and tie the foot with a band to the leg.
And it is necessary that you beware of the cavities or fear the nerves which are above the heel of the back, so that there is not a strong band over them and they are not harmed.
Then let him go for two days or three. If the band is softened, bind it again: then dissolve it on the third day or fourth day: and prevent the sick person from walking for forty days. Indeed if he tries to walk before that time, there is no safety that the dislocation above him does not dissolve and decay, and does not receive after that cure.
If however a boil hot occurs to him: then it is necessary that the attendant in the sedation of him in which our previous account preceded in another place from the cure and ointment, until it is removed.
§ On Dislocation of Toes of the Foot, and Cure.
It is necessary that what is dislocated be equalized with them by extension a few without labor: and indeed this is not difficult, but easy.
If however the dislocation is in certain bends of the back of the foot: then it is necessary that he make the sick person sit his foot on a level with the earth, or on a board: and standing like walking.
Then you should stand and place your foot upon that which is higher than the others among those joints. Then step on it with your foot with strength until it returns, and see that it is now evened out, and does not appear to be raised in place.
Then place a board under its belly which can take the whole foot, with two heads. Then bind it with a decent binding for three days. Then dissolve it and let it rest from walking for many days, until it is bound and secured from the reduction.
¶ On the kinds of dislocation with a wound or fracture.
When something happens to it and you try to cure it and restore it, death often follows: and because of this, it is not fitting for anyone to presume on its cure, which is such as this, unless he is wise in the art with long practice, merciful, pious, slow, not bold, nor presumptuous; and that he use in the beginning of medical treatments which only stop boils with hot: and let him send away the sick by divine judgment. Unless you see or hope for health from the destruction with the alleviation of illness, and in which something appears to be of hope. Then try its reduction immediately at the beginning of the matter, before boil hot occurs.
If then the member returns, as we wish, then administer the regimen which stops boil: and care for the wound with that which is appropriate to it from drying ointments.
If then the dislocation is with fracture, and they occur in the bones of the separated shoulder, then try to remove them, and make in it what we said in simple illnesses from that which preceded in those places.
And keep your wound clean according to your ability, and guard yourself from the entrance into the path of fear: as my previous warning advised you.
For that is better for you before your Creator, and more enduring to your glory, and more saving for your body among them in your time.
