Having completed this book for you, my son, which is the last of the sciences in medicine with its complement, and having reached the end of it through its expositions and declarations, it seemed to me that I should complete it for you with this treatise which is a part of operation, that is, surgery with the hand.
Since operation with the hand has been neglected in our region and time, and perhaps the science of it has entirely perished and its trace has been lost, and only a few small descriptions remain in ancient books which have been changed by hand: and they have suffered error and doubt until their intentions were closed and its vision was lengthened. It seemed to me that I should revive it with the order of this treatise in it according to the way of exposition, declaration, and abbreviation: and that I should come with the forms of Cauterii's tools, and other instruments of work: because it is made from its addition of declaration, and its operation which is necessary.
The reason why a good craftsman of it is not found with his own hand in our time is because the art of medicine is long, and one must be exercised in its author before that in the science of anatomy which Galen narrated, until he knows the joints of the members, and their forms, and their conjunction and separation, and has knowledge of the bones, and nerves, and tendons, and their number, and their exit, and the pulsatilium of veins, and quiet places, and the exits of their places.
And for that reason Hippocrates said that a name with a name is much, and with work is little, and especially in the art of the hand.
But we have already spoken about that in the introduction of this book.
Since those who are not knowledgeable about what we have said regarding anatomy cannot be purged from error, and will fall into the error by which men perish: just as I have seen many from among them who are formed from this science, and boast of it without knowledge, and without experiment.
Which is, because I have seen a stupid doctor cut an abscess of the scrophula on the neck of a woman, and he cut some arteries in the neck: therefore the woman's blood flowed, until she fell dead in his hands.
And I have seen another doctor who presumed to extract a stone from a man who had grown old, and the stone was large. Therefore he reached him, and extracted it with a piece of the bladder. Therefore the man died on the third day.
And I myself had already been called to extract it: and I saw from the size of the stone, and the weakness of the man, that he would die.
And I have seen another doctor who received a bribe from a certain duke of our land for medicine: and it happened to the black eunuch who was with him, a fracture near the calcaneum of his leg: and the doctor rushed with his ignorance, and he bound the fracture over the wound with cotton, and stars, and a strong bandage, and did not let out the wound's expiration.
Then he healed him according to his own desires. Then he sent him away for several days, and commanded him not to untie the bandage: and it stayed like that until his leg was an abscess, and his foot, and it reached his destruction.
Then I was called to him: and I rushed to untie the bandage: and there followed peace, and he escaped from his pains.
However, the corruption was already confirmed in the member: and I could not restrain it.
Therefore, the corruption ceased to walk in the member until it died.
And I saw another doctor who punctured the cancerous abscess: and it became an ulcer after days, until its wickedness was revealed to its lord.
Which is to say, because when the cancer is pure from melancholic humor, then it is not necessary for it to reach him with iron at all, unless there is in the member that can bear, so that the whole of it be cut off.
And because of this, my son, it is necessary for you to know that the operation with hand is divided into two divisions: namely, the operation to which health is associated, and the operation, with which there is danger in many arrangements.
And I have already awakened in every place of this book, in which the operation comes, in which there is fear and fear.
Therefore it is necessary for you to beware of that, and leave it: so that the fool may not find a way to speak, and disgrace.
Take therefore the measure with solicitude and protection, and your infirm ones with facility and firmness, and use the better way leading to salvation and laudable success through the grace of God: and leave terrible difficulties of healing: and take away your souls from that which makes you fear, so that hesitancy may enter upon you in your faith and your good.
For it is rather remaining to your glory, and higher in this world, and finally to your quantities.
For Galenus has already said in some of his admonitions. You shall not apply harmful remedies: lest you be called bad physicians.
I have, however, divided this Treatise into three Chapters.
Chapter One.
Chapter One: On the use of fire and sharp medicine, arranged from beginning to end, including the forms of instruments and tools for cauterization, and all that is necessary for the operation.
Chapter Two.
Chapter Two: On cutting and piercing, bloodletting and incision, and wounds: and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and all arranged according to the forms of instruments.
Chapter Three.
Chapter Three: On restoration, and dislocation, and the cure of twisting, and similar things; arranged from beginning to end, and according to the forms of instruments.
However, before I mention the operation with it, it is necessary to tell of the quality of its cauterization and its harm: and in which constitution it should be shown.
I say therefore, that the speech about the quality of cauterization and its harm is a long and subtle science, and an occult secret.
For indeed there was much talk about it among the wise men, and they disagreed in it: and to me, however, it is not enough from their words, fearing prolongation.
I say therefore, that the cauterization brings universally to every constitution, which is with matter, and without matter: excepting two constitutions, which are the constitution hot without matter, and the constitution dry without matter.
However, in a hot and dry compound with matter, they separated. For indeed some said that the cauterizing iron of the juvenile was in it. And others said the opposite of that, namely that the cauterizing iron is not suitable for the ailment, which is from heat and dryness: because the nature of fire is heat: and unsuitable, so as to be healed from the ailment hot and dry, with hot and dry.
And he who said the opposite of that: that through cauterizing, a cure is made in every hot and dry ailment which occurs in human bodies: because when you compare the body of man, and his humidities, to the compound of fire, you find the body of man cold.
And indeed I say by his speech: because from experiment he has extracted that from me many times already.
However, it is not necessary, unless he who has already been tested, and exercised in the chapter of cauterization exercise lastly, and knows the diversity of human compounds, and the disposition of ailments in themselves, and their causes, and their accidents, and the time of them.
But from other compounds there is no fear on you: and especially in cold and wet ailments. For indeed all doctors have now gathered on them: and they did not separate in the cure with cauterizing in them.
And know, O sons, that from the secret of the cure with cauterizing and fire, and its goodness over cauterizing with burning medicine is: because fire is simple, whose action does not reach, except to the member which is being cauterized: and it does not harm another member joined with it, unless a small harm.
The action of medicine has reached the point where it extends beyond the members: and perhaps it causes difficulty in healing a member, and perhaps it kills.
However, fire due to its subtlety and goodness of its substance, does not do that unless it overflows.
Now indeed we have become aware of that through experience, because of the length of service and study with the art, and the position on the truth of things: and for that reason I excuse myself from the length of speech.
And if it were not, because it is not allowed to this my book, I would bring you a secret hidden in fire, and the quality of its operation in bodies for its expulsion, which expels difficulties demonstrated by philosophical speech, which would be remembered by your minds.
And know, sons, that they themselves disagree at the time when it is fitting to do cauterization, and put a better time for true.
And I say, that cauterization is fitting at all times: because the accidental harm is submerged in benefit, which is drawn with the cauterizer. Especially if cauterization is for pain from necessary pains, strong, urgent ones who do not tolerate slowness: because it is feared from them that something evil may happen which is greater than the small harm that comes through time.
And may not fall into your minds, sons, that which they do not fear, namely the common people and stupid doctors, namely that to the pain which is healed by cauterization, there is not always return: and they put this consequence, and the thing is not as they think: because cauterization is not, except in the place of medicine, which changes the complexion, and dries the humidities which are the cause why pains happen.
However, the cauterizing instrument exceeds medicine by its speed of healing, and its effectiveness of operation, and its forcefulness of dominance: and it is possible that the sickness returns at some hour of a time according to the temperament of the infirm, and the location of his sickness, and its virtue: and that which is prepared in his body from the accumulation of superfluities in him: and that which reaches him in his acquisition of it from foods, and similar ones to those, unless sickness occurs, in which the cauterizing is administered.
Subtle sickness in a member of few superfluities, and moistures, such as the cauterizing of the tooth, because of pain, and similar to it, is possible that that pain does not return in him. But that happens in few.
But truly the talk of the common people again, that the cauterizing is the last of medicine, is right: not to that which they intend in it: because they believe that there is no cure which confers with medicine, nor with another after the falling of the cauterizing.
But the thing is contrary to that, and intent, that the cauterizing is the last of medicine, is not, unless when we administer modes of cure in some sickness, and those medicines do not confer: then we administer at the end of the matter cauterizing, and it confers: then from there it falls, that the cauterizing is the last of medicine, not according to the understanding which the common people and many stupid physicians intend.
But the ancients said, that the cauterizing with gold is better than the cauterizing with iron: and they did not say that, unless because of the equality of gold, and sublimity of its substance: and they said, that it does not make a pus place of the cauterizing. However, it is not absolutely true that I have already proven and discovered that this does not work in certain bodies without other things.
And the cautery iron itself is good, and better than with iron, as they said. However, when you use the cautery iron in fire from gold, it is not declared to you when it burns according to the quantity you want, because of the redness of gold: and when it rushes to the heat, and if you add more fire to it, it melts in the fire and turns into sheets.
Therefore, the craftsman falls from this into his trade: and for that reason, the cautery iron with iron is faster and closer to us in relation to the operation.
And indeed, I have already arranged this Chapter on the Cautery in order according to chapters, and I have arranged them from the head to the feet, so that those seeking something from it may find it easily.
Chapter 2.
This cautery application gives control over moisture and cold above the brain: which are two causes of sweat, and a multitude of fluids flowing from the head to the parts of the eyes and ears, and a multitude of sleep, and toothache, and throat pain, and general all kinds of discomfort that occur from cold, such as paralysis, and sweating, epilepsy, and apoplexy, and similar illnesses to these diseases.
The method of cauterying is that you order the sick person: so that he may be emptied in the first place with a cleansing solution for the head three nights, or four, according to the strength of the sick person, and his age, and his custom.
Then instruct him to shave his head with a razor. Then make him sit between your hands in a square position, so that he has already placed his hands on his chest.
Then place the root of your thumb on the root of his nose between his eyes. Whenever your middle finger reaches that spot, mark that location with an unclean (mark).
Then heat the cauterizing iron, which has this shape.
Then place it on the marked spot with the unclean (mark), with a downward movement, by which your hand is gradually constricted, and you turn it back. Then quickly withdraw your hand, and look at the spot.
If you see that the bone quantity of the head is already detached, or the quantity of zeuberg, then withdraw your hand. And if not, repeat your hand with the iron itself, or with another from it if it is cooled: until the bones that I told you about are seen.
Then take some salt and dissolve it in water, and drink it with the wound: and put it on that spot, and leave it for three days.
Then place the salve on top of that which was drunk with butter, and leave it on the spot until the scar of the fire is destroyed. Then care for it with the quadripharmacon ointment, until it is healed.
They have already said that the more the wound remains open, the more it emits pus: therefore it is better and more beneficial.
And some of them said that the skin should be cauterized until the bone: and the cauterizing iron should be held until something of the thickness of bone is burned.
Then, after it has been set and become hardened from the bone, it should be dressed.
Some say that it is necessary to apply the cautery directly to the bone until an impression is made in the bone, so that the bone falls off as if by a kirate: or with an instrument similar to one used by women for writing small letters: and they believe that vapors from the head will escape from this place, and the wound will be left open for a long time.
Then it should be dressed until it has become hardened.
In my opinion, these two kinds of cautery are not seen at all in all men except in certain men according to the way of fear.
And it is better to leave it alone with its own health, in my opinion.
For the head is weakened from the solution of its own natural continuity: as we have shown in other members: and especially when the head of an infirm person is weak by nature: and indeed the first kind of cautery is more saving and better for me, and I use it: therefore work with it in health.
Head III.
When pain in the whole head is chronic and prolonged in an infirm person, and he uses herbs, and coals, and purgatives, and oils, and fomentations. And especially if he has already been cauterized with one cautery, which we have mentioned, and does not give him anything from those: then consider. For if the head of the infirm person is strong by nature, and is not weak, and has found a violent cold: then cauterize with another cautery under it. Then cauterize it above all the horns of its own head with the cautery, so that it does not pass through the skin, and a quantity of bone is exposed, as we have mentioned. And burn it with a single cauterizing tool at the back of its head, in the place called the 'navel': and it is the location where the windpipe is placed. And lift up your mat (or bed) in this, and do not uncover its mouth. For indeed it found itself due to this intense pain, and different from the pain of all other cauterizations of the head.
And I will call this Cauterium in its place: and it is necessary that it be a cauterizing tool, by which the horns of the head are cauterized, and the back of its head more subtly with a cauterizing tool, by which the middle of the head is cauterized.
Chapter IV.
When it happens that pain and swelling occur in a part of the head, or the pain extends to the eye, and is evacuated with cleansing drugs for the head, and the rest of the cure, which I said in the divisions of ailments, and not all of it: then cauterization in that is according to two methods: either cauterization with a sharp burning drug: or with iron.
But the cauterizing tool with a sharp burning drug is, as you take one tooth of garlic, and scrape it, and cut off its ends from two sides. Then cut the place of the pain at the time with a wide lancet, until it becomes in it a place under the skin, in which the tooth is caught.
Then insert it into that under the skin, until it is hidden: then bind it above with a suitable amount of cotton, and release it after fifteen hours, and remove the garlic, and let it rest for two or three days: afterwards put butter soaked cloth on top of it, until the place becomes pus: then care for it with ointment until it is healed.
And if you wish to do this with certain burning medicines which I have written about in my twelfth treatise on burning remedies.
Indeed, the cautery of it with iron is done in this manner. The cauterizing iron, which has this shape.
And it is called a Claw: because the shape of its head is like the shape of a claw, in which there is something curved, and in the middle of it is a small elevation.
Then place it on the spot and hold your hand: and you will turn the iron gradually with speed: and the quantity that is burned from the thickness of the skin, is like its middle. And lift your hand, so that the artery which is below does not burn, and blood flows.
Then dip the wound in salt water, and place it on the spot, and leave it for three days: then place the wound with butter: afterwards care with ointment until it is healed.
And if you wish, cautery this hemicrania with the second edge of the knife of the cauterizer. And avoid from incision of the artery in this hemicrania, not anciently proper.
§ On the manner of cauterying in ancient hemicrania.
When you are treating hemicrania, with that which we said from the previous cure, and what we said in divisions of ailments, and it does not benefit him: and you see from the ailment, that it is not sufficient to him what we said from the first cauterizing with medicine, or with cauterizer with fire, then it is necessary to burn the knife cauterizer, until it becomes white after the signs of pain on the spot, whose length is the middle of the finger, or rather that: and place your hand one vice [?] and stretch it until you cut the artery, and reach up to the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuation of the jawbone, which moves during mastication, lest it be burned or a nerve that moves it be affected, from which spasm may arise.
And let this be over the guard and the precaution of the flow of blood from the artery that has been cut. For in its division there is fear, and especially for him who does not know what it does, and is not eager or experienced: and he leaves the operation with him first.
And I will come with the remembrance of the management of the flow of blood from the artery according to its own way, and in its place in this book.
But if you see from the pain that this cauterizer does not suffice for him, and you see the weak body bearing the cauterizer in the middle of the head, as we have narrated, care for the wound until he is healed.
And if you wish, administer the cauterizer that we said in the chapter of extracting the artery with a cauterizer having two knives. For this cauterization is better and more suitable.
About the method of cauterizing in pain of the ear.
When it happens that pain occurs in the ear from cold, and is cured with solutions, and the other cure that we said in division, and the pain is not removed, then cauterize with fire: and this is called a punctum, whose form is this.
Then puncta with it after its ignition in the circumference of the ear entirely, as it is turned around: or in the circumference of both, if the pain is in both. And draw yourself away from the root of the ear a little, after you have marked the places with the cauterizer: and let the quantity of the cauterizer be ten puncta in every ear, and so.
Then care for the affected areas until they are healed.
On the method of cauterizing in torture.
Chapter VII.
The torture that is cured with cauterization is only from certain species that occur from phlebitis, as we mentioned in the divisions of illnesses.
And the lack of cauterization of this species, which occurs from dryness and spasm of the nerve.
When you treat this species of torture with honey, and headpurges, and gargarisms, and your cure does not help, then it is necessary for you to cauterize the sick person with three cauterizations: one at the root of the ear, and second somewhat lower from his temple, and third at the connection of the two lips.
And place your cauterization on the opposite side of the weak part. Since softening does not occur, except in the part that appears healthy.
And the form of cauterization is, to cauterize the same cauterization instrument directly at the tip of the upper ear under the horn of the head somewhat: and another in the temple, whose length should be according to the length of the thumb. And place your hand with the cauterization instrument until half the thickness of the skin is burned.
And this is the form of the cauterization instrument, and it is a species from a knife, whose form was mentioned before: however, it is not too thin, as you see: and it should be that the knife is somewhat lacking in thickness.
Then care for the affected areas, with what preceded, until healed.
On the method of cauterizing in ancient apoplexy.
When ancient apoplexy is cured, and you treat it with what we mentioned, and your medication does not help, and the sick person does not have a fever, then cauterize him with four cauterizations over all the horn of his head, and with the cauterization instrument in the middle of his head, as we mentioned, and with the cauterization instrument in the back of his head, according to what preceded: and the mode of cauterization should be according to what preceded.
Even the lip of the stomach is cauterized with a cautery: and it is more distant.
Then it should be treated, with what came before.
Chapter 9.
It is necessary that in the jar great amounts of hiera picra and cleansing pills be given first, and they cleanse the brain.
Then shave the head of the sick person all over, and place on his occipital bone the plaster described in the treatise on plasters: and place it repeatedly.
For this is indeed the method of cauterization: and do it according to the order which I said there.
If therefore he is healed by this, good. If not: then do to him three cauterizations in the posterior part of his head, which are descending from the superior part of his head down to the lower part of the eye: and place between every cauterization the thickness of a finger.
Then treat the cauterization, with what came before.
If however you wish to add, and the sick person is able to tolerate it: then do to him cauterization in the middle. If however you wish to add: then cauterize him on two horns.
Then treat him, until he is healed: and the cauterization should be oily according to the form which was mentioned.
On the method of cauterizing in paralysis, and softening.
Chapter 10.
It is necessary that you proceed with the cleansing of the head with hiera picra, and with what we said.
Then shave the head of the sick person: afterwards cauterize him in the middle of his head, and with cauterization on every horn of his head, and with cauterization on his posterior, and three on his spinal processes.
If you lack the necessary skills in mollification of the body and are weak in tolerating pain, and the sickness is strong: then cauterize him with four cauteries on the spines of his back, and the last one with the cauteri, until most of his skin is burned off, and lift your hand. Then care for him until he recovers: and thus use the cauteri.
On the method of cauterizing in epilepsy.
An epileptic should not be cauterized unless he is one whose epilepsy is caused by phlegm.
Therefore, you must first cleanse his brain with hyeris, and with the rest of the cure that we mentioned in the division, when he is weak, or unable to bear medicines.
If he is a child who cannot bear medicines, then give him a gargle, and cleansing mouthpieces to cleanse his brain, before many days with good nourishment.
Then shave his head, and then cauterize him with a single cauteri in the middle of his head, according to what preceded in method: and with another cauteri in the back of his head, and on every horn of his head with a cauteri. If he is weak and able to bear it, then cauterize him with the cauteries that I mentioned in having paralysis, and mollification of the body on the spines of his neck, and the spines of his back: and let the cauteri be olive according to the method that preceded.
If he is a child who is weak, then place a thin cauteri according to this method.
On the method of cauterizing in melancholy.
When the cause of melancholy is corrupted humors and thick phlegm, then cauterize it with the cauteries that we mentioned for one having paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is an excess of humors flowing down to melancholy, and there is a weak humid body, then give it a drink that cleanses its brain, according to what preceded in division: then shave the weak head, and make afterwards a well-made tortellini from linen, like a circle.
Then place it in the middle of the head: and the weak one sitting squared should be held from all sides.
Then present the liniment. And it is more fitting from old butter. And heat it over a fire with temperate heating measure, which the finger could tolerate when inserted into it. Then wash it out in the middle of its head in a circle, and let it go until it is cooled down.
Do this for the weak one once a week, with good regimen of his other things, until he is healed.
Or if you wish, cauterize it by making small points as much as possible of it, except that you hold your hand with the cauterizer: indeed it is scented.
For this kind of cauterization moistens the brain with quality.
Then place over it a wet cloth soaked in butter, or chicken fat.
About the way of cauterizing in descending water to the eye.
Chapter 13.
When the beginning of water is declared to you in the eye by signs, which I said in division, then begin and give the weak one a drink, with that which will cleanse his head.
And guard it from all moistures, and make it sit in the bath, on fasting days for several days.
Then order him to roast his head, and cauterize it in the middle of his head. Then cauterize it over two temples with two cauteries, if there is the beginning of descent of water into both eyes at once: or from one side, if there is the beginning of water in one eye: and cut off with the cautery all veins and arteries which are under the skin: and let the cauterization be long in the width of the temples: and beware of blood flow.
If you see anything from it, then cut it off immediately with whatever medicine is possible: and I will come with wisdom, which is in the extraction of arteries, and cutting them off, and precaution against blood flow.
And sometimes it is cauterized on the back, under two bones, with two last-produced cauteries.
¶ On the manner of cauterizing in the tears of olden times.
When the tears of the eyes are olden, constant: and they are over veins, and arteries which are in manifestly the outside of the head, it is verified that that is from excessive cold, phlegmatic: then cauterize with the cautery which I have mentioned in the beginning of water descending, cauterization in the middle of the head, and with two cauteries over two temples, and with two cauterizations in the back under two bones. And if you lack addition, then cauterize it on all side with caution the eye, over the extreme end of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
¶ On the manner of cauterizing in the pus of the nose.
When you are treating that which we mentioned in the division, and medication does not help: then hasten, and give the weak person a decoction of three nights: afterwards shave his head, and cauterize it with a medium cauterizer, with an oil lamp. Then cauterize it with a clawed cauterizer, with two cauterizers, above two eyebrows under the hair slightly.
And guard against the artery, lest you cut it.
And this is the form of the clawed cauterizer.
Concerning the method of cauterizing in the softening of the eyelid.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened from pain or moisture: then cauterize the eyelid with a single cauterizer, with this lunar cauterizer.
And if you wish, cauterize it above two eyebrows slightly with two cauterizers in every part: and they should be lengthened from two temples: and the length of all cauterizers should be according to the lengths of the eyebrows: and do not extend your hand with the cauterizer, but according to the quantity that burns the third eyelid.
Concerning the method of cauterizing the eyelid when the hairs are facing away from the eye and are sharp.
The cauterizer in that is according to two methods: either a cauterizer with fire: or a cauterizer with burning medicine.
But in the cauterizer with fire, order the sick person before it, so that he may let go of his hairs, if it is from those who shave them, until they are lengthened and equalized. If however they are pricked by them at the time of their birth: then bind his eyes with a bandage, so that they do not move, until they are born.
When therefore they are born and equalized, then place the head of the sick person in your lap: afterwards mark the eyelids with a pencil, with the sign that it is according to the form of the myrtle leaf: and let the beginning of the sign be near the hairs.
Then place a wet cloth soaked in egg white: or in the mucilage of psyllium on the eye.
Then with a cauterizing iron, whose form is this.
Then cauterize above the sign that you marked on the eyelids many times, until the surface of the skin is burned, which is like the form of the myrtle leaf, entirely visible.
And the sign of the health of your work is: that if you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted, and the hairs raised near the puncture of the eye.
Raise therefore your hand then: and let him go for three days.
Then place on him a cloth with butter, until the eschar is removed. Then care for him with ointment, until he is healed.
If however some of the hairs return after an hour, and the eyelid is softened: then repeat the cauterizing iron on that place, as you did in the first time.
If however the hairs are in the lower part: then cauterize that, until it is raised to its natural place: and equalized so that they do not prick the eye with the hairs.
It is that you command the sick person, that he let go of the hairs, until they lengthen and equalize. Make a shape of a leaf from paper and cloth.
Then take equal amounts of known soap and dry, unmixed powdered chalk, each weighing one ounce or about that amount: then grind them together well, and make it into a paste quickly, so that it does not harden. Then take a piece of the paste from the one you made and spread it on the paper in the shape of a leaf, and place it on the eyelid of one or both eyes. And place under the eye a wet compress soaked in egg white: and let the sick person rest in your lap.
And place your finger on the remedy and press it gently. And move it whenever the sick person feels the bite of the remedy, for its bite is like fire.
And while he continues to feel this bite that he found, then remove the remedy and move it with your finger. And when the bite stops, then remove the remedy and wash the eye with water.
And then consider whether you see the eyelid swelling, as it does with contraction with fire or with incision, it is good: and if not, then repeat over it from the remedy on the place where it does not press the remedy and does not stain, until your operation equals and the eye closes.
Then place a wet compress with butter on it until the skin burn is removed. Then care for it with diaphanicon ointment or another one, until it heals.
And it is necessary for you during the operation to guard the last guardianship, lest something fall into the eye from the remedy.
If the eyelid softens after days and something fights from the hair in the eye, then repeat the remedy on that place which softens from the eyelid properly, as you did in the first place. Then take care of yourself until you are healed.
And this is the shape of a myrtle leaf.
And you should know that human eyes differ in size and shape. Therefore, according to that, your consideration should be: and the path of righteousness is not hidden from him who has a desire for this art.
About the method of cauterizing in a lacrimal fistula.
When you are treating a fistula, since as we said in the divisions of diseases, and your cure does not combine: then, it is necessary for you to cauterize it according to this method.
Instruct the patient to place his head in your lap, and hold his head between his hands in this way, so that he does not move, nor move his head with his own.
Then place a compress soaked in white of egg, or in a mucilage of psyllium on his eye: then ignite the cauterizing iron, whose shape is this.
It should be concave, like the shape of a quill pen's feather from one end, with which it is made into a cauterizing iron: and if you wish it to be penetrating up to the other end, and if you wish it to be upwards, then try.
However, this concave is better for your work.
Then express the fistula, if it is open, and extract the pus from it, and dry it: and if it is not open, then open it, and extract the pus from it.
Then place then on it the cauterizing iron, which is made to burn very hot.
And hold with it your hand for a little by the cauterizing iron from the eye, to the part of the nose, so that your hand does not wander, or disturb the sick person: and place the cauterizing iron in the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
If you reach the beginning of your cauterizing instrument up to the mouth, it will be good. But if not, then repeat the cauterizing instrument once or twice, depending on what you need from it, and let it rest for three days.
Then place a bandage with butter on it, and care for it with drying ointment until it heals.
But if forty days have passed and it has not healed: then place a sharp corrosive medicine on it until the mouth is opened: and shave it according to what comes in its chapter.
And there is another method of cauterizing a fistula, which some first said. Bend to the place of the fistula, and find it: then place in it a fine cannula, that is, a fine needle, whose form is this. And pour in it a quantity of drachma of melted lead, and hold your hand with the cannula with good retention, and not move it at all weakly, so that it does not run or reach the melted lead to its eye.
And you should place on the weak eye's bandage an infused bandage on white of egg or in water.
For lead burns the place of the fistula, and heals it with a wonderful healing.
But if the fistula is healed, with what we said from cauterizing and curing, it is good. But if not, then it is necessary to administer the nostril hole, and reduce the fistula to the course of the nose, according to what comes in its own place.
Concerning the method of cauterizing in lip splits.
Many times it happens in lip splits, which are called hairs, and especially in the lips of children.
When therefore you are concerned with these wounds, since as we said in the division of diseases, and there is no cure, then a small knife heated by fire, in this form.
And its hollowness according to the thinness of the knife.
Then place it quickly in these wounds, until the heated knife reaches the depth of the wounds.
Then care for it with a poultice, until it is healed.
¶ On the method of cauterizing in a mouth ulcer.
When an abscess occurs at the root of the gingiva, or in the palate, or in the roots of the teeth: then it produces pus, and bursts: afterwards it becomes putrid, and pus runs out, and a fistula is formed: then care for it, and there is no cure for it, then it is necessary to use a heated knife according to the amount that can be taken into the fistula. Then insert it into the hole of the fistula, and hold your hand until the heated knife reaches the depth and end of it, and do it once or twice.
Then care for it after that, with what we said about cure until it is healed.
If therefore the pus is cut off, and it is healed, it will be good. And if not, then it is necessary to expose the place, and remove the bone of the decayed part according to what comes to its head.
¶ On the method of cauterizing in the gums, and softened teeth.
When the gum is softened due to moisture, and the teeth move, and you care for it with medicines, and there is no cure: then place the head of the sick person in your lap.
Then, place the cauterizing iron, whose shape will be described later, on top of the tooth: and quickly insert the hot cauterizing instrument into it: and hold your hand there for a moment, until you feel the weak heat of the fire has reached the root of the tooth.
And then lift your hand: and then repeat the cauterizing instrument several times, according to what you wish.
Then the weak person will fill their mouth with salt water, and hold it for one hour: and then spit it out.
For the tooth is strengthened by movement, and the gums are softened and contracted, and the corrupted moisture is dried up.
On the method of cauterizing in tooth pain.
When the toothache is due to coldness, or there is frost in it, or worms, and no cure is found with medicines: then the cauterizing instrument is used in two ways: either with butter: or with fire.
But the cauterizing instrument with butter is, that you take boiled butter in an iron spoon, or in a brass vessel. Then take a cloth, and cover it over the outer part of the tooth. Then immerse it in the boiled butter: and place it on the painful tooth quickly, and hold it until it cools: then repeat it several times, until the power of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, immerse a cloth, or a rag in cold butter, and place it on the painful tooth: and place a burning iron on top of it: until the fire reaches the deep hollow of the tooth.
But the cauterizing with fire is, that you direct it towards the nozzle of air, or the nozzle of iron. And let there be something rough on his body, so that the sharpness of fire does not reach the mouth of the sick person.
Then place the cautery, which will come in the shape of a cautery, on his tooth: and hold your hand over it until the cautery is cooled down.
Do this several times, for the pain will be removed, either on that same day or on another day.
And it is necessary for the sick person to fill his mouth with good beurage after the impression of that cautery, and hold it for an hour: then spit it out.
And this is the shape of the cautery.
Cautery with whatever extremity you can, according to what is possible: and this is the shape of the tube.
On the method of cauterying in strophuli.
When strophuli are from phlegm, and from cold humors, and are not obedient to digestion by medicines, and you want to quickly digest them: then place a flat cautery on fire, which has this shape.
Having two open extremities, so that the smoke comes out from the cautery by the other extremity: and place it on fire over the abscess once, and secondly, if you need it, until it reaches the depth of the abscess.
If the abscess is small: then place the cautery according to the amount of the abscess.
Then let it go for three days, and place on it a soft infusion in butter, until what the fire burned is removed.
Then care for it with tooth ointment, until the shape of the tube heals.
On the method of cauterying in a hoarse voice, and constriction of breath.
When moistures accumulate over the bronchial canal, and especially when it is accompanied by a cold constitution, then it is necessary for the sick person to be evacuated first with dissolved remedies.
Then cauterize the affected part at the root of the throat in a depressed place: and beware, do not let the cauterizer reach the throat, nor in the skin, unless something of it.
Then cauterize the affected part at the junction of the neck at the last spine of its end, and let the cauterizer be a sealing one according to the manner that preceded.
Then care for it with what preceded until it is healed.
On the method of cauterizing in afflictions of the lungs and coughs.
When cough and affliction of the lungs are from cold moistures, and the sick person does not have fever, nor phthisis, and old affliction: then cauterize it with two cauterizers above the backbone in depressed, loose, empty places. And with another cauterizer in the middle of the chest between two breasts: and let the cauterizer be a needle according to the form that preceded.
And if your cauterization is by puncturing with the cauterizer called Punctum, whose form preceded in puncturing pain of the ear: and there are punctures from thirty punctures almost to another.
Then care for it with what preceded until it is healed.
And now let the cauterizer have three branches: according to this form. Therefore it is relieved with that cauterization when you do it with one three-pronged cauterizer.
Chapter 27.
When the head of the humerus is dislocated due to moisture, and it does not return to its place at the time of its return from dislocation, until it becomes a habit for it to return, then it is dislocated by a small movement, as we have already testified, at that time you should reduce the dislocation in the first place. Then the patient should lie face down on his back, or on the healthy side. Then lift the blanket, which is on the inside of the tonsils towards the upper part with your left hand's fingers: and if the joint is dislocated towards the inside.
Then hold the cauterizing iron having two holes. Whose form is this.
Then cauterize the blanket until it penetrates it to the other side, and the figure of cauterization comes with four cautery irons.
And sometimes cauterization is done with a cauterizing iron having three holes, so the figure of cauterization is made then with six cautery irons: and they are holes according to the thinness of the thread.
And this is the form of a cauterizing iron having three holes.
And sometimes one is added to this mode, so there are eight cautery irons.
Then place on the cauterizing iron crushed salt with salt. Then make the patient stick to the tranquility, so that the limb does not move during any time until he is strengthened.
And if the dislocation is towards the upper part, and this rarely happens, then cauterize it on the arm with a claw cautery, or with many cautery irons pricking.
For the joint is strengthened and moisture is removed, and the sick person is healed.
On the method of cauterizing the Stomach.
When fever and excessive moisture occur in the stomach until it is removed from its surroundings, and more cataracts are multiplied to it, and frequent modes of treatment are not effective: then the sick person should be raised up on his back, and extend his legs, and his hands. Then cauterize with three cauteries, the cautery under the collarbone in the amount of one finger's width with the cautery clavicle, and two cauteries below from both sides of the cautery of one, until the figure of the cauteries triangular. And extend between each so that they do not connect when they make pus.
And let the depth of the cautery be the amount of two tertiary thicknesses of the skin.
And let the figure of the cauteries be according to this form without addition: and if you wish to cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form: and let the cautery be made into this cautery one according to the form of a circle according to this form.
And the stomach is cauterized by puncturing it with the cautery that frightens it: and there are signs above the stomach punctured according to the amount that you wish with the encaustro: then cauterize it with the cautery of the puncture: then care for it with the cure that preceded until it is healed.
On the method of cauterizing a cold Kidney.
When pain occurs in the kidney from cold and moisture, or from excessive dryness, until it exits its natural outflow with excessive outflow, and the sick person is healed, with that which we said, and does not improve in it: then it is necessary for the sick person to be raised up on his neck, and signs with the cautery three cauteries according to this form, and this amount of cauteries below the hypogastrium, where the arm of a man reaches: and let there be space that is the width of one finger between each cauterium: and let the cauterium be according to the length of the body straight: and do not press your hand with the cautery too much.
And let the quantity of that which is burned be from the thickness of the skin, and let the quantity of its middle not be added: and let it be a weak standing on its feet.
But if it is not standing, then it is lying, which has already extended its legs and raised its arms.
This is the form of the cautery.
And indeed it is possible for you to perform this cautery with a knife, when you have skill and wisdom in the art.
And guard yourself, so that you do not proceed to the cauterization to the end, and the thickness of the skin is burned throughout, why the whole body is burned, and it reaches the intestines: for the skin there is delicate, therefore know this.
¶ On the method of cauterizing abscesses in the liver.
When it happens, and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the liver, or in its membrane: then if it is in the flesh of the liver, the weak pain invades, and there is gravity without sharpness: and if it is in the membrane of the liver, with sharp pain: and you see already, that its cure has fatigued the doctors.
Therefore it is necessary for the weak to lean back on his neck. Then the form of the location of the abscesses with the cautery: then ignite the cautery which is like a ray. And this is its form. And cauterize with that cautery one, until the whole skin is burned, and it reaches the sinews, until all the pus comes out: then care for him with the cure of the wounds, until he is healed.
And it is not necessary to use this cauterization species, unless whose study in the art of medicine is prolonged: and through whose hand these miseries with experiment many times: then for he dares on this operation.
Indeed, it is better to let her go, with me.
On the method of cauterizing in Pleurisy.
The ancients said that a cautery with the roots of Aristolochia should be applied to Pleurisy in this manner. And it is, that you should take from the dry roots of Aristolochia a long one, the longest root that can be found, and it should be as thick as the size of a finger. Then immerse it in oil: and light it in the fire. Then cauterize it with a cautery one in that which is between the continuity of the ribs with the neck, and two small cauteries under the guides slightly inclined to the part that is under the chin.
And two cauteries also in that which is between the fifth and sixth ribs slightly inclined to the backs a little: and with another cautery in the middle of the chest, and with another above the stomach. And three cauteries from the backs: one in that which is between two spatulas: and two cauteries from two sides of the chest, lower cauteria that is between two spatulas.
And it is not necessary to press your hand with the cautery, but rather it should be in plain sight on the skin smelling.
And some ancients have said that from men there are those who use a cautery from iron like a ray: and they burn, and they put it inside in that which is between the ribs, until it reaches with it to the aposteme, and the pus comes out: as we said in the aposteme of Epatis.
But in this puncturing with the cautery it is from fear, that either he dies weak immediately, or a fistula occurs in the place, which has no cure.
Chapter 32 on the method of cauterizing the spleen.
When you are treating the spleen ailment, since as we mentioned earlier in the cure of divisions, and your treatment does not restore it, then cauterization is applied to it in three ways, all of which are correct.
One of these is to perform three or four cauterizations along the length of the spleen according to the shape of the liver cauteries, whose figure precedes it.
And let there be between each cauterization a quantity of thickness like that of a finger, or a little more or less.
And let the mode of cauterization be as we mentioned in the cauterization of the liver equally.
And do not press your hand with the cauterization: and let him be weak and lying on his back.
And another method of cauterization is: that you have a two-pronged cauterization, which we mentioned in the chapter on dislocation of the shoulder: and elevate the skin, which is on the spleen directly, where the elbow of the weak left hand reaches: and your elevation be as you elevate the skin according to the width of the body, so that the cauterizations fall according to the length of the body.
Then insert two burning prongs deeply until you pierce the skin from the other side: then remove the cauterization: thus four cauterizations are made.
And if you wish to cauterize with another cauterization having three prongs.
Then care for the cauterization after you have dismissed it, by emitting the pus over many days: for it is more beneficial than all that came before in the cure.
Chapter 32 on the method of cauterizing in hydrocele.
The cautery does not fall in hydrocephalus, unless properly trained.
When you are treating hydrocephalus with the methods of cure that we mentioned in the division, and do not combine the cure, then it is necessary to cauterize the affected area with four cauteries around the umbilicus, and one cauterization on the stomach, and one on the spleen, and two cauterizations after the back between the vertebrae, and one in direct pectoris, and one in direct stomachi: and let the depth of the cauterization be close to the thickness of the skin.
Then leave the cautery open, so that it may emit pus over a long period of time.
And do not evacuate the patient from treatment after the cauterization with him: which is necessary that two intentions should gather to him: and he will quickly approach him with the help of God.
Indeed, the form of the cautery with which the abdomen is cauterized should be closed: according to what preceded its form: and the form of the one with which the back is cauterized should be oily according to what preceded its form.
On the method of cauterizing feet and legs.
When blisters form in hydrocephalus, and are filled with yellow water: it is necessary to cauterize on the back of the foot in the nocrati, which is between the auricular and annular: and raise your hand with the cautery, and do not twist it: then raise your hand: and do not rub it at all.
For the yellow water flows out, and the cautery is according to this form.
Then make two cauterizations on both legs, and let the cautery be made with the tip of the cautery knife: and let the cautery be made according to the length of the leg, one under the knee, and the other below it, near the middle of the leg: and two cauterizations on each hip: and leave the cautery open without treatment for a long time: so that some water may flow out from it: then treat it with the rest which we said.
On the method of cauterizing in the operation of ventroscopy.
Chapter 35.
When there is a solution of the belly due to cold and moisture, until it weakens the retentive and digestive powers that are in the stomach and intestines: and it is cured with methods of cure, but not healed: and you see an infirm person tolerating an excessive cauterizing instrument, then cauterize him with a large cauterizing iron on his stomach, according to what preceded in the cauterization of the stomach with the cauterizing circle, and four cauterizing needles in the circumference of the umbilicus, with the thin cauterizing needle: and cauterize him above the alcatin on the alhosos with a large one, or with two cauterizing irons.
And if you see excessive moistures, and the infirm person tolerating that, then cauterize him with a cauterizing iron on the comb, and cauterize him over all the belly: and perhaps add two small cauterizing needles near the large one on his stomach.
For there is a cure that progresses, whose remedy does not fail.
On the method of cauterizing hemorrhoids.
Chapter 36.
When in the anus there are many old hemorrhoids, or one, and they are from thick humors, cold, or corrupt moisture, and they are cured with that which we said in the division, and not by a single cure: then cauterize them with three cauterizing needles on the lower spondyle of the back slightly triangularly, and cauterize under the umbilicus as if with two fingers.
And if you think that his stomach is cold, and his food is not digested, and you see his face swell, then cauterize him on his stomach with a large cauterizing iron, according to what preceded: and cauterize above his epigastric region, and another above his spleen, with the thin cauterizing needle: and let the cauterizing iron rest open for some time: then cure him until he is healed.
Chapter 37.
When you remove the ulcer, then you burn the cauterizing iron that resembles a needle. Then insert the burning iron into the removed ulcer: and let your last finger, until the cauterizing iron reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood flowed, do it once or twice.
If therefore the ulcers are many, then cauterize each one with the cauterizing iron according to what we have told you. Then care for them, with that which heals them from ointments, until they are healed.
And if you cauterize him with a large cauterizing iron over the ulcer, it is more harmful in wounding.
On the method of cauterizing a fistula in the anus.
Chapter 38.
When the sick person does not obey the incision and operation that we told you in its place, and is frightened by it, perhaps he will be healed with the cauterizing iron.
When therefore a fistula happens to someone and is long-standing, pus runs from it, and corrupted moisture. Therefore it is more fitting that you should probe it with a fine needle. Then know the amount of its depth with the needle.
Then burn the cauterizing iron, which is like a needle. Then insert yourself the burning iron into the fistula and the amount in which it entered the lock.
And repeat the iron over it, until those corrupted bodies are burned, once or twice or three times, according to the amount of your need.
And guard yourself from burning of the nerve, if it is there, or of the great vein: or if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder, or to the body of the intestine, then guard yourself from all these places.
And do not do this, unless when the fistula is in a fleshy place: and you think, because it is not perforating.
Then care for the place until it heals.
But if the place is sealed, and the matter is cut away from it, and it remains like this for a long time: then you know that it has healed completely.
And if the matter is not cut away from it, then you know that it is perforating, or there is a rotten hole in its depth, or something like that from those: whose memory will come back to its place.
¶ On the method of cauterizing the kidneys.
When it happens in the kidneys pain from cold, or from thick ventosity, and is reduced because of that weak breathing, then it is necessary to cauterize it above the almethen, above the kidneys, with a cauterizer on all the kidney with the claw, whose memory has preceded.
And perhaps we will cauterize it again in the second in that almethen. Why three straight lines will come. Therefore they will be more final in the cure.
¶ On the method of cauterizing the bladder.
When it happens in the bladder weakness, and softening from cold and moisture, until it does not retain the infirm urine, then cauterize it in the lower part of the summit above the bladder, where the pili pectinis begin, and with a cauterizer from the right summit, and another from the left of that: and the length of that cauterization on the side should be according to the quantity of the thumb joint: and cauterize it with a cauterizer on the lower back, or with two cauterizers if you need them: and it should be according to what preceded the claw cauterizer.
Of the method of cauterizing the womb.
When cold and humidity occur in the womb, and prevent impregnation, corrupt her menstruation, delay its provocation, and cause her pain upon its arrival, then it is necessary to cauterize her three times around the navel, as we mentioned in the cauterization of the bladder, and with a cauterizing iron below her back, or with two cauterizations: and let the cauterizing iron be sharp.
Of the method of cauterizing the ankle in dislocation.
When humidity is exuded from the mucous membrane of the ankle to the joint, and becomes a cause for its exit from its place: and the sign of this is that the leg is prolonged over the other when they are compared together: and the location of dislocation is found empty in that place.
Therefore it is necessary to cauterize the sick person on the joint of their ankle with a similar cauterizing iron: after you have marked with the cauterizing iron in the circumference of the joint, as it revolves: and so that the joint falls in the middle of the circle.
If that cauterizing iron is not present to you, then cauterize it three times with a large oil cauterizing iron: and let the depth of the cauterizing iron be according to the thickness of the skin of the entire.
Then care for it until it is healed.
Of the method of cauterizing in sciatica.
When pain occurs in the joint of the ankle, and the cause of this is cold and humidity: and the sick person is cured with it, as we mentioned in the division, and does not relieve the cure, and aggravates that: then it is necessary to dissolve the sick person from gross humors with fetid pills, or with artificial pills, and similar. Then cauterize him.
And the method of cauterization varies according to two methods: either with a cauterizing instrument and burning medicines, or with fire.
The cauterizing instrument with fire has many methods.
One of these methods is to cauterize on the pitcher of the anchor three triangular cauterizations, in this form. And make them a good or bad depth. And let there be space that is the quantity of the thickness of each finger: and let the cauterizing instrument be oily.
Sometimes, however, the cauterization is made in the middle on the head of the anchor. Therefore there are four cauterizations.
And if you want to cauterize with a circle, which precedes the form of dislocation of the anchor in one, so that it is a circle containing the whole anchor.
And burn the thickness of the skin of the whole.
This is the method of cauterization in sciatica, when the pain clings to the anchor itself and does not extend up to the hip and leg.
But if it extends up to the hip and leg, then cauterize him with two cauterizations on the hip, on the place where the infirmity indicates it, in which is the pain, and with your cauterizing instrument on the thigh four fingers towards the sylvestre part: and let the cauterizing instrument be a knife.
And let the depth of the cauterization be according to the thickness of the skin.
But if the infirmity indicates that the pain extends up to near the fingers of the foot, then cauterize him there where he indicates with the cauterizing instrument of the point, three, or four, or more, if it needs it.
If it is indicated that there is pain under the knee towards the leg, then cauterize that place with a single knife.
And burn yourself in every cauterization of yours, so that you do not end with the knife to this extent that you burn nerves, or a large artery, and pull through it over an injury, or a contraction.
And I myself have seen one and another of those who cauterized above the knee, and ended in cauterization, and the leg became inflamed, until a tumor resulted at the foot, and it was perforated throughout, and the whole foot rotted: then dissolution of the belly occurred, and death after that.
If the pain is in both parts at once, cauterize each one according to this manner.
And some wise men said in cauterization of the ankle, which is this manner of the knife. Make a knife similar to iron, whose diameter is the middle of the palm: and it is at its own opening according to the thickness of a finger nail, or a little less: and within that knife is a third knife.
And let there be space that is between all the knives by the thickness of a finger joint: and let the knives be open from both parts: and let their height be like a knot, or two knots: and make them handles from iron fittingly attached in the knives.
Then light it in the fire until it reddens, and throws sparks: then put it on a poultice of the ankle of the weak one lying on the healthy side. Then cauterize him with three round knives in one stroke.
Then leave him for three days. Afterwards, apply plasters with butter: and let the open wound heal over many days. Then care for it with ointment, until it is healed.
Albucasis says, "In this manner of cauterization, my son, we are little used, due to the fear of its appearance: and therefore, because few do wait upon it.
Nevertheless, it is from good cauterizations that he who suffers has found and has with him its place.
The cauterizer, however, with medicaments burning is, that you do two samia having perforated a ring, in which descends the bolt of its gate from air, or iron, length of the wall: whose height of them are two knots, or as themselves.
And let there be space that is the quantity of thickness of a finger, and they are open below and above: and let them contain each other, according to this form.
Then lay it on the iron hook, infirm one lying on the sound side. And press your hand on the iron hook much. Then pour between two circles of hot water, which is warmed with fire a little, and hold it for the time of an hour: and the infirm one bears its bite, and its burning, for he has found the bite as fire, until the bite is quiet.
Then clean your hand with the instrument, and wipe off hot water from the hook entirely with sweet water: then let it be for three days.
And place on it butter, until the blackness of burning is removed: and let it be for several days, and wipe off pus from it. For it is the last in the healing.
Then take care of that wound with ointments until it heals.
If the pain extends to the thigh or leg, make a splint in that which contains water, according to what you did in the anchor equal.
And this is the method of hot water: and I have already written it in the treatise on the correction of medicines. Take alkali and unextinguished lime, each one part of the same: grind both, and put them in a new pot, whose lower part is perforated with a small hole, according to the quantity that enters inside the radius: and put under the bottom of the pot another glass pot: and throw on top of the alkali and lime from sweet water, which submerges both through your finger: after which you compress it with your hand good compression: and leave the pot, until the sharp water descends the lower part of the glass pot.
Then gather that whole water and throw it on top of another lime: and cook, until it is renewed.
For this will then be very strong acid, which is administered in many medical operations, and in the cauterization of the other limbs. Because it effects the operation of its fire.
And from the medicines with which the anchors are cauterized, there is also as a plaster, and honey of cashew, and lime with soap, so that both are mixed.
And indeed Galen himself reported in his writings the cure of a certain man from ancient times, by which he was cured of the pain of the anchor and the sciatic vein: and he praised it to be very great. And he said, because it did not require other cure, and because he was cured of the vice of one, until he reported, because perhaps he had already entered the bath carried, and exited from it already healthy.
And it is to be taken from fresh seterachi green: and if it is not found green, a dry one should be taken, newly picked, and it should be well pounded with some fat, and placed on the ancham where the pain is, or in the leg, or in the hip: and it should be bound, and let go for a quantity of three hours, or according to the quantity that the sick person feels sedation of the burn. Then introduce him into the bath.
When therefore the body becomes moist, introduce him into the bed. For the pain retreats, and he is healed.
And know that it is not necessary for anyone to use a cauterizing instrument with these medicines, unless after the evacuation of the body.
And Dioscorides who said that, when the droppings of a goat are cauterized with the sciatic nerve, it brings him: and it is made into a cauterizing instrument in this way. Take wool, and it is imbued with old oil, and it is placed on the deep place which is between the thumb of the foot, and between the foot, and it is near the foot.
Then take dry goat droppings, and burn it in fire, until it becomes charcoal.
Then place it on the wool, and let it go, until it is extinguished. Then repeat that. Do not therefore cease to do that, until the sense reaches above the medication up to the ancham, and the pain is quieted.
And this method of cauterizing is called the Vaccinum cauterizing.
About the cauterization of the back pain.
Sometimes pain in the back occurs from many causes, or from an accident, or from a blow, or from an excessive evacuation, and similar things, from the infusion of cold and wet matter: and the cauterizing instrument does not fall, except in this species alone, which is made from the infusion of cold and wet matter.
Therefore, after the evacuation of the sick with foul-smelling pills and similar things, three lines should be drawn across the back, where the pain is, according to the width of the sufferer's back, and five or more cauterizations should be made along each line with a hot iron, according to the tolerance of the sick person: and this should be done with a cautery-puncture.
And if you wish, three or four cauterizations should be made with a middle hot iron in this form.
On the method of cauterizing in the early stages of gout.
This disease often occurs in small children.
And the sign of its onset in children is: that a stricture occurs on him in breathing and movement, and it is found in the last rib and its knots, which is already beginning to project above the other ribs.
When you see this and wish to do it, then cauterize that with a hot iron which is a circle in this form.
And he should take the hot iron over every part of the rib equally: and if you wish to cauterize around the rib with a pointed hot iron, two lines or three, and they should be close together.
Then care for the place until he is healed with that which we said.
And beware, do not apply the hot iron in gout, which occurs in spasm of the nerve.
On the method of cauterizing in podagra, and pain of joints.
When the pain of the joints is from cold humors, which are poured out to any part of the body, then when pain occurs in the feet, it is the custom of doctors to call that podagra properly.
When therefore treating gout of the cold cause and when the means of cure do not remove the pains, then the cauterizer will remove them.
And it is, that the cauterizer should cauterize him after evacuation in the circumference of the joints of the feet, with many cauterizations: and let the cauterizer be olive oil.
And if you need to make points on the face of the foot, then do it with a cauterizer point. But if the pains ascend up to the knees, or other joints, and this often happens, then cauterize him over all the knee with three cauterizations, or four from every part, with this same cauterizer on the calf.
But if you need more of this cauterizer, then cauterize it. And do not submerge your hand with the cauterizer, but rather it should be about the thickness of the skin only.
But if the pains ascend up to the knees and back: then administer what we said from the cauterizer in its chapter.
But if the pains are only in the hands: then make points in the circumference of the forearm, as two lines are rolled up.
But if there remains from the pains in the fingers: then make points on every joint, and on the palm of the hand.
But if the pains ascend up to the elbows, or shoulders, then cauterize both from every part.
And do not evacuate the weak one from good regimen, from the receipt of medicines. For if good regimen is made, and the phlegm is evacuated, he will be cured with the help of God with this cauterizer.
§ On the method of cauterizing in ruptures.
When a rupture occurs in the groin and the intestine or bladder descends to the testicle, and it is near the beginning: then you should order the sick person to abstain from food on that day. And let him use laxatives so that feces descends from his belly.
Then let him sit between your hands on his back: and order him to hold his breath until it comes out, or the bladder, or the intestine appears.
Then let him reduce it with your fingers, and sign with the cautery under the rupture on the tip of the pectoral, with a sign whose extremity is similar to the middle of the circle towards the upper part of the body.
Then light the cautery, which has this shape, until it becomes white, and throw sparks. Then let him reduce the intestine, or bladder, to its original shape. Then let him place his hand on the place, so that the intestine does not come out: and you have already opened between the legs of the sick person, and placed under it a pillow, and another servant on his legs, and another on his chest who holds the hand.
Then place the cautery on him with the sign, with your hand holding the cautery straight. And hold him until you reach the mouth with him: or repeat with him another time, if you did not reach with him in the first one up to the mouth.
And carefully observe from the exit of the intestine at the time of your burning, lest you burn it, and he dies through that above the sick person or death, or great evil.
And know that when you do not reach with the cautery to the mouth, your operation is not successful.
And it is necessary that the cauterizing instrument for children should be delicate, according to their size.
Then care with other ointments until it is healed.
And let the sick person lie on his back for forty days, until the wound is sealed.
And it is necessary to give him food of a length of time for his healing, which soothes his stomach: so that the intestine does not go out at the time of defecation and excretion.
Then when he wants to get up after forty days, then give him a well-made bandage, and let him hold it for another forty days.
And reduce his labor, and intake of food and drink, and loud voices.
For when he uses this regimen, thus he is healed with complete healing.
And I will say the cure for hernias with incision in his chapter.
But when the hernia occurs in the other belly, and they are beginning, and you do not want them to add, then cauterize his hernia with a round cauterizing instrument according to its quantity: and let that which is burned from then be as the third of it. Then care for him, with what we said: and do not add.
And now some have said first: that the hernia should be cauterized with a triangular cauterizing instrument, in this form.
After it is signed with the cauterizing instrument, and a line is placed which is through the width in the upper side of the hernia, and another line below. And place your hand in the middle with the cauterizing instrument closed.
But the cauterizing instrument first is easier and better.
¶ About how to cauterize in pains because of a fall, or a blow.
Chapter XLVIII.
When it happens in certain members due to accident or blow: and the pain persists for a long time, and does not improve with medication: then it is necessary to cauterize with the point cauterizer.
And the cauterizer should be of the same size and strength as the member, and its weakness, and its virtue, and its twist, and the pain from it.
If therefore it is healed from the first cauterization, it is good. If not: then repeat the cauterizer on it.
Because of the habituation of these pains, it is customary for them to change from member to that which approaches it. Therefore it is necessary to pursue them with the cauterizer until the sick one is healed.
On the method of cauterizing in leprosy.
However, sometimes lepers are healed with a great cauterization. And especially the species of leprosy that is formed due to the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy: therefore when you want to cauterize it, consider.
Therefore if the leprosy is incipient and you have treated it with what we said in division, and it has not descended nor stood: and you fear that corruption will spread over the whole of its complexion: then cauterize him on the head with five cauterizations: one in the middle of the head, and the second below it towards the front of the hair, and two on the two horns, and one behind on the nape of the neck.
And finally your hand with the cauterizer for a little, until it makes an impression on the mouth, and the bones are dislocated from it: so that the expiration of thick vapors is relieved from it, and also cauterize the spleen with the cauterizer, according to what preceded.
If the leprosy has already spread over the sick person and is clearly visible, then it is necessary to cauterize with these cauteries, which we mentioned at the beginning, and a cauterizing iron on the tip of the nose, and two cauterizing irons on the two maxillae, and two cauterizing irons on the spines of the neck, and six cauterizing irons on the spines of the back, and one large one on the hollows at the base of the spine and one above it, in the middle of the back: and two on the knees: one on each knee, and two on the shoulders, and two on the elbows, and two on the chest: and cauterize the entire joint, from the joints of the fingers of his hands and feet: and cauterize the soles of his feet, and the calluses of his hands.
And spare you the nerves that are on the back of the heel, so as not to burn them.
And sometimes cauterize with a cauterizing iron on the palate, and another on the stomach, and another on the ear.
And know that the more cauterizing iron you add, the greater the benefit, and the greater the relief.
And know that the sick person does not find pain in the cauterizing iron, as healthy people do: because his body is already numb.
And it is necessary that the cauterizing irons be of appropriate size and shape according to the limbs and joints: as was previously mentioned from the types of tools.
Then take care of the cauterizing iron with flour of herb mixed with honey and other cure until he is healed.
On the method of cauterizing in a stupor.
When a certain limb is swollen and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, but does not heal, then cauterize the swollen limb with cauteries according to the size or condition of the limb.
And let your cautery penetrate slightly into the skin's thickness. Then care for it with ointment until it heals.
And sometimes cauterize for a certain swelling that occurs in the hand and foot, on the spine at the exit of the nerves that move that limb: and the swelling is removed.
But do not presume over it, unless he is wise in the anatomy of limbs, and the exit of the nerves that move the body.
Chapter 61.
When Albucasis is discolored, and nothing is applied to it from the resources of medicine: then cauterize over it with a deep cautery slightly, according to the thickness of the skin, until the whiteness is removed, and its color is changed.
Then care for it with flour of herb, and lentils with rose oil, and leaves of Arnoglossa, and blood of dove, and blood of goose: let each be a part of one: mix all these, and apply them to the cloth, and stick to the place, until it heals.
§ On the method of cauterizing in Cancer.
When Cancer is beginning, and you want to stop it: then cauterize it with a circular cautery around its circumference, as it turns.
But the wise say, that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle.
To me, however, it does not appear that way: for I fear lest it should suppurate; and I have seen that very thing several times.
And it is more proper to cauterize around it with a circle, as we have said, or with many cautery irons.
Of the method of cauterizing in Adubelati.
When a person has Adubelati, and the maturation is delayed, either because of excessive discharge which he makes, or because of old age, when he is weak with few drops of blood, or because of time, and you wish to hasten the maturation of Adubelati, then cauterize around it with many small cautery irons by pricking. Then let it go. For it will hasten with the maturation.
But if you wish to make a perforation of it with a cautery iron, then use the cautery iron, which has this form.
And place it in the middle of Adubelati, until it penetrates the skin: and let the cautery iron be weak, so that the course of the purging may be eased.
Then care for it until it is healed.
Of the method of cauterizing in a corrosive ulcer.
Chapter 54.
A corrosive ulcer is not other than a corruption in a moving member, and it corrodes it: just as fire consumes dry wood.
If therefore you see a corrosive ulcer in a place which would bear a cautery iron with fire, then use many cautery irons, small and large, according to what is suitable for that place where the corrosive ulcer is.
Then cauterize it from all parts until the whole corruption is destroyed, and nothing remains of it entirely.
Then let him rest for three days, and apply to the cauterized areas ground sulfur mixed with oil until all the scars and corruption are removed.
Then care for him with flesh-generating ointments.
If you see that after three days the flesh grows back healthy, without corruption, it is good.
And if not: then repeat the cauterization on what remains from the corrupted areas.
And he should be rubbed with sharp medicine at times. For it rises in the place of the cauterization.
However, the cauterization with fire is faster for healing: and indeed I have already said about its cauterization with sharp medicine in division; so take it there when you need it.
On the method of cauterizing in Warts, and Clavi.
Chapter 55.
Frequently it happens in the lower parts of the feet this illness: and it is a rough, dripping matter that harms the foot.
And indeed cauterization in them is according to two methods: cauterization with fire, and cauterization with hot water.
However much with fire is, so that the cauterization tool is sharp like a penfeather: which should be made of iron, according to the amount it contains the wart from all parts: and it should be thin at the edge.
Then place him on fire over the wart. Then turn his hand with the cauterization tool around the wart, until the cauterization reaches the depth of the wart: and let him rest for three days, until it begins to emit pus. Then apply plasters to him with sharp-smelling ones, crushed with salt: and let the plaster be applied over him at night. He will be uprooted from his roots.
Then care for the wound with a generative flesh ointment until it heals.
If they are not convergent and often occur on the surface of the body, especially on the hands and feet: then apply heat to them with hot water: and take a needle from air, or iron, or from the feather of a turkey: and place it on the clauum, or althelul. Then apply a small amount of hot water to the needle: hold your hand and turn it with slight compression of your hand, so that the edge of the needle is imprinted on the clauum root, and the hot water finds a way to the depth, to the root of the clauum: and wait for the weak one for an hour.
Then let him go, for the clauum is uprooted with its roots.
So do with them one by one, until you come across all those who are in the body.
Then care for them after they are uprooted, with what generates flesh from ointments.
ON THE METHOD OF CAUTERIZING IN TREMOR.
When it happens to someone that tremor occurs from cold in the nerve, or from quartan fever, or from another: then it is necessary to cauterize him with four or five cautery irons on the spines of his back, and between every spine with a cautery, and in his chest with a cautery, and on his stomach with a cautery.
For tremor is quieted with the olive oil cautery, and hastens the health of the cold sick person.
ON THE METHOD OF CAUTERIZING ALBATHIR.
Chapter LVII.
At times, abscesses, that is, boils, which are formed from corrupted coarse materials, are expelled from the body.
Therefore, when they appear, they must be cauterized over the entire head of the boil with a fine cautery made from the wood of the myrtle tree, whose end is burned with fire. Or with the root of the long-leaved aristolochia. Or with a lens-shaped cautery.
And sometimes they are cauterized at the beginning of their expulsion in this way: and they do not increase: and the excess is broken, which makes them, and they are healed from them.
However, it must be done after evacuation with phlebotomy.
On the method of cauterizing in the flow of blood from an artery into a wound.
Frequently it happens that the flow of blood from an artery which is cut at the wound, which happens outside, or at the incision of the pustule, or cauterizing the limb, and similar to them: and it is difficult to remove it.
Therefore, when it happens to someone, then quickly with your hand at the mouth of the artery, and put on top of your finger: and press it much, until the blood is held back by your finger, and nothing comes out from it.
Then put a small cautery of olive oil and many: and blow on them, until they are burned greatly.
Then take from them one, or a little, or much, according to the wound and the place in which the artery is broken, and put the cautery on the vein, after you remove your finger quickly: and hold the cautery, until the blood is cut.
If the thorn is expelled from the orifice of the artery and the burning iron is extinguished, then take another burning iron quickly from the prepared ones in the fire.
Therefore do not cease to do this with one after another until the blood stops flowing.
And beware, lest you burn the nerves which are there, and another misfortune occurs on the weak one.
And know that when blood flows from the artery, then it is impossible to remove it: especially when the artery is large, unless with one of four methods. Or with a burning iron, as we said. Or with extraction, when it is not extracted. For when it is removed, the ends of it contract, and the blood is cut off. Or it is tied with a strong ligature. Or they are placed on it medicines of their property, which is to cut off the blood and tie it with a proper compression.
But he who administers its cutting with a ligature and binding with a cloth, and position of things burning and similar, does not give it to him completely, unless rarely.
But if it happens to anyone of that, and he is not present to him the physician nor the medicine: then begin with the position of the index finger over the orifice of the vein itself, as we said, and compression of it very, until oppressed by the blood from the upper part of the wound, and on the artery. And the finger is not removed, above it with cold water of intense cold always, until the blood freezes, and swells, and is cut off.
And meanwhile consider in it what is needed from the burning iron, or from the medicine.
Chapter on Incision, Puncture, and Bloodletting in Wounds and Similar Conditions
We have already mentioned in Chapter One, all illness that is suitable for the application of fire and burning medicine, and its causes, reasons, instruments, and forms of cauterization.
And I placed chapters from the head to the foot.
And I proceed in this chapter the same way: so that it may alleviate those who are seeking and have found it.
And before I begin that, it is necessary for you to learn this, son, which is in this chapter from the fear of that which is in Chapter One about cauterization.
And for that reason, it is necessary to have greater caution in it, because in the operation which is in this chapter, often feces and blood fall out together, with which life stands at the opening of the vein, or incision over an abscess, or opening of the exit, or cure of a wound, or extraction of an arrow, or incision on a stone, and all similar things: from all of these, fear, trembling, and death fall in many of them.
And I advise you not to fall into that in which there is hesitation, for sometimes such men and their ways of infirmity come to you in this art. For from them is one who becomes angry with his illness, and is light-hearted about death: because of the vehemence of him which he found from his infirmity and length of his malice. And with illness is from fear which signifies death.
Among them is one who gives his lute to you, and gives you along with it, hoping for health, but his illness is dangerous.
Therefore, it is not necessary to consent to him who comes to you from among them, whose manner is such. And let your caution be more urgent than his greed and your greed. And do not presume upon anything from him unless after certain knowledge that confirms to you the succession of praiseworthy.
And use them in the healing of all your sick, for the prediction and indication of what is fitting for their health.
For in him you have help for the acquisition of fame and glory, and memory and praise.
May God inspire you, O son, His understanding, and may He not take from you direction and inspiration, for that is in His hand.
And indeed I have arranged this Chapter by distinguishing it into chapters, according to what preceded in the previous chapter of Cauterization, from the head to the feet: so that you may be relieved of what you seek from him and what you need.
¶ On the healing of water that gathers in the heads of children.
Chapter 1.
Know that this weakness often happens to children among those who are born: or when the midwife tightly holds the head of the child without gentleness.
And sometimes it happens even for an unknown cause that is not known.
And indeed I have not seen this illness in other than children: and to all of whom I saw from them, death came quickly: therefore it seemed to me to leave the operation in it.
I myself have seen a boy whose head was filled with water, and his head was admired every day until he could no longer sit on himself due to the size of his head: and the moisture increased until he died.
And this moisture either accumulates between the skin and bone, or beneath the bone above the skull.
And the operation for this, if the moisture is between the skin and bone, and it is a small abscess, then it must be cut in the middle of the head: and the length of the fissure should be about two knots, until the moisture is drained.
And this is the shape of a syringe.
If therefore the moisture is more increased, and the abscess is larger, then place these two fissures according to this shape.
And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and the sign of it is that you see the cuts of the head open from all sides: and water is pressed when you press it with your hand to the inside, and it does not hide from you this: then it must be cut in the middle of the head with three fissures, according to this method.
And after the incision, remove all the moisture. Then tie the fissures with cloths and cotton. Then apply this from above with wine and oil until the fifth day.
Then dissolve the ligament, and care for the wound with compresses, and ointments.
And do not dismiss tying the head with equality. And feed the weak with all dry food of little moisture, until the limb is strengthened and healed.
And another method of incision is to consider where the size of the abscess appears, and the collection of water.
For sometimes there is more in the back, or in the forehead, or on the right, or on the left.
Then ascend with an incision where you see the abscess and swelling of water, and cut it according to what is possible for you.
And observe, so that you do not cut the artery, and the blood flow occurs, and the weak person dies from that flow with the evacuation of moisture.
¶ On the incision of the arteries that are after the ears.
2nd Head.
When catarrh occurs to someone's eyes or chest, and it is not cured by medical treatment: then the last cure is in that, the incision of these two arteries.
Therefore, when you want to cut them, it should be done so that the weak person's head is relieved. Then rub the place with a rough cloth, so that the arteries appear. Then tie the weak person's neck with any of his cloths. Then consider where the pulse is beating. And the locations of both are locations that are below the ears: and it is rarely hidden, unless in some people.
Then mark with a hot iron on both: and cut both with a narrow blade, the incision going to the bone: and let it be done across the width of the head.
And if you want, insert a narrow blade under the artery, and cut it to the upper part with the incision.
And let the length of the incision be like two fingers joined together.
For when the pulse is cut, blood flows out with a pulsating flow, which jumps to the inside frequently.
But if the artery does not appear to the senses, then it is necessary to measure from the ear the quantity of space of three fingers. Then indicate with a hot iron and fennel, and scrape up to the bone.
And that which should be expelled from the blood is six ounces, and perhaps you may expel more or less from it. All of that according to the amount that appears to you from the weakness and filling of its artery.
Then consider the wound. Then if there remains to the bone from the scab something, then cut that, so that it does not happen hot abscess: then bind the wound with lints from linen cloth.
Then care for it with ointment, until it is healed.
¶ On the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
Chapter 3.
When it happens to a man that he has ancient headaches or sharp cataracts due to acidic humors and heat in the temples, or old soda, strong, and similar to those: and he is treated with remedies of cure and not given that: then we have experienced these pains in the extraction of arteries from the temples, or cauterization of them, as we have said.
And the method of operation in the extraction of them is, that the weak hair which are in the temples be scraped off, and he directs to the artery that appears in the temple. For indeed it is shown to you from its pulse, and rarely is hidden except in a few men, or vehemence of cold.
But if it is hidden from you, then he binds his weak head with any of his cloths: then rub the place with a rough cloth. Or steam the place with hot water, until it appears to you with clear appearance. Then take a small needle, which I have previously formed. Then, remove the skin along with the fascia until you reach the artery. Then insert the hook into it and pull it out towards the top until you remove it from the skin and make it extend through the layers of tissue beneath it from all sides.
If, however, the artery is thin: then cover it with the tip of the hook. Then cut from that part according to the amount by which their ends extend and contract, so that blood loss does not occur. For if it is not cut and if it is not severed, the blood will not rise at all.
Then wash out the blood with six ounces of water, up to three.
If the artery is large: then it is necessary to ligate it in two places with strong double silk thread or with catgut, so that it does not hasten to putrefy before the consolidation of the wound and blood loss occurs.
Then cut away the excess, which is between the two ligatures. Do this at that hour or after another hour.
And if you wish, cauterize it with a cauterizing iron and a scalpel until its ends are cut and it remains in the same position of that work.
And it is better to do this unless if the patient is weak and has a fever or a heated constitution. Because the cauterizing iron is from those things that dry up moisture. Therefore it is better to use a moistening agent.
And it is necessary after the extraction of the arteries, to fill the place with old wheat flour and place some well-made cotton on top of it.
And after the wound is cleaned with dry medicaments that cause flesh to grow and with lotions, until it heals.
If, while you are operating, blood suddenly flows from the artery, then quickly remove it with a cautery, or fill the place with zeugit: and press your hand until the blood stops flowing. If there is nothing present for you, then place your finger on the spot until the blood congeals. And apply cold water to the spot until the burning stops and it is bandaged as appropriate.
And because it is lighter and easier to extract the artery, it has a cautery with two knives: and the sharpness of the two knives should be like molten wax. However, they are much less sharp than two knives. Because if they are as sharp as two knives, both cool quickly and do not cut the flesh quickly. However, since there is a little thickness in them, the heat of the fire is held in them, and the flesh is cut quickly: therefore it is better for all work, lighter, and easier.
And this is the shape of the cauterizer.
And there should be space between the two knives equal to the thickness of a finger, after you mark two spots with the cauterizer: and place both hot ones, until they reach the bone, and cut the vein in two places: so that it is extended between its ends. For they do not consolidate completely with this cauterizer.
Chapter IV.
Concerning the care of the course of sharp, frequent tears from the eyes.
When tears are frequent and their course is from the eyes, which are on the outside of the skull above: and nothing is applied to them with medicine, and you see that the face of the sick person is already red, and feels a kind of walking, like the walking of ants: and his eyes are thinned, wet, so that the hairs of his eyebrows are already corroded with corrosion: and his eyelids are hot from the sharpness of the tears: then the ancients needed in the cure of these operations, and called it a cure, with a Sword.
You should command the sick person to shave off the hairs that are on his forehead. Then you should make three evenly spaced cuts across the forehead according to its length: and let the length of the cut be about two fingers, and let one cut be evenly spaced from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length slightly beyond the shoulder blades, and the third on the other side: and beware of incising the arteries that are on both sides: and extend your hand away from the continuation of the two jaws, and let the entire length of the incision be the amount of three fingers joined together: and let there be a piece of prepared sponge or dry cloth with which to stop the blood.
Then insert two sharp-pointed needles, whose following form is as follows. From the incision that is on the side of the temple, up to the second incision: and scrape off with it all the skin that is between the two incisions, along with the flap that is above the bone. Then do the same from the middle incision up to the second incision. Then remove that spatula and insert another tool, called a sharp cultello, from one side gently, not sharply from the other side. And this is its form.
And place its sharp side towards the flesh with the skin, and its gentle side towards the bone: and push it until it reaches the middle cut: and cut off with it all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes: except that the incision continues up to what appears of the skin.
Then do the same in the middle cut up to another cut.
And after the blood has flowed out an equal quantity, express the locations from the pieces of clotted blood.
Then place linen soaked in old cooked linseed in every wound, and place over them lints moistened with wine, oil, or vinegar. And be sure that no abscess of heat occurs.
And on the third day dissolve the bandage, and administer an infusion much with warm water. Then care for it with basilicon ointment, and with the other things that heal wounds: until it is healed.
Chapter 5.
¶ On the care of sharp tears and catarrh from the inside of the head to the eyes.
When catarrh occurs to someone sharp, sharp, and frequent: and you see his eyes weakened, small, and already weakened is their aspect: and the eyelids are ulcerated, and they fall out from them, and in the deep of the head is sharp pain, hurting, and following sneeze: then take from these accidents that those matters, and catarrh do not come, except from many vents.
And better cure in them is this. And it is, that you order the sick to shave his forehead. Then cut in that wound one in the middle of the forehead, or another slightly in width, and begin with the wound from the left temple to the right: and it is incision until the bone: and lengthen your hand away from the temple bones, which move at mastication: until when the bone is exposed: and dry all the blood with a sponge.
Then separate between two lips of the wound with old cooked linen, or with lints of flax. Then tie above with wool: and drink wool soaked in wine and oil, so that no heat abscess may occur.
And when you untie it, and see that the heat abscess is about to diminish: then it is necessary to rub the mouth, until flesh begins to grow in it.
Then care for it with a dry diet that causes flesh to grow: as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of pitch: and prepare an ointment from them, and administer it at the birth of flesh in these wounds.
Chapter 6.
¶ On the care of that which falls into the Ear.
Everything that falls into the ear is one of four kinds: either a mineral stone, or a stone similar to it, such as iron and copper: or it is a plant, such as beans and peas: or it is a fluid, such as water, and vinegar, and the like: or some animal.
When therefore a stone, or a kind of stone from those which do not add nor grow in the ear, falls into the ear, expose the ear alone: if then you see the stone, then pour something from broken oil, or sisamin into the ear. Then administer its extraction, and make him sneeze with the conditioned, and close the nose with an onion at the approach of sneezing, after you place in the circumference of the ear fragments of cloth, or wool, and extend the ear to the superior.
Often it exits with this care.
If however it does not exit, then administer its extraction with Gesti, that is, fine pizzarolis: whose form is this.
If therefore it exits with Gesti, it is good.
And if not, then perform an extraction of it with a blind hook of fine, slight duplication.
If it does not exit through that, then make a cannula from air, and insert the end of the cannula into the ear canal a lot, and apply oil with softened wax around the cannula to prevent air from entering except through the cannula: then extract with your strong attraction.
For it often exits with what we mentioned. But if it does not exit in this way: then take from helkalimbat, or from usco, that is, prepared gluten with which birds are caught, a small amount: and place it at the end of the radius after you have put on it a cloth properly positioned: then insert it into the ear canal when you have dried the ear from moisture.
If it does not exit with all that we mentioned, then hasten to cut it before an abscess or hot fever, or spasm occurs.
And the method of incision is, that a weak phlebotomist should be placed in the first place in the cephalic vein: and extract it from him according to the measure of its power. Then make the sick person sit between your hands, and turn his ear towards the upper part, and find a small incision in the root of the ear at the fatty part of him in the depressed place: and let the incision be in the shape of a crescent moon until you reach the stone: then remove it with what is possible from your instruments.
Then sew the incision from your hour with speed and care until he is healed.
If the thing falling into the ear is from one of the grains that grow and swell: then perform an extraction of it.
If it still does not obey you at the end, then take a thin, delicate spatula in this form.
And administer with it the separation of that kind from the grains that fall into the ear, and do not do it when you think that that grain is already moistened by the steam of the ear, until you place many fragments: then remove them with hooks, or with a fine instrument, or with suction, as we said, for its extraction is alleviated.
But in the water that enters the ear, it is necessary to use an infirm sneezing with the first condition: and now it has filled its own ear with some cooked old [grain]: and it is lying on that ear, in which is the water. If therefore it exits through that, it is good.
And if not: then take many stones, according to the length of the finger, thin, soft, and heat them with fire for a while, and let the infirm one insert one of them into the hole of its ear: and salt on one of his feet from that part, and strike with another stone on the stone that is in the ear. Do not therefore cease doing it with the stone and the stone, until all the water exits.
And now the water exits thus, that you take from the pus, or from the dung one, and insert its end one into the ear: and heat its other end with fire, until it is burned much of it. Then repeat the dung another one, and do it many times, until all the water exits: and remove it with a tube according to that which was prescribed in the stone.
In the extraction of the animal entering into it, if it is small of body, such as a flea, and similar to that, take care of him as I said in division.
If it is a large body part that is visible to the senses, then administer its extraction with forceps and hooks, and its removal is easier than all those held in the ear.
However, when you extract the worms generated in the ear, when you treat it with what we mentioned in division and in the treatment of distillations, and your care does not bring about cure: then you should look at the ear in the sunlight. If therefore something appears there from the worms, then remove it with forceps or with fine hooks.
But if nothing appears there from the worms, then take a cannula, whose form is narrow below and wide above: and insert its fine tip into the ear according to the amount that the weak person can tolerate: then suck with it strong suction. Do this many times until all the worms come out.
But if they do not obey you to the end, then wrap a woolen cloth around the cannula with clay, as I said in the stone.
But if they do not come out with that, then administer the distillations which the ancients have been acquainted with in the puncturing of worms: and you will find it in the treatment of distillations.
And let your effusion be what you pour out oil and medicines into the ear with this instrument, whose form is depicted here. As you see, make it from silver, or from brass, below narrow, in which there is a small hole, above wide.
Therefore let the thing that is in the hollow of the cannula be made from brass properly. And if you wish, take a radium, and wrap it in a proper fold of cotton at the end of it: then project oil, or suck, or whatever you want from these medicines into the cannula: and let it be in the ear: then insert the radium with the cotton above, and press it with your tempered hand compression until the oil is forced into the hollow of the ear, and the weak person feels it inside: and that which is poured into the ear should already be warmed with a little fire: and beware that there is nothing that is distilled into it very cold: for medicines do not tolerate that.
Chapter VII.
Translation: On the Care of Accidental Burns from Gold.
Sometimes, infants occasionally emerge from their mother's wombs without being pierced.
And it also happens to some people that burning occurs in the ear canal from a wound, or from flesh born in it.
And this burning sometimes occurs in the deep canal of the ear, which does not reach sight: and sometimes it happens to the outer part of the canal, and reaches sight.
Therefore, that which happens in the deep ear, and which does not include sight, is difficult to cure in many positions.
And in that which follows sight, it is necessary to place the ear of the sick person in the sun, and look at it: then if you see the burning appearing, open it with a thin, subtle probe, whose form is as follows: its end is small, and has a small width; and the rest of the probe is flat on both sides: so that it does not harm the ear.
If therefore the burning is born from flesh in the ear canal: then hold it with a thin, sharp instrument, and cut it with great force, until all the flesh is removed.
If the burning is in the deep ear: then take a thin, sharp, and heated probe with a little fire: then put it into the ear canal.
If therefore you feel the burning with that which the sick person has, if he experiences great difficulty in hearing, try to open it with force: and beware, do not wound the nerves of the ear.
Then put in the ear a liniment according to the size of the canal, which you have unfolded in Egyptian oil: make it for several days, until you are secure about the healing of the wound.
Take linseed and infuse it in rosewater, then sprinkle powdered zegi on it, and use it.
If you see an ear already suppurating, then it is necessary to remove the linseed, and let it be placed with another linen cloth that has been rolled in oil made with rosewater, until the boil becomes hot: then care for it until it heals.
But if blood is flowing, then immerse a sponge or cloth in cold water, and place it on the ear: and use the rest of the treatment that stops the predicted bleeding in the aforementioned treatise on distillations.
On the care of Althea's eyelids.
Chapter 8.
These Althelia which occur in the eyelids of the eye, sometimes are moist and sometimes are dry.
Therefore it is necessary to hold them with tweezers: or with an uncinus, and cut them off from their roots with a lancet. Then place powdered zegi on the affected areas.
But if blood flows from them, then cauterize them with a fine lenticular cauterizer.
And to cauterize them is better after the incision. For often they return when there remains something from their roots. And when they are cauterized with fire, those roots burn and do not return.
On the care of Granatum's eyelids of the eye.
Chapter 9.
Often something occurs in the eyelids that resembles the strength and hardness of Granatum, and because of this it is called Grando: and it is an accumulation of thick moisture on the upper eyelid and the lower eyelid.
The operation for these is thus: consider if it is a frost (a cold sore) proceeding from that which appears from the eyelid, and moves to all parts, and its matter is easy.
Find therefore above it a fissure of width. Then scrape it from all parts with facility, until it subsides. Then suspend it with a splint, and cut it off.
But if the cutting off of it is not prepared for you, unless when you penetrate the eyelid with an incision a little, then it harms the weak one in some place.
But if the fissure is large: then gather it with a suture: and care for it, until it heals.
And if it is small, no harm will come to you from it. For an ointment restores it, and flesh it.
And if the frost is declining towards the interior of the ear, turned away from the inner surface, then turn the eyelid, and suspend the frost with a splint: besides which you need an incision, and press it from all parts.
But if the eyelid is lengthened by an incision, it does not harm it in some place.
Then wash the eye after the incision of the frost, with salted water: and care for the place with that which fleshes it, until the weak one heals.
¶ About the care of Axiromath for the eyelids.
Chapter 10.
Axirnath is a fat which is generated in the tunics of the upper eyelid: and much indeed happens to it in children: and it blurs their eyes, and cataracts happen to them in the morning, and they cannot see the light of the sun, because their tears rush to them, and on account of this you see them lying on their faces always, and they sleep on them, and their eyelids are under wet arches, which inflation has already covered: and the eminence of Axirnath appears to the eye, and when you press the place with your fingers, you feel Axirnath between them.
The method of operation is for the sick person to place his head in your lap.
Then take a linen cloth and prepare a poultice in it, and make from it a circle of the size that contains the Axirnath from all sides. Then place him on it, and press with your fingers from all sides, so that the Axirnath gathers in the middle of the circle.
Then find in the middle of that moisture with a thin blade making incisions along the width, and let there not be an incision larger than that which is made in bloodletting in the depth.
Or it is necessary to make an incision in the whole skin, until you reach the Axirnath, for the Axirnath proceeds from the incision in many ways according to the shape of a white fat fragment.
Extract it therefore with the cloth that you have soaked between your fingers to the outsides: and you turn your hand to the right and left, until it is spread: and beware, do not add in the incision, so that the blade does not reach with the thin blade to the eye, and you wound him.
But if the Axirnath does not appear to you at the beginning of the incision, you will add a little with ease into the incision, until the Axirnath proceeds. Then extract it, as we said.
Then immerse the cloths in vinegar and water, and place them on the place, and bind him with poultices.
And there are some men who sprinkle salt on it, and place it in the hollow of the incision, so that what remains of that moisture is melted.
Then care for it, until it is healed.
But if an abscess occurs in the place of heat, then care for him with sedative plasters, until it is healed.
On the ways of Ataxmir's eye, that is, when the eyelid becomes soft and the eye waters excessively, causing it to water incorrectly.
Chapter 11.
When additional eyelashes grow in the eyelids beyond their usual course and become ingrown: then they harm the eye, causing various afflictions such as frequent tears, eyelid softening, and sclera, leading to the cause of eye destruction.
And Ataxmir indeed cures the eye in four ways. Or by cauterization with fire. Or with sharp medicine, as previously mentioned in the chapter on cauterization. Or by incision and sutures. Or by cannulas, as I will say.
You must place the head of the sick person in your lap. Then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand.
If it is turned, then it is good. And if not, then insert the needle into the one where the hair is from the lower part of the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate with thread from above, and be near the hairs themselves, that is, near the edge of the eyelid, where the hairs grow: and pull the thread to the upper part with the eyelid, and turn it with a spoon.
Then find in the inner part of the eyelid under the added hairs with a thin probe entering from the larger lacrimal duct up to the smaller lacrimal duct.
Then extract the thread, and place a small amount of charcoal or cloth under the eyelid: then mark on the eyelid with cauterizing iron, which is like the shape of myrtle leaves.
However, it is necessary to make the figure according to the quantity and elevation of the eyelid, since this varies among people.
For some, it is necessary for the figure to extend beyond the eyelid due to the large quantity that is softened by the eyelid.
Then, with the spatula, draw a line above two lines that you have marked, and begin from the larger lacrimal to the smaller one, and let there be a fissure near the natural hairs, like the size of the radius.
Then insert the hook into one of the two angles of the skin. Then scrape off the entire scale. Then gather the two lips with a suture, with a needle and fine thread of wool: and wipe off the blood, and make that which is superfluous from the threads over the two eyebrows stick to it, with some things that prevent it from unraveling, if you wish to do so; and if not, you will not care.
Then leave the suture and thread for three days or four, and then take care of it afterwards.
And if you wish, leave the wound without a suture, and take care of it with that which dries and constricts. For the eyelid is elevated at the sign of the wound and its gathering, but it will be better in the future.
The ancients taught this method of healing Ataxmir.
However, there is anxiety over the weak one, and it is from good surgery, and there is no fear in it.
And another method is also taught by Ataxmir: and it is to make signs on the eyelid in the form of a figure, which is like the figure of a myrtle leaf, as we have narrated.
Then elevate the eyelid with three separate or gathered hooks, according to this following form, and then cut off what is superfluous with small forceps, according to this form, with equality of incision.
If it is not possible for you to hold the hook, and it does not fit: then take a needle with thread, and insert it in the middle of the shape: and insert another thread near the tear duct, larger, and another thread near the tear duct, smaller: and gather the threads between your fingers with equality.
Then lift your hand evenly by elevation: and lift the skin over which is marked with ink, as we have told you.
Then gather two wound lips with suture: and care for it, until it heals.
But if an abscess occurs near your incision, or your wound: then soothe the abscess with charcoal, and these similar things, from ointments that settle.
And sometimes it happens to the eyelids also, that their hairs turn.
Therefore you should use what we said in the incision: but the suture on both is more artificial. ¶ On the care of Ataxmir with dogs.
AND IT IS, that you turn the eyelid, and tear the wound that is inside, as I have told you. Then make two splints, or two thin pieces of wood: whose length is according to the length of the eyelid, and their width is less than the width of a finger: and you have already cut on the extremities of each from both sides where you hold the threads.
Then gather each of them with thinness on top of what exceeds from the eyelid of the eye, and tie two splints from both sides with a strong suture, and leave it for several days. For the skin tight will die, and blacken, and rot, until it falls off by itself.
If it delays, then cut it with forceps. Then take care of it until it heals.
When it is consolidated, raise the eyelid: and do not prick the hairs.
And this is the shape of two needles that you will make according to this figure and quantity in length and width.
Chapter 12.
About raising hairs that prick in the eye with a needle.
The operation in that is, to take a thin needle and insert it into the hair with a fine silk thread, gentle. Then gather its ends and tie both knots with a very fine silk thread: and the length of the threads should be one finger.
Then compose another fine silk thread under it in a short space, and tie the ends of it if you wish.
Then place the weak head on your lap, and let it be near the sun so that the operation can be shown: because it is a delicate or small operation.
Then insert the needle with the silk thread into the root of the eyelid, and make it penetrate into the eyelid quickly, until you pull it out from above the natural hair.
Then pull the hair up to above the silk thread: and insert that hair into the silk thread: if it is one, or two, or three, not more.
Then pull your hand with it, until the hair comes out with the silk thread into the eyelid with the natural hair.
If however the silk thread is pulled, and the hair does not come out with it: pull the silk thread downwards, with the thread that you composed in it, until the silk thread comes out from the upper opening, and see it with the vision of the eye: then pull the silk thread and the thread: and remove both, and close the eye: and let it be closed for two days, or three, until the hair sticks in its place, and flesh grows over it.
If the hair is short, then associate it with a longer hair from natural hairs, and lift it with that: or let it be, until it lengthens after some time, and then lift it.
Chapter 13.
When this Alexander's eye occurs, it is called Leporina.
And this Alexander's eye is either natural or accidental.
Therefore it is accidental from the consolidation of a wound, or cutting, or cauterization, and similar to those.
And the method of operation in it is, that you find that consolidation, and that you separate its lips, and that you put in it what is between them linen from linen, and bandage it, until it heals.
And it is not necessary that you use in the cure of things that dry and contract: for if you do this, Alexander's eye returns worse than it was: rather use in it those things that soften, such as fenugreek: and rub with water in which althea has been cooked, seed linen: and ointment dyaquilon, which has been melted with some oil: and wrap with it linen, and care for it with it.
And your treasure of cure is that you try with every skill, that it not consolidate, according to the form that it was in first.
And this operation which we said is indeed only some correction of Alexander, so that it does not return to the form of the place according to what it was entirely.
Concerning the care of Alexander that occurs in the lower eyelid, and is a wrinkle or contraction upwards to the right and left.
Chapter 14.
This is what is done below, which is truly called Albucasis. And it is natural, and it is accidental.
And the accidental one is made from a wound, or a tear, or a cauterization, and similar things.
And the method of operation in it is, that you take a needle, in which there is a double thread, and you dip it in flesh, and make it penetrate from the left tear duct to the right tear duct, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
Then extend the flesh upwards with the needle, and cut it with a broad-bladed knife. If therefore the figure of the eyelid returns according to what is proper, it is good.
And if not, take the radium, and put it in the tear, and turn with it the eyelid: and make two tears on the inner side of the eyelid, and let the ends of the two tears be from two corners of the incision, until they meet and form an angle from them: until when they gather together, this figure is made, and it is the Greek letter laud.
Then remove that flesh by the amount, which is the sharp side of its width below, from what follows the eyelid. Then gather the separate parts: sew it with a wool thread.
Then care for them with what we said, with softening medicines, and lotions, until they heal.
And if Albucasis happens from a tear and a stitch, or a cauterization: then it is necessary to make the tear flat under the eyelashes, even as it preceded. Then separate between two lips with a ligature, as we have said.
And the summary of the speech about the care of Albucasis, whether it is above or below, is that he should operate on it according to the operation prepared from the form of Albucasis.
For indeed it is of many diverse forms: and the skilled artisan prepares his skill with whatever way is possible for him, until he makes the figure return to the natural form, or near to it, and himself the infirm one, according to what suits him from the operation and instruments in many dispositions.
Chapter 15.
Concerning the adhesion of the eyelid with the conjunctiva, or the cornea.
Sometimes this consolidation happens to many people, so that the upper eyelid is consolidated with the whites of the eye, and prevents it from its natural operations.
Therefore you must insert the end of the ray under the eyelid, and raise it up: or extend it with a hook: then cut the adhesion with a thin, small knife, which is not with the sharpness of the knives, but is blunt for a little: so that the infirm one may not be disturbed by the operation, and the knife may not injure the eye with its sharpness: and your incision will be as if you are scraping off that adhesion with ease, until when the eyelid returns to its natural form, and the whole adhesion is healed.
Then pour in the eye salt water, with water to clean it: or sprinkle in it from a sponge made of zinc dissolved in water.
Then separate between the eyelid and the eye with a ligature line: and place on the eye a soaked cloth with egg white: and after three days use a sponge, and with firm things, until it is healed.
On the Incision of the Claw and Prominence of Flesh for Tears.
Chapter 16.
Know that the claw is in two ways. Either it is nervous: and it is similar to a hard, thin string. Or it is not nervous, similar to frozen moisture of white: which when it touches the iron flame, or you try to take it with the hook, it is cut off, and does not stick on it the hook.
And both kinds do not begin, except from the larger tear-duct, until it gradually reaches, so that it covers the sight, and prevents light, and movement of the eye.
And the method of operation in its incision is: that you put your weak head in your lap. Then open his eyes, and raise the eyelid with your hand. Then gather the claw with a hook of few multiplications, and extend it to the upper parts. Then take a needle, and insert in it a needle from the needles of horses, or oxen, or goose: and let it be strong, and double the tip of the needle a little, and fix it in the middle of the claw: and penetrate it with the needle, and tie the claw with thread, and extend it to the upper parts: and scrape off the side of the claw that follows the pupil, as if you hold it with the thread until its end.
Then cut off the remainder at the root of the tear-duct with a thin, sharp knife, or with small forceps: and let go the natural flesh of the tear-duct, so that it may not happen from its incision that the course of tears is constant.
And sometimes the claw is extended with a hook alone: or with thread, as we said. Then, he shaves with a mild exfoliant, whose shape is as follows.
And beware, lest the exfoliant touch the horn-like skin of the eyelid and cause a tear, and perforate the pupil.
Then, after the incision, put something salty and crushed into the eye, or made from sieving sewage, and leave it until another day. Then care for him with what is necessary until he is healed.
If the eyelid is not nervous, and you cannot insert an awl into it nor fix a hook in it, then this kind of eyelid is often treated with medicines and healed as I have described in the division.
If you want to cut it, then open the eye of the sick person, and take a thin, mild, weak exfoliant, according to this shape. And shave the eyelid from above with the same thinness. If you see that it is rarefied and broken, and you press on it, then pour from your hourglass into the eye a liquid made from sieving sewage, or from sieving red, or crushed salt: and keep the eye closed until another day.
Then repeat the operation over it, until all of it is removed. Unless the opposite is true in your eye, a hot abscess: then leave it, and care for the abscess until it is healed.
Then repeat the operation over it with the razor, until it is healed.
However, if the elevation of the eyelid causes harm to the eye with great injury, it is suspended with a hook, and cut from that part: and do not complete the incision, so that the course of tears does not occur.
Then, pour some rubbed red stone, or that made from azurite, into the lachrymal until it is healed.
Of the incision of Al-Guardian, and flesh born in the eye.
Chapter 17.
Sometimes flesh is born in certain human eyes, composed or placed with red, until it covers the pupil, or approaches, or stretches over the eyelids, and perhaps turns the eyelids to the outside: and it resembles a balmrose rose.
And the operation in it is also that he places his weak head in your lap. Then open his eyes, and gather all that flesh with the appropriate hooks to that: and hold it with a wrench, or a hook.
Then cut the flesh in the first place, until it is all of his with the incisor. And beware of the eye, so that you do not wound it in the operation: and your incision is what you cut it with, or with a small spatula, which we mentioned in the incision of the hoof: or with small forceps, with which it is gathered, according to the form it will have after this chapter.
Then when your incision is completed, and the whole Al-Guardian is removed, then fill the eye with crushed salt: or pour in it red powder, and similar to it from corrosive medicines: and place on the deformed eye a bandage with egg white: so that it is secured from hot suppuration.
If there remains any of Al-Guardian, and hot blood rules you, and you fear hot suppuration: then let go the eye, and care for it with that which calms the suppuration.
Then repeat over it with the operation, until it is healed.
Similarly, perform with added flesh that occurs in the eye from this type.
However, it is necessary to operate on all weak eyes from the natural or accidental way with iron: and you should not put your hand into any of these operations until you see that that member can tolerate that operation.
¶ On collecting sebel from the eye.
Chapter 18.
Sebel are red veins that cover the eye and prevent their operation: and they weaken the eye with the length of days.
Therefore it is necessary for you to first consider whether the eye in which there is sebel is strong, and there is no other illness in it except sebel: then collect sebel from that eye.
And it is, that you command the weak one, that he put his head in your lap.
Then suspend those veins with a needle one or two according to your prudence: and the needle should be thin for the formation of the stitches, in this form, or there are two needles gradually in one body, in this form.
Then collect those veins with thin forceps with thinness, and remove the blood hour by hour, until you see that those veins are removed from the eye, and they dissolve: and beware not to injure the eye with the tips of the forceps.
And your operation should be in midday before the sun, and you should be strong in your operation greatly: so that you do not cut except those veins.
And when you have filled it, then pour green or red wine into the eye: so that its sharpness corrodes what remains from sebel.
But if it is not possible for you to collect all of it in that hour, then apply plasters to the eye with what soothes the pain of the eye: and let him rest for several days until the pain settles: and secure it from hot abscess: and then repeat on it according to the same method, until it is healed.
This is the form of forceps.
On the reduction of Aries (the nose) to the nose.
Chapter 19.
The doctors call Aries (the nose) a fistula, which they cure with a cauterizer or with a sharp burning medicine, according to what was previously reported about it.
And if it is not cured, then there is no skill in it: unless you find the abscess at its birthplace and remove all the moisture and pus that is in it, until the nose is cleaned.
When therefore the nose is cleaned and you see decay or discoloration in it, then shave it with an instrument of this form.
And it is called the rough head.
Let it be made of iron and its head round like an azir, which is dotted with a file or with a fine puncturing of the aliskilfer: and put it on top of the rotten bone.
Then turn it between your fingers and press your hand on it for a while until you know that that decay is now scraped off: and do this several times.
Then restore the place with dry hemostatic medicines.
If therefore the place consolidates and flesh grows in it and the course of pus is cut off: and it remains for forty days and does not renew, and does not form an abscess, and nothing bad happens to it: then you know that it is healed.
And if not, then there is no skill in it: unless you reduce the fistula to the nostril opening, according to this form.
And it is, that you scrape off the bone second with iron or with a sharp medicine: and when the bone is detected, then take the drill according to this form, its end is iron, triangular: and the wood of it is a flattened pyramid until its end, as you see.
Then place it on the eye itself: and let it be near the lacrimal point: and lengthen your hand away from the eye a little. Then turn your hand with the trephine until it enters the eye, and feels it to be weak: by which, as it finds the wind coming out of it, when it holds its hand on its nose.
Therefore then restore the place with astringent healing medicines, as I taught you.
When therefore the flesh is born and the place hardens: then the matter that flowed to the outsides returns to the nose: it is therefore lighter on the weak.
¶ On the Reduction of the Prominence of the Eye.
Chapter 20.
When the eye protrudes with its whole, and no harm occurs in the sight, nor diminution: then it is necessary to dissolve the weak: then you must bleed him: afterwards place windy ones in the temples without scarification, but with suction.
Then place a liniment on the eye which is made of acacia, and aloe, and olibanum, and sarcocolla. Then bind the eye above with a plaster with many pledgets.
And the method of the pledgets is: that you take soft cloths, many, and double each cloth on top of four: make many from them: then place them one over another according to the amount that the eye needs: then bind them with a hard cloth and a strong binding.
And repeat windy ones with suction without scarification.
Then remove the windy ones, and let the eye loose day and night.
But if the bandage again becomes soft, then it is necessary to bind much: then remove the bandage day and night, as we said.
If you see the eye about to return to its original position, it is good; but if not, then repeat the ointment, bandages, and splints, and the windy [treatment], until it heals.
Of incision of the eye's membrane.
Chapter 21.
When a tear occurs in the eye's membrane, it then protrudes and extends outside the eyelids like a grain of sand, and defaces the form of man due to this, and you wish to cut it: then the operation on him is as follows: and it is, that you insert a needle into the root of the eye from the lower part to the upper part.
Then insert another needle where there is a double thread from the part of the lacrimal gland, and make it penetrate: and release the first needle according to its position.
Then cut the place of the double thread, and tie it with that part of the eye in the circumference of the needle: and tie it tightly.
Then remove the needle, and place a soaked wool above the eye on the white of the eye: and release him, until the thread falls with the eye.
Then care for the eye with him, that it strengthens him, until the wound heals.
And sometimes the eye is tied up with a bandage from all parts with a circle of cloth, until the eye gains a great elevation.
Then pierce it with a thin lancet, which reaches to the depth of the eye, and cleanses the humidity of the white of the eye, and the eye descends, and goes in immediately: then tie him, until he heals.
Of the treatment of almonds.
Chapter 22.
This illness which is called almond, is not, unless it is pus, which gathers in the eye, similar to water descending, and it is not itself.
And the method of operation in this is, that you make the disabled person sit on a prepared seat, or a straight one.
Then take his head in your hands from the two sides, and move it, until you see health reach the lower parts of your eyes. Then shape it, and let it not descend, and let the light be completed: and the disabled person will see as he used to: and if it does not descend lower, you will know that it is water.
But if the preparation of the descent of health does not come with what we said, then make the disabled person sit between your hands. Then take a thin lancet, and prick with it above the corneal skin a little at the continuation of the joined part with the corneal tunic to the corona, until the pus comes out.
When therefore it comes out, then pour warm water into the eye in which you mixed honey: or water in which you already boiled fennel and honey: then let it be treated with the rest of the cure, until he is healed.
¶ On the care of water that descends into the eye, or cataract.
Chapter 23.
Now we have already mentioned the appearance of water in division, and what is appropriate for cutting with speech declaring and explaining, then take that same one according to health.
Then therefore you must make the disabled person sit between your hands squarely, opposite the light, near the sun: and bind the healthy eye, and pull it very tight: then open the eyelid of his eye with your right hand, if the eye in which is water is the left: or with your left hand, if the eye is right.
Then take with your right hand alumgum, if the eye is left: or with your left hand, if the eye is right.
Then place the needle near the corona at the thickened part of the radius appearing in the whiteness of the eye's lachrymal: then push the needle with force, and you will turn it back with your hand until it penetrates into the sclera of the eye: and feel that the needle has already reached the empty space.
And it should be the measure of the path of the needle to the depth, the measure of the space that is from the pupil to the end of the darkness: and it is the corona of the eye. You will see them in the pupil itself of the eye, because of the clarity of the tunic of the cornea.
Then place the needle until it reaches the place where there is water. Then press it downward, one after another.
If therefore the water comes down immediately, then the sick person sees that above which he opens his eye immediately, and the needle in his eye.
Then rest a little. If therefore the water comes down, then lay it down in the second place, except that the needle goes out.
When therefore it sticks, and does not rise: then take out the needle with ease: and you will turn back your hand gradually.
Then dissolve something clear from the salt of jewelry in water: and wash with it the eye inside. Then place outside the eye all the bandage, or woven cloth dyed with rose oil, and with sclera of eye: and tie it with it the healthy eye.
But we, and those who are of our time, place on him ground almond with sclera of eye.
If the needle does not obey you for entering into the eye because of its hardness, since it is from a person whose eye is very hard: then you must take a small tool, which is called Alberid, of which this is the form.
Therefore, connect it with that joint only and do not insert your hand through the opening: and it is only so that you may make a way to the delicate spot of the womb.
Then introduce the sponge, as we have said.
And at the completion of your work, prepare for him a decently made bed of rest, in which he may lie on his back in a dark room: and let him be prevented from all movements, and from coughing: and place his food, that which nature leni
And let the bandage be according to its condition up to the third day.
Then dissolve it in that dark room, and examine his sight: and make him see things. Then reduce the bandage up to the seventh day.
And it is not necessary to do it at the hour of cure, or immediately after incision: but rather that others do it: because water ascends quickly through a strong gaze.
But if it happens to be a hot abscess: then it is necessary to dissolve the eye before the seventh: and correct it with that which sedates the abscess, until it is sedated: then complete his sight, and place on his face an oral remedy by which his sight is regulated for several days, while he is still in that dark room.
Then he should go out of the house gradually, and return to his usual activities.
And you should know that in the case of a student, vision is not excused from zaltea: for then he dares to perform operations.
And indeed, one of those who are from Alayrach has come to us, who said that it happened in Alayrach that a man was perforated, through which water is drawn.
I have not seen anyone in our land who has done this: nor have I read it in any book of the ancients; and it is possible that it may be new.
And these are the forms of species from which it stands above those who do not know them.
They should be made of air properly: and their ends should be with the same subtlety of a triangle, and a sharp end.
Chapter 24.
On the care of flesh born in the nose.
Sometimes flesh is born in the nose that is added with various kinds, of which there is something that resembles a scorpion of many feet: and from this is cancerous flesh, stone-like, of a dark color: and from this is the flesh that is soft, not of a dark color.
In that therefore which is from those flesh that is soft, not deceitful, nor cancerous, it is necessary for you to do this: sit the weak in your hands opposite to the sun, and open his nose, and thrust a hook into those flesh: then draw them out to the exterior, and cut what you have grasped from them with a thin sharp knife on one side, until you know that all the flesh is removed.
If something remained from which its removal is not possible: then shave it with one of the tools with facility, until there is nothing remaining from it. If however blood dominates you, or hot abscess happens to you: then apply to him what is necessary: or it is from malignant abscesses, then hasten cauterizing him, until the blood is cut off, and all the flesh is removed.
Then throw into the nose after incision vinegar, and water, or wine. If, however, the nose opens and moisture proceeds from it up to the palate, then you will know that he is already healed.
If, however, the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you will know that there is flesh born within him in the upper parts of the nose, to which the instrument did not reach with the incision.
Then you should insert a string with some bulk and many knots in it: and place between each knot the quantity of a finger or less: and make him bend his weak hand, so that he sends one end of the string into his nose with a probe, or with whatever is possible for him to do after he has made it similar to an azzer: and draw out his smell, until it reaches the throat, and comes out over his neck.
And they often do something similar to this of Attoumi boys in school: and it is an easy thing for him who wants to do it.
Then place the two ends of the string: one that comes out over the nose, and the other that remains in the nose. Then the flesh with the knots that are on the string should be cut off. Do this until you know that the flesh is now with the knots of the string.
Then remove the string: and put it into his nose after washing away the blood: with the linen that you soaked in the Egyptian ointment: do this for three days, or more, until the ointment corrodes all that remains of the flesh.
Then put at the end of the matter into his nose a lead tube, for several days, until he is healed.
If however he needs the cure that will dry it out, use that.
To perform the extraction of a tooth, when drops of olive oil and other medicines are applied to the nose, do this with silver or bronze: it should be similar to a small lamp, open like a shell: and its channel likewise.
And if you wish to make a closed cannula, like a reed.
And the shell of the instrument for tooth extraction should be full, empty: with a handle at its end, with which you hold it, when you heat oil or whatever you wish to extract from flexible substances and things.
Chapter 25.
Often a wart grows at the end of the nose, and it becomes prominent and increases with the days, until it becomes disgusting in appearance.
And because of this, it is necessary to cut off that at the beginning of its appearance, and uproot all of it. Then place on the spot, or a cauterizing iron, or a burning medicine that remains in its place.
If therefore the cutting of it is delayed until it becomes prominent, then consider if it is stone-like, hard, dark in color, few sensations: then do not touch it with iron: because it is an abscess that is cancerous.
For often I have seen people who cut into an abscess, and harm came to them from it great evil upon him who had it.
And if the abscess is gentle to touch, not dark in color, and you see that cutting it all is possible, then evacuate the weak one, and cut it without fear, without pity: and care for the spot with what dries and contracts, until it heals.
Chapter 26.
Regarding the closure of the nose, lips, and ear:
You should know that when there is a disruption of continuity in one of these cartilages, it does not greatly benefit from an operation, except in certain people.
Therefore, when something happens to someone from this, you should consider whether it is a recent wound with its own blood: and then gather the edges of the wound with sutures, and then care for it until it heals.
And if the disruption of continuity has already separated the lips, and each part is healthy: then you should scrape off all the part from its apparent skin, until it bleeds. Then gather two lips with sutures, and tie them, and powder the dragon's blood on top of the blood, and ground frankincense: and place above the powders a fragment of the plaster diafinicon, and some other of the consolidating plasters: and leave it tied for two days, or three. Then dissolve it, and change the medication: and leave it until the sutures come off by themselves. Then care for it with ointment until it heals.
The method of suture is to gather the disruption of continuity, or with a needle, as we have told you about the suture of the stomach: or gather it with thread, as I have taught you.
Chapter 27.
Regarding the removal of warts on the lips:
Many people indeed have warts often on the inner parts of their lips, which are hard and similar to grains of herbs: and some of them are smaller, and some larger.
Therefore you should turn the lip, and scrape over every wart of it, and hang it with a needle, and cut it from all sides.
Then fill the space after incision with zeig crushed until the blood stops flowing.
Then apply a mixture of vinegar and honey to the wound, and dress it with a stiptic substance until the wounds heal.
Chapter 28.
About making an incision on the flesh of the thigh over the knee joint.
Often flesh grows on the knee joint, which the ancients called abulus.
Therefore, you should hang it with a hook: or hold it with forceps, and cut it at its root, and let the pus run out, or blood.
Then place on the wound zeig crushed, or other stiptic and dry powders.
If that flesh returns after healing, for it often returns, then cut it again and cauterize it: for it does not return after cauterization.
Chapter 29.
About the reason of teeth with iron.
Sometimes they gather on the surfaces of teeth from the inner and outer parts, and between the jaws rough, foul, and sometimes turn yellow and green, until that corruption reaches the jaw, and the teeth become foul through it.
Therefore, you should make the weak one sit between your hands, and his head in your lap, and shave the molar and tooth, in which the roughness and sand-like substance appear to you: until nothing remains from them, and similarly do with blackness, greenness, and yellowness, and other things until they are cleansed.
If therefore that which is in them from the beginning of reason is removed, it is good: and if not, then repeat the razor on them on another day, second, and third, until you reach the end of your desire in it.
And know that the tooth requires razors of various shapes and many forms: according to how it is prepared for your operation; because the razor with which it is removed from the lower part of the tooth is different from the razor with which it is removed between the teeth, according to other forms.
And those forms of razors should be prepared by you, as you see them.
Chapter 30.
On the extraction of tooth pain.
You should cure the tooth from its pain with all your skill, and slowly remove it. For it does not fit its place when it is removed: because it is a subtle substance; until there is no excuse for its removal, then when the sick person must remove it himself, to strengthen and be certain about the tooth that causes pain.
For often the pain deceives the sick person, and he thinks that it is in the tooth and removes it; then the pain does not go away, until the weak tooth is removed.
For we have already seen this from the operation of bloodletting.
When therefore the tooth that causes pain is removed by himself, then you should scarify around the tooth with a small knife, in which there is something of its virtue, until the gum is separated from all parts; then move it with your fingers, or with fine forceps gradually, until you shake it.
Then place large forceps in that location with good position, and the head of the sick person between your knees; which you have already held well, so that it does not move: then pull the tooth according to its straightness, so that you do not break it.
If therefore it does not come out, then take one of those instruments, and insert it under it from all parts with ease, and try its movement, as you did in the first place.
If the tooth is perforated or corroded, then it is necessary to fill the hole with a cloth: and to tie it with the thin end of a finger, so that it does not break during your constriction with forceps.
And it is necessary to carefully perform the incision around the jaw from all sides, much.
And keep your strength, so that you do not break it, and its part remains, and it returns to the weaker one from that greater malice which is its first pain.
And beware, so that you do not do what ignorant phlebotomists do in their haste, and the audacity of them over its extraction, besides which they administer what we have mentioned.
For they often cause great harm to people, whose difficulties are such that they break them, and all their roots remain, or some of them: or that they extract it with certain jawbones: as we have often testified.
Then it should be covered after its extraction with wine, or with vinegar and salt.
Which if there is bleeding from the places (for it often happens), then wipe some zege with it, and fill it with it: and if not, cauterize it if it does not give you zege.
The forms of the fine forceps by which the tooth is moved in the first place, should be long at the ends, short in the handle, thick, so that they do not double when pressed on the tooth: they should be like the thick handles, until when you tie with them, they do not bite themselves, nor double: short at the ends, and made from iron, or from a well-made file, straight ends: and in their ends there should be teeth, some of which enter into certain ones, and tie with a proper constriction, strong.
And sometimes such ends occur like the form of a bird's beak, which is called a stork, and they are strong in their contraction.
Chapter 31.
On the Removal of Teeth, and Extraction of the Jawbones' Bicuspids.
When there remains at the removal of a tooth that is broken, then it is necessary to place butter on the spot for one or two days, until the spot becomes soft: then introduce into it algasti, or forceps: whose ends resemble the beak of a bird, which is called a stork. However, this is the form of forceps.
Let their ends be made like a file inside: or like an algasti.
If therefore it does not obey you with these forceps, then it is necessary to make an incision on the root, and tear away all the flesh, and introduce the instrument called a small pincer, whose form is this.
Let it be short in its end, rather thick: and not wetted, so that it does not break.
If therefore the root exits through that, it is good: and if not, you must wriggle with these other instruments whose forms are these.
The form of the first triangular end, in which there is a certain thickness.
The form of the thin triangular end.
And with other instruments and tools that preceded in the ratio of teeth.
Also wriggle with this instrument that resembles a large hook, whose form is this: a twisted triangular end, in which there is a certain thickness, so that it does not break: and it is not wetted.
And know that there are many dental instruments: and similarly, the other tools are not counted, and a wise craftsman, skilled in his art, has found for himself alone the tool, according to what signifies to him the operation and the very pains themselves.
For since from the pains to which they did not say the tool, because of the diversity of their kinds.
But if the jawbone is broken from the jaw, or from other bones of the mouth, or rots: then to examine above it in its place with that which suits him from the tools and forceps that I said in extraction of root, and to heal with the gesture whose form is this.
Let there be something of bulk gradually, so that it is tied or held with the jawbone, and does not flee and run away, until the jawbone comes out: and restore the place with suitable medicines to that.
But if there is a small rot in the bone, then shave it from its own rot, and heal it, until it is healed.
Chapter 32.
Of the cutting of teeth projecting above others.
When the teeth do not project above others according to their natural course, it becomes disfigured by that form: and especially when it happens in women, and girls, that is, those who are marriageable.
Therefore you must consider. For if the tooth is born after another tooth, and does not fit, or is possible to cut it, nor to shave it: then eradicate it: and if it is connected with another tooth, then cut it with this instrument, whose form is this.
It is similar to a small beak, and is made of iron, with very sharp extremities.
And let your incision be where you incise on many days, and because of the hardness of the tooth, and so that another is not moved by the teeth.
But if it is prominent and exposed, then it is filed with its own file, which has this form.
Let the whole be of india, and its handle is made of fine points, like a needle with which needles are made: with which tooth is filed gradually on many days with ease, so that the tooth is not moved, and it falls: then smooth it, at the end shave it with some razors.
But if it is a tooth from which part breaks off and hurts the tongue: then it is necessary that the file even that, until the roughness of that fracture is removed, and it is equal: and it is flattened, and it does not hurt the tongue, nor corrupt speech.
Chapter 33.
¶ On the filing of teeth with gold files.
When it happens to the front teeth that they are shaken and moved by a blow, or by chance: and the weak one cannot string over that which he eats so that it does not fall: and you have treated them with hemostatic remedies, and the cure did not improve: then the skill in them is, that they are strung with gold wire: because silver becomes green, and putrefies after days: but gold never changes.
And let the wire be of medium thinness and thickness according to the amount that it takes between the teeth.
And the shape of the filing is indeed, that you take the wire, and insert a double of it between two healthy teeth: then weave with the two ends of the wire between the moving teeth, whether one is, or more, until you reach with the net to the tooth of the other part. Then repeat the texturing until you reach the part where you started: and tie your hand with skill and wisdom, until it is completely removed: and your binding should be like tying a thread, at the roots of the teeth, so that it does not slip.
Then cut the excess ends of the thread with forceps: and gather both, and fold them with a hook: and hide them between the healthy tooth and the moving tooth, so that it does not hurt the tongue: then let it be released as tightly as possible while it remains.
If it is loosened or cut, tie them with another thread, and it will stand with it in this way for the whole time.
And this is the form of the teeth, and the shape of the binding of two healthy teeth and two moving teeth, as you see.
And sometimes it happens that one tooth or two return to their places after the fall of both, and they are retained as we have said, and remain: and this is not done by anyone other than a skilled and experienced craftsman.
And sometimes something is taken from the cow's bones: and it is made into the shape of a tooth, and it is placed in the place from which the tooth is protected and tied, as we have said: and it remains, and it is served with it for a long time.
Chapter 34.
Sometimes this ligament that happens under the tongue is either natural, with which man is born, or accidental, from a wound that has already healed.
And the operation in it is, that you open the mouth of the sick person in his neck, and raise his tongue: then cut that nervous ligament in width, until the tongue is released from its binding.
If there is something hard and knotted in it, and it is due to the consolidation of the wound: then push a hook into it, and cut it across its width until you sever the ligament, and the knotting will be dissolved.
And beware, lest there be a deep cut into the flesh, and you sever an artery there, and there is a flow of blood.
Then apply a compress to the wound with rosewater, or with vinegar, or with cold water.
Then place a linen rag under the tongue, which the weak person should hold all night: so that it does not consolidate again in the second day.
But if there is a flow of blood, then apply charcoal powder on the place. But if the blood gushes out, then cauterize the place with a blunt cauterizer, which is suitable for that: and then care for it along with the other cure, until it is healed.
Chapter 35.
Sometimes an abscess occurs under the tongue that resembles a small ranula, preventing the tongue from performing its natural function: and perhaps it becomes so large, that it fills the mouth.
And the operation in it is, to open the mouth of the weak person in front of the sun: and examine the abscess.
But if you see it is of a dark or black color, hard, and which the weak person does not feel: then do not touch it, because it is cancer.
And if it is inclined towards whiteness, in which there is moisture, then push a hook into it, and cut it with a thin saw, and free it from all parts. If the blood insists on you during your surgical operation, then place some crushed zeigum on it until the blood is removed: then return to your operation until you have extracted it with its complement.
Then bandage it with vinegar and salt: and take care of the rest of its cure according to what is suitable for that, until it heals.
On the cure of two abscesses in the tonsils.
Chapter 36.
Sometimes abscesses occur between the throat and the glands, which resemble those of the thyroid, which occur deformed: and they are called two tonsils: which when you care for with what we said in division, and do not heal, then consider.
If therefore it is a hard abscess, brownish color, little pain: then do not touch it with iron.
And if it is reddish color, and its root is thick: then do not touch it even with iron, fearing the flow of blood, rather leave it until it ripens. And then either you will pierce it: or it will burst by itself.
And if it is white color, round, and its root is thin: then it must be pierced.
And the operation on it is, that you consider before your operation, if the abscess of it has quieted by warm completion, or it is diminished by some reduction: then therefore make the sick one sit in front of the sun, and his head in your lap: and open his mouth, and let him receive a servant between his hands, and press his tongue inferior with an instrument, whose this is form.
Let it be made of silver, or of brass, that it is thin like a knife.
Then when you press it with him the tongue, and the abscess appears to you, and falls on it your sight: then take a hook, and fix it in the tonsil, and extract it as much as you can outside, except that you pull with it some from the clothes.
Then cut it with an instrument of this form, which follows: It resembles forceps: however, its extremities should be cared for, so that the opening of each is directly opposite and sharp: therefore, ensure that it is made of iron or enameled.
But if this instrument is not present, then cut it with a spatula of this form: It should be sharp on one side, not sharp on the other.
And after cutting one almond, cut the other according to this same form of cutting.
Then after cutting, make the sick person gargle with cold water, or with vinegar and water.
But if blood flow occurs to him, gargle with water in which boiled are the shells of almonds: or myrtle leaves, and similar to those from stiptics, until the blood flow stops: then care for it, until it is healed.
And sometimes abscesses arise in the throat other than the two almonds. Then cut them according to what I said in the cutting of the two almonds equally.
And indeed I myself have already treated a woman with an abscess, which was born between her throat, which was pulling to the esophagus, few senses, which had almost closed her throat: and the woman was breathing through a tightly closed mouth, and had already prevented her from eating and drinking water: and she had already reached death, if it had remained for one day, or two days.
And the abscess had risen so much that it had emitted two branches, until they came out over two holes of the nose.
I therefore acted quickly and fixed one of their claws. Then I pulled it out, and from it I extracted a large portion.
Then I cut it off, where it was grasped from the nostril opening.
Then I did the same to the other one that protruded from the nostril opening.
Then I opened its mouth, and pressed its tongue: and afterwards I fixed a claw in the pus: then I cut out part of it, and only a few drops of blood flowed from it: thus the throat of the woman was healed, and she immediately began to drink water, and then took food.
Therefore I did not stop cutting out from that pus many times over a long period of time: and the abscess succeeded in the place where I was cutting, until it was prolonged too much and with it that one.
Therefore I devised, and cauterized the abscess between the throat.
So it stood by the addition: then I walked away from that side, and I did not know what God did with her after me.
About cutting out abscesses in the gums.
Chapter 37.
When the catarrh descends to the gum, and becomes an abscess, and is long: then it is called a perpendicular one: and if it is in the lower part thick, round, then it is called a wound.
When it is cured with what we said in division, and does not require cure: and you see that the abscess has become quiet from her, and is thin: then it is necessary to cut it out.
And what is collected from it is round, and there is no length to it, and it is bloody, or of a yellowish-brown color, or black, and there is no sense in it: then it is necessary to make an incision into its opening. In that case, there is fear of the weak one.
Therefore, when you see it according to the method that I mentioned from its whiteness and length, you should make the weak one sit facing the sun: and press its tongue with the instrument of which I previously spoke, then fasten a hook in the throat, and pull it downwards: and cut it with one of the two instruments that I mentioned in the incision of two tonsils.
And it is necessary that you do not cut from it, except that which is added above the natural limit without addition.
For if you cut from it more, you injure voice and speech.
Then after the incision, use what we mentioned in the incision of two tonsils: and care for it, until it is healed.
But if the weak one is frightened by the incision, then you must use your skill in its cauterization without fear and cowardice.
And the method of cauterization in it is not, except with sharp water: and it is, that you place the head of the weak one in your lap. Then press its tongue with the instrument that we mentioned. Then take from the water that I told you in the chapter of cauterization, and mix it with hot ash, and place it not thick nor subtle, and fill the hollow of this instrument, whose form is this.
Let its end be in which the medicine is placed, concavity, as the concavity of a spoon.
And place the instrument with the medicine on the very same hook: and the weak one should be lying on its side, so that salt comes out of its mouth from the internal medicine, so that nothing descends from it to the throat of itself and injures it.
Then hold your hand with the medicine. And you apply it to the first part of the wound, in the amount of half an hour, until you see that it is already dissipated and soothed by the medicine's bite.
And if you wish to take a probe, and wrap it around the tip of the finger, and pour the probe with the medicine, and insert the finger with the probe into a tube from above, until the probe sticks to the wound.
Do this many times, until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the wound. Then let it go: for it indeed dries up and falls off after three days, or four.
But if you need to reapply the medicine, apply it again: and after cauterization, clean around the wound with a probe immersed in butter, and wipe with what is in its surroundings from the medicine: and moisten with cold water.
And it will be healed externally with an ointment, and internally with gargles, until it is healed.
Therefore this method of treatment is more wholesome than incision and farther from fear.
And sometimes the wound is also cured with what is more subtle than cauterization and incision: it is cured with smoking, in this way. Take calamint, and hyssop, and origanum, and rue, and sage, and chamomile, and abrotanum, and similar herbs to them: and gather all of them, or some of them in a pot, and immerse them with vinegar, and boil: and the pot should be coated with clay properly: and there should be a hole in the middle of the pot, on which a concave instrument is placed according to this way.
Make it from silver or copper: and the tip, in which is the grapefruit, is inserted into the mouth of the sick person until the vapor rises to the nostril through the cannula, until the nostril becomes obscured with vapor.
Then repeat on it many times until it dries out.
And beware, do not make this treatment at the beginning of the formation of abscesses. For indeed, it adds to the abscess: and you should not make it except at the decline of its hot swelling.
But if this instrument is not present to you, then take a cannula, and prepare in its tip a piece of cloth: so that the mouth of the sick person is not burned: for the cloth prevents the vapor from burning the mouth: and this is from good treatment with safety.
About the removal of splinters, and bones from the throat.
Chapter 38.
Often a bone or fish-spine sticks in the throat.
Therefore you should extract what is visible on top of what falls down the throat, after pressing your tongue with an instrument under the sun, and it is declared to you that it is in the throat.
And what does not appear to you and is hidden in the throat, you should make the sick person vomit before the food is digested in the stomach. Perhaps the attached thing will come out through vomiting.
Or the sick person may swallow a piece of bone, or the root of lettuce, or a piece of dry bread: or he may receive a piece of sponge from the sea-sponge, wet and gentle, and then swallow it. When therefore it reaches the place where the splinters, or bone, are, and is extracted, then it comes out.
If therefore it does not exit with that which we said, then use the tool of lead according to this form.
Let it be thicker than the Radius a little, and at its end have a narrowness which will insert into his throat with ease: and he himself should have his head raised upwards.
And beware of his own epiglottis, so that it does not happen to him coughing, and push with it, or a sponge, or insert it himself the doctor with his hand.
But what the sick person inserts, this is better: because of his knowledge of the place of the thing attached: and push downwards, or draw his hand with the instrument upwards, all that according to the quantity which is prepared for him, until it exits.
¶ On the extraction of the bloodsucker.
Chapter 39.
When the bloodsucker is treated with that which we said in division of cure with medicines, and does not bite, then consider in the throat of the sick person before the sun, or at the sun after you have pressed his tongue with the instrument which I told you.
If therefore your sight falls upon the bloodsucker, extract it with a small hook, or with a slender tool decently.
If it is not possible with them: then take a hollow needle, and insert it into the throat of the sick person up to near his throat: then insert in the hollow of the needle burning iron with fire. Do this often: and let the sick person refrain from all water on that day.
Then let him receive a full glass of cold water, and open his mouth in it: and cover his mouth with it, and not swallow anything from it: and move the water one hour after another with his hand. The leech immediately drops off when it feels water.
If it does not come out with what we mentioned earlier, then smoke the patient with cimices, or with asafetida using the tool we mentioned in smoking the wound.
Do this often, because it will fall off anyway.
The method of operation in smoking is as follows: take a pot in which there are live prunes with fire: and the pot should be covered with a lid, in which there is a hole: and the instrument should be placed in that hole.
Then throw the smoke, and let the patient put his mouth at the end of the tube, and close his mouth, so that the smoke does not escape, until you know that the smoke has reached the leech. For the leech will immediately drop off.
If it does not fall off, then repeat the smoking often.
And the patient should bear thirst, and eat salted food, and ointments, and not drink water.
It is therefore necessary that it come out with this regimen.
And this is the form of the instrument with which the leech is extracted from the throat when it falls on it.
It is similar to forceps, as you see: except that it has this hook which enters the throat. And its end is similar to the beak of a bird called a stork, in which there is the roughness of a file: when it grasps something, it does not let it go completely.
On the opening of abscesses, and their cutting, and care in general.
Chapter 40.
Abscesses are of many kinds, of many forms, according to what remembrance comes to mind, namely one and one in this book: and they differ in their piercing and cutting from two ways.
One of them is from the species of boils that are in themselves, and that includes what it contains from moistures.
And the second method is due to the places where it happens from the body.
Because the boil that happens in the head is different from the boil that happens in the anus, and the boil that happens in fleshy places is different from the boil that happens in joints, and to each of them is its own judgment from the operation.
And from the boils are those that it is not necessary for them to be punctured, unless after the maturation of the pus in them and its complement: and from them are those that it is necessary for them to be punctured while they are raw, and not mature according to the complement.
Just as boils that are near joints.
Because the boil when it happens near the joint, and to be lasting is extended until that which is in its circumference perhaps corrupts the ligaments, or the nerve of that joint: therefore it is a reason closer to the contraction of that member.
Or it is the boil near the main member: because if you delay its puncture until it matures, it will harm either him, or through that main member.
Or it is near the anus, puncture therefore it immature: and it is not necessary for you to puncture, the boil raw, not completed digestion, except that which is near the anus, so that it does not putrefy deeply, and extend to the interior of the anus, and become a fistula, or become in the end of it that is not healed.
It is necessary for you to know the time of puncture of the boils that have matured according to the complement: and it is at the sedation of pain, recession of fever, and diminution of redness, and pulse, and sharpness of head of the boils: and the other signs.
And it is necessary to make the same perforation in the lower part of the abscess and its most prominent elevation: and the perforation should extend in the length of the body if the abscesses are in the parts of the hands and feet, and in the places of the back, and tendons, and nerves, and arteries, and finally in all equal places where there is no reflection.
But in those that reflect, go with the perforation according to that limb.
But when the abscess is in fleshy places, then it is better to let go of its perforation until its digestion is confirmed, as we said according to the complement.
Because if you perforate it before that, the course of the virus from it is prolonged, and there are many filth and filthiness, and perhaps its lips are hardened, and its depth.
And some abscesses are perforated according to the width of the body at need: or according to that where the limb needs.
And it is necessary for the administrator in small abscesses to make a small perforation, and in large abscesses to make a wide perforation: or many cuts according to the similarity of the size of the abscesses.
And there are from abscesses, in which it is necessary to make a concavity of the skin: and it is cut when it has already been made like a garment, and it has become in the end, which is already dead: like that which happens in many, so that they doubt, and bubonibus.
And there are those that are cut with a cut having three angles. And there is one from which it is cut like the figure of the leaf of myrtle.
Like the abscess in the groin.
And among them are those in which a circular incision is made, and a lunar incision: and similar to these are certain incisions.
But for that which does not have a head, such as are the mild suppurative pustules on the surface, it is necessary to make an incision into it with a shallow or flat incision only.
And when the pustule is large and has already collected much healthy matter, you should incise it so that you do not rush and remove all the pus at once in that hour, but rather remove some of it from there. Then leave the pustule alone until another day. Then remove something from the pus again.
Do this often gradually until it comes out: especially if the patient is weak or feeble in strength, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an old man: for the animal spirit often dissolves from the animal when the healthy matter comes out, and perhaps the weak one dies and you do not notice.
Therefore this chapter is to be approached with great caution.
And after your incision, by which you have incised these pustules, it is necessary to clean the wound: and consider. If therefore the wound is small or the incision is flat, then apply linen from flax, or old cotton. And if the pustule is large and there are many incisions, then you should insert linen into every incision until they reach each other.
And if in the pustule you have cut off a part of the skin, or you have concaved it around: then it is necessary to fill it with old cotton, or as when a garment is sewn together, or the wool is removed from flax without moisture: and bind it up until the third day.
Then apply it to him and take care of that with the ointment until he is healed.
But if bleeding occurs during your surgical operation, then administer cold water and vinegar after he drinks it through the cloth: and place him on the location of the blood flow many times.
But if the bleeding persists, then you must administer treatment and healing, and powders that I have mentioned in many places of this book, and from division.
But if it is in the time of winter, and the location of many pustules is full of newborns: then you must pour powders with wine, and warm oil: and place them on the locations.
And if it is in summer, and the locations are meaty: then you must place powders soaked in water, and oil, or him with wine and oil, and all of that cold. Until when the third day will be, as we said, then you must dissolve the abscess, and cleanse him, and administer to his healing what is suitable for him, until he is healed.
This is therefore what is necessary from the knowledge of universal healing of abscesses.
Indeed, according to the method of distinction, I have already said about every abscess, how is the way to its healing individually in chapters.
Chapter 41.
§ About the incision of abscesses that occur in the skin of the head.
Abscesses occur in the skin of the head that are small, and they are from the kinds of knots, which contain the tunics that are for them sacks: as if they were themselves washed hens.
And their species are many.
From these are the fat ones: and from these are those which contain moisture similar to lime: and from these are those which contain moisture similar to flour and porridge: and from these are similar, and from these are those which are hard like stone.
And in the section of all, and their extraction is not fear, as long as it does not make opposition to the artery in its section.
And the operation in their section is, that you try them with an instrument, of which the form comes after these, which is called Intrumentum, until you know what it contains.
For if that which contains moisture, then dry it with the section according to the length of the surface section: in this form.
And begin with the section of a line b to line g. And when the moisture is drained, then scrape the shell which contains that moisture, and do not leave anything from it entirely.
For often it returns, if something remains from it.
Then immerse the wound in Egyptian oil, if it is present: and if not, in water and salt: and fill with it the wound, and leave it until another day. For indeed it will corrode what remains from the shell.
Then repeat over it the wound with Egyptian oil second and third, and if you lack it, until you trust that nothing remains from the shell, then care for the wound with oil until it is healed.
If the abscess contains a fat knot: then dry it according to this form, with the section having the form of a cross: and place the needles between the grooves of the section, and scrape it from every part: and try your strength in extracting the skin which contains it.
If the artery gives you difficulty, then do as I will tell you afterwards.
And similarly, if the abscess is stone-hard, treat it from the incision and cure it in the same way as we have said.
And the incision into a stone-hard abscess is easier, since it has less blood and moisture. And sometimes some of these abscesses in the head in certain people are completely without moisture.
Which is: because I have incised over an abscess in the head of an old woman, and found the abscess like a solid, hard, rough, white stone, which could not be broken; and if anyone struck it with it when thrown, it would wound itself.
But in other abscesses that occur in the head, namely those that occur in the heads of children and at the roots of the ears, the incision of all of them is a superficial incision.
Or make a perforation in them always from the lower part of them, so that the course of the pus may be relieved towards the lower parts.
Then treat them with what is appropriate for their cure from the cure.
¶ On the incision of Strophularias in the neck.
Chapter 42.
These abscesses often occur in the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groins; and sometimes they occur in the rest of the body.
And over those that occur in the neck, there is one, and many: and they are generated from each other; and every Strophulus among them is within its own tunic, as it is in the knots and abscesses of the head, as we have said.
The varieties of these Strophularia are many. For among them are stones: and among them are those that contain moistures: and among them are evil ones, which do not obey the cure.
Therefore, in that one which you see of good disposition in touch, whose near color is to the skin, and moves to all parts, and is not annexed with the neck nerves, nor with the guidegi, nor with the artery, nor is deep: it is necessary to cut it off from the upper part to the lower part of the body with a line, b. to the line, g. and scrape it from all parts: and extend two lips of the skin with a nail, or with many nails, if you need that one, as we said in head abscesses, and extract it gradually.
And it is above the precaution, that it does not cut a vein, or nerve.
And let it be not very sharp: so that it does not add to your hand with the incision, or disturb the weak, and you cut what is not necessary.
But if you cut a vein, or an artery, and prohibits you from the operation, then place in the wound zeig ground, or some powders that cut blood, and bind the wound, and let it go, until the sharpness of the abscess is quieted, and the wound is softened: or it begins and wants to putrefy.
For blood is cut then. Therefore return to your operation, until you complete it.
Then inquire with your index finger, if anything remains of the small Strophuli: therefore cut them, and clean them.
But if there is a large vein in the root of the Strophuli: then it is necessary that you do not cut that Strophuli from its root: but it is necessary that you bind it with doubled strong thread, and let it go until it falls by itself without harm.
Then fill the wound with an old cloth that you have already immersed in Egyptian ointment. Then take care of yourself.
If the entire Strophula is cut, then it is necessary to gather the two lips of the wound: and suture them immediately, after you see that there is no longer any excess.
But if you see that there is still excess due to the size of the Strophula, then it is necessary to bend the root of it and remove it: and then administer the suture that we mentioned.
And what contains moisture from the Strophulas, pierce it with a shallow puncture: so that you can see its ripeness to you: and place it below the body, as we said.
Then administer after puncture a liniment with ointment and similar things, so that it corrodes what remains from corruption, until when you see the wound is already clean: then take care of it with a flesh-generated ointment, until it is healed.
Chapter 43.
§ On cutting the Epiglottis from an abscess inside the throat.
The ancients said this cutting of the Epiglottis, and I have not seen anyone in our land who has done it: and this is the writing of their words.
But in those who have a synanche, it is necessary to avoid cutting the Epiglottis: because it does not allow the passage of air through it: therefore, because all veins and lung are weak.
But in those who have a hot abscess in the mouth, or throat, or both jaws, when there is no illness in the canal, it is necessary to use cutting of the Epiglottis, to avoid death from the danger that occurs from the prefocation.
Therefore, when we wish to do so, we should separate the epiglottis under three or four small circles, by cutting through its width, and in the space between two circles, by quantity, which is a section in the skin, not in the cartilage: and this location is convenient for section, as it is free from flesh, and the veins are far from it.
If the physician is timid, then he should extend the neck skin with a lancet. Then he punctures the skin, until when it reaches the channel: he severs the veins, if he sees anything from them.
Then he severs the skin that we mentioned: and it is indicated over the section of the channel by the phlegm that escapes from it, with what is broken, and the cutting of the word.
And let the wound remain open for some time.
Therefore, when it is removed at the hour in which fear of suffocation occurs, gather two lips of the wound skin, and suture it alone without cartilage.
Then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow, until he is healed.
Says Albucasis. The summary of this discourse that we mentioned is not complete, unless when they see that some of these abscesses have already filled the throat of the sick person: and he was raised up, the sick person, above death, and wanted to be cut off from his breath: they go to cut the epiglottis, so that the sick person can breathe over the wound place, and be saved from death: and for this reason they ordered the wound to remain open, until the evil of the illness is consumed, and its duration is three days, and almost the same: then they ordered the wound to be sewn, and cured it, until he was healed.
And what I saw with my own eyes is that one maidservant took up the knife and put it into her own throat, and it struck against the part of the windpipe.
And I was called to treat her, and I found her groaning, as is the groan of the dead.
I therefore extracted the wound, and I found blood that had escaped from the small wound. I was therefore suspicious that she had not cut her vein nor her artery: and the wind was coming out from the wound.
I therefore hastened and treated her wound, until it was healed: and nothing happened to the maidservant, except a hoarseness in her voice: and she returned to me after days in better condition of her limbs.
Therefore I say: that there is no fear in cutting the epiglottis.
¶ On cutting the hernial sac of the neck.
Chapter 44.
This tumor called hernial of the neck is a large abscess according to the color of the body: and it is common in women.
And it is of two kinds: either it is natural: or it is accidental.
In the natural kind, certainly there is no genius.
But in the accidental kind, indeed it is of two kinds: one of which is like little knots. And the other mode, is like an abscess that is caused by the constriction of an artery. And in it there is fear, and it is not necessary to make a presumption against it with iron, unless in that which is small: and you prove it and investigate it with a probe. If therefore you find it similar to a little knot, and it is not suspended with any vein: then cut it off, as the knots are cut: and remove it with that which contains it from the bag, if it is in the bag: and if not, then examine all of it. Then take care of the place where what is necessary for the cure is from, until it heals.
Chapter 45.
On incision over the species of Nodes.
There are many kinds of nodes, and I have already said all the species of them in division: and it is necessary for me to tell here the difference between a node and an exit: since it causes doubt.
I say therefore, that when an exit is hot and fever, and severe pain, until the boiling of excessive fluids, and completion of putrefaction: then the fever and heat are quiet.
But a node truly is not hot and fever, and pain, and contains them in kistis sifachin, which is their own bag, and is according to the color of the body: and is the beginning of them as chickpea, and becomes like beans, and greater and smaller.
And they are according to two species: either fat: or contain moisture. And the colors of moisture are many, as I said in division.
Therefore, when you come to the cure of a node, you must try it and investigate it first with the instrument called the intromissus, according to its form which comes in the chapter that is after this.
And the method of investigating the abscess and all nodes is, that you take this instrument and insert it into the moister place which you find in the abscess: and you turn your fingers with it gradually, until you know that the instrument has penetrated the skin. Then your last hand according to the measure of the size of the abscesses.
Then remove the intromissus, and consider what comes out at its tip.
If, however, there is a running discharge of any color, then dry it off with a shallow cut, as I have mentioned for the other abscesses.
And if the humidity does not run out at the point of insertion, then you know that it is fat: therefore dry it off above with a cut in the shape of a cross, according to this form, as I have taught you: and suspend it with pins, and scrape the skin from all parts with ease: and if you can guard the kistin over it, so that you can remove it whole with the node.
But if the kistis is broken during the operation, and it is not possible to remove it whole, often this happens, then remove it piece by piece, until nothing remains of it.
For if something remains of it, a little or a lot, the node returns most of all.
But if it pains you, and something remains of it: then fill the wound at your completion with some sharp eroding powders: and bind the wound, and place above it what sits the abscess hot, and care for it with the rest of the cure, until it is healed.
But if the node is large, then cut its two lips, and care for it with that which fleshens.
But if the vein of the pulsatilla is contrary to you, or not pulsatilla: then hurry, and fill the place with crushed zegi, and leave it bound for two days, or three, until the wound rots, and the boiling of the blood ceases: then return to cutting that which remains of the node.
Chapter 46.
¶ Of the outer instruments for cutting and piercing.
Of these are the forms of the intromissions, and they are of three kinds.
From these, there is a great one, and from these, there is a medium one, and from these, there is a small one.
Let them be made of iron, in the shape of a square, appropriately, so that they fit well into the opening of the abscess.
And these are the forms of Experiments, and no, that is, puncturing: and one of them is called beris, that is, puncturing: and they are of three kinds.
For from these there is a great one, and a medium one, and a small one.
They are united, so that through them abscesses, and wounds, and fistulas, and boils can be investigated from what is between them from the bones.
And others are made round, clean, soft, like the large needles which have seats for them, of yellow stone, or of air, or of iron, or of silver.
And the best of them are those which are made of yellow stone.
And they are also made of black lead, which are united so that through them they can investigate fistulas, whose concavity is reflections, so that they reflect with their softness with those reflections.
And they are again of three kinds. Because from these there are long ones, from these medium ones, and from these short ones, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and its constriction.
The form of Uncinors, and they are of many kinds.
Because from these there are simple ones, that is, which have a single curve: and they are of three kinds as you see, Great, Medium, and Small.
And from these there are blind hooks: and they are of three kinds.
And from these there are hooks having two curves, and they are of three kinds: and from these there are hooks having three curves, and they are of three kinds: and all of these are necessary in their place.
And these are the forms of Scalpels, by which Nodules and Abscesses are cut and scraped off: and they are of three kinds: because from them is a large, medium, and small one.
Their ends by which the incision is made are sharp, their other ends are not sharp: and they are not placed thus, except that with them a bandage may be applied for scraping off Nodules in fear of incision of the vein or nerve: and so that the sick person may be healed by it, and find a little tranquility from the burning which he found at excoriation of Abscesses.
They are made of air, and they are like a Lens, with which is made Alcohol: and at the wide end there is a hidden Spatula point: and it runs to the insides and outsides as you wish, as you see.
The form of Spatulas which are hidden between the fingers at the puncture of Abscesses: and they do not receive them from the sick: and they are of three kinds, large, medium, and small.
The forms of Suction Cups with which the flow of blood is cut off: and they are of three kinds, large, medium, and small.
They are made of air, or yellow, round, to a certain length, as you see: and they are for delicacy.
And it is necessary that these kinds of Suction Cups be with you both large and small: so that you cut off the blood through them quickly at need, and then when there is not present to you medicine.
But you will not use them in the cutting off of blood in every part of the body, and you will not use them except in fleshy places: as on the calves of the legs, and the hips, and the arms, and the breasts, and the belly, and the groin, and similar ones from fleshy places, moist.
And sometimes such instruments are made of small pieces of tortoise shell, shaped like them: with which blood is drawn when it flows from the place of phlebotomy, or at the incision of a vein, or artery: and sometimes they are made round in this form.
Chapter 47
On the care of human breasts which resemble female breasts.
Sometimes the breasts of certain men swell at the onset of sleep (that is, when they begin to become soiled in sleep), until they resemble female breasts: and they remain disgusting and filthy.
Therefore, if one wishes to avoid this, it is necessary for him to cover the breasts with a lunar incision, in this form from a line, b. to a line, g. Then he should scrape off all the fat. Then fill the wound with flesh-colored ointment. Then gather together the two lips of the wound with a suture, and care for it until it heals.
If, however, the breast leans towards the lower parts and becomes soft because of its size, as happens to women: then it is necessary for it to be incised on both upper sides with two similar lunar incisions, each of which contains the other at their ends, until one line contains a smaller one, in this form from a line, b. to a line, g. Then scrape off the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and administer what we said about sutures and powders, which is necessary for healing, until it heals.
If, however, he does not close the incision as it should be closed, because of the restlessness of the sick person, or because of the flow of blood: then it is necessary for you to fill the wound with a corrosive ointment submerged in cotton, and leave it, until it corrodes what remains of the fat. Then take care of yourself until you are healed.
On the puncturing of abscesses, which happens under the Titillus.
Chapter 48.
These abscesses that occur under the Titillus are of a hard species of Strophularia, which contains kists, and from them are those that contain moistures.
Therefore, those that are from them that contain moistures should be dried by lunar incision, according to this form, from line b to line g. And so, when all that is in the abscess is drained out of pus, then fill it with old cotton and leave it until another day.
Then the cotton is removed, and it is treated with appropriate ointment to that, until it is healed.
If the abscess is of the species of Strophularia knots, then cut above it, as we said in the incision on Strophulas equally.
But if the wound extends so that it can emit pus, then apply a cauterant in it, according to what we said in it which was previously mentioned.
Chapter 49.
On the incision of abscesses that happen because of the artery and vein.
When the artery is ruptured and the skin that is above it is consolidated, very often an abscess occurs from this. And similarly, it happens to the vein also, so that an abscess and swelling occur in it.
And the signs by which it is known that the abscess and swelling are because of the artery and vein, are: because when the abscess is because of the artery, it is long, collected in the depth of the body. And when you press the abscess with your fingers, you feel as if there is a noise to it.
This is also for a surgical textbook, and it is talking about how a certain procedure must be done around a visible vein on the body. The Latin says: "And that which is for the vein, is round in plain sight of the body.
And incision over this abscess is an error, and especially that which is under the armpits, and in the groins, and on the neck, and in many places of the body: and it is great very much. Therefore it must be avoided with iron, and what from them also is in the extremities, or in the head, must be avoided.
Therefore over that which from them also is from inflation of the opening of the artery, find in the skin incision in length. Then open the incision with hooks, afterwards the artery: and free it from the tunics, until it is stripped off.
Then insert the needle under it, and make it penetrate to the other side, and tie the artery with double thread in two places, according to what I taught you in the extraction of the two arteries which are in the temples.
Then prick the place, which is between two ligaments with a lancet, until the blood that is in it all goes out, and dissolve the abscess.
Then administer the treatment which generates pus, until the ligaments fall: then care for that with suitable ointments to it, until it is healed.
If it is an abscess because of the incision of the vein, then it is necessary for you to hold with your hand what is possible from the abscess with the skin. Then insert the needle under the place which you held with your hand, and make it penetrate: and let there be a double thread in it, until you pull it out from the other side. Then tie the abscess with the same bandage as before: as I told you in the bandaging of a wound, from two sides with two ends of a strip.
But if you fear that the thread will be pulled out, then insert another needle with another thread under the abscess throughout the incision: press and tie your thread in four places.
Then cut the abscess in the middle of it, until what is inside comes out: then cut off the excess skin and release what is tied from it.
Then place a piece of lint that you have dipped in wine and oil on top of it. Then apply the treatment, which is done with compresses and ointment, until it heals.
Head L.
¶ On the abscess that occurs from the twisting of nerves.
Just as an abscess occurs in an artery and vein, similarly an abscess can occur in nerves: this happens in them from a blow, or from excessive work, and similar things: and it is most common in the places of supports, or calcanei, and in every place where the joints move: and it is a heavy abscess.
It is similar in color to the rest of the body, and it occurs in many positions without pain: and when it is tied with great force, the weak person feels in it a sensation similar to a stroke.
And it is not an aggregated abscess in the deep body, but rather under the skin, and it moves to every part, and does not go to the front, or before, nor back to the rear.
Therefore, since it is in the joints, it should not be approached with a knife. Perhaps contraction will occur.
However, if it is among them at the head or on the forehead, prick the skin with a blade. If therefore it is an abscess of small size, then hold it with forceps and cut it off from the root.
And if it is large, then suspend it with a hook, and scrape it off: then remove it, and cover the wound with a stitch: and care for it until it heals.
Chapter 51.
On the incision of abscesses that occur in the belly.
Often occur to men many times in their bellies and in the other bodies of them, tumors, which they call Mushrooms, by similarity of them with mushrooms.
Whose root is thin, and their head is thick, and they are turned their lips. And there is among them small: and there is among them which is greatly valued.
And I indeed have seen a man, and in his belly were two tumors, which were more than other things like mushrooms: there was no difference between them, white, small root, and they turned their lips, and they were pricked, and moisture ran out of them always.
I therefore pricked them, and I found in the weight of one as if X and VIII ounces and in the other as if VI ounces. And the operation in their incision is, that you consider then, if the sick is humid, and the color of the tumors is white, thin root: then prick him with a broad blade, and there be present with you cauterizing in fire.
Often the blood is expelled from his incision much: therefore if he overcomes you with blood, then cauterize him.
If you see an ailing and timid patient who is afraid of incision with a knife, then take a thread made of well-made lead and tie it around the affected part: as we mentioned earlier, and let him rest for two days.
Then add to the lead thread. Therefore do not stop tying the lead thread, whenever you press on the wound, until it is cut off and falls away without effort.
But if the wound is large and the root of the wound is thick, then there is a certain fear and trembling in incising it, especially in the abdomen.
However, it is possible to cut through the middle of it. Then cauterize it, so that it does not return.
Then care for it until the wound heals.
And beware of not assuming to incise the wound that is of a foul color, little sensation, and ugly appearance: for it is a cancerous abscess: and I will return with a memory of Cancer after this.
Chapter 62.
§ On the care of the umbilical cord.
The umbilical cord becomes prominent for many reasons. Either from tears in the skin, which is on the abdomen: and it goes out through it, or intestine, according to what happens in other tears. Or from the blood that flows out of the vein, or from the artery, according to what was previously mentioned. Or from the swelling that is tied up in it.
But if it is due to a tear in the skin and the outlet is thin: then it has a similar color to an abscess: and it is soft, without pain: and it appears to have a different location. And if it is due to the protrusion of the intestines, then its location, along with what we have mentioned, is more diverse and severe. When you therefore press it with your fingers, it becomes hidden: then it returns, and perhaps it is with that sound: and it is greatly magnified at the entrance of the bathhouse, and it causes severe labor.
But if it is due to moisture, it is mild, then it does not become hidden when you press it with your hand, nor is it constricted, nor is anything added.
But if it is due to blood, then with these signs an abscess appears to be turning black from the slope.
But if it is due to flesh that is born: then it is a heavy, thick, hard abscess, and it is shaped according to one quantity.
But if it is due to suppuration, then the touch of it is mild.
And the operation in it is such that you should consider then, if the prominence of the navel is due to blood from the artery, or the vein, or suppuration: then it is necessary to be prevented from its cure. For in it is fear and fear, as I taught you in the chapter where I said that abscesses are due to the artery and vein.
But if the prominence of the navel is due to the intestine, or a mass: then it is necessary to order the sick person, as far as he can bear his breath, and stands extended. Then the signs with the cautery in the circumference of the navel throughout. Then order him to lie down supine between your hands on his back. Then circle with a broad-bladed knife in the circumference of the navel over the place that you indicated with the cautery. Afterwards, extend the middle of the abscess towards the upper parts, with a large needle. Then tie it around with a strong thread, or with a silk cord, and let the knot of the ligament be loose.
Then cut open the middle of the abscess extended above the ligament. If indeed you find it already caught by the ligament: then remove the abscess, and insert your index finger into it, and push the intestine towards the interior of the belly: and if you find a pus-pocket, then take it with a needle, and cut off its excess.
But if the opposite is to you an artery, or vein: then encircle it much. Then return to your operation. And take two needles, and insert into them two strong threads: and insert two needles into the circumference which you made around the abscess in the shape of a cross, which you make to pierce.
Then tie the abscess in four places on the needle: and if you wish, remove the needle, and let the place go until the extended flesh rots: and falls off by itself: or cut it when it becomes thin and rotten.
Then care for it with what is necessary from the ointments, until it heals.
But if the prominence of the umbilicus is from the flesh in it, or from moisture: then it is necessary to hollow out the abscess, as we said. And extract the blood, or moisture, which you find in it.
Then care for it with what is necessary to harden the place.
Chapter 33.
¶ On the care of CANCER (cancer).
We have already said in the division of the species of cancer, and how is the way to its cure with medicines: and we must beware of it with the cure of it with iron, so that it does not ulcerate: and we said Cancer generated in the womb, and the precaution from its cure.
The ancients said that sometimes when cancer is in a place where it can be eradicated, as in the breasts or thigh, and similar places, from the movable parts of the body, all of it should be removed, especially when it is just beginning to be small.
But if it is old and large, one should not approach it.
For I could not heal anyone from that, nor did I see anyone before me who reached that.
And the operation on it, when it is located as we said, is to go before and dissolve the weak part from black bile several times. Then, if you find it with manifest repletion, perform venesection on it yourself.
Then prepare the weak part with the preparation in which it will be located during the operation.
Then introduce into the cancer hooks that suit it. Then hollow it out from all parts with the skin, according to probing, until there is nothing left of its roots: and let the blood run out, and do not cut it off quickly, but express the places and wipe off the thick blood entirely by your hand, or with whatever is possible there from instruments.
But if the thick blood flow from the incision of the artery or vein causes difficulty for you, then cauterize the vein until the blood is cut off. Then care for it with the rest of the treatment, until it is healed.
§ On the Care of Hydropsy.
Chapter 41. Now we have spoken about the division of the species of hydropsy, and how the collection of water is made: and the signs of all species, and their treatment with remedies.
And those that are cured with iron are only the species of ascites alone, and it does not approach the species of tympanites: nor is the species of hydrops completely cured, for that is fatal.
When you have already been treated for this type of hydrocele with medications and your treatment has not been successful, then consider the following. For if the patient has already been weakened by treatment and there is another ailment along with hydrocele, such as coughing or diarrhea, and similar conditions, then be careful not to treat him with iron, because there is fear of that.
But if you see that the patient is strong and there is no other illness along with hydrocele alone, and he is neither a child nor an old person, then the method of treatment for him is to raise the sick person standing between your hands, and have a nurse behind him to press his lower abdomen with her hand, pushing water downwards.
Then take a sponge of thistle, in this shape. It should be of two parts, sharp, long, and sharp at both ends like a sponge. However, it should have some brevity gradually, so that you do not pass through with it during the operation up to the intestine and damage it.
Then consider. For if the generation of hydrocele is from the side of the intestines, then it is necessary to lengthen with a cut from the navel by the amount of three fingers, downwards directly above the lower abdomen.
But if the generation of hydrocele is due to illness of the liver, then your cut should be on the left side from the navel by the amount of three fingers.
And if the generation of hydrocele is due to illness of the spleen, then your cut should be on the right side: and it is not necessary either that the cut be in the side where the sick person wants to lie, so that superfluities do not flow to that weaker place.
Then perforate the skin entirely with an instrument. Then insert your hand into that incision, and scrape the skin and flesh with a spatula, as if you were scraping it off: and let the amount of skin removed be equal to the amount removed by a nail, or roughly that amount.
Then perforate the flesh until the spatula reaches the empty space: and this is the place for water. Then remove it, and insert the instrument into the hole, which has this shape. And it is similar to a cannula: it is made of silver, or copper, or gold, which is thin and clean: at the lower part of its body there is a small hole, and on its sides there are three holes, two from one side, and one from the other: and its tip is shaped like a pen, according to the shape of the incision, as you see: at the top of its body is a ring.
For when the instrument reaches the water, then the water immediately flows down onto the instrument, so you should drain off the water in the middle of the hour.
Because if you drain off more than necessary from it, in an hour perhaps the weak person dies by the resolution of his animal spirit: or he suffers from syncopes which approach death.
But drain off from it according to the amount of its virtue, and according to what the signs of the weak person indicate to you from its pulse, and from its goodness.
Then remove the instrument, and retain the water.
Which is because it should be retained immediately because the skin which retains the hole which is on the flesh: of which I have spoken, so that you can perforate it in that way.
Then repeat the instrument on the second day, if you see the weak person bearing that: and also remove a small amount from the water.
Do this for several days without fear, and guard yourself from error: until only a small amount of water remains.
But if you fear for the weak, and let out a large amount of water: then cure him with burial in hot sand, and much sweat in the bath and sun, and wait on his thirst: and cure him with dry medicines until he is healed: and cauterize above the stomach, and epar, and spleen, after the extraction of water: according to what I have told you before.
On the care of children who are born in places where their urine is not perforated.
Chapter 55
When someone of the children leaves the womb of his mother, and the head of his umbilical cord is not perforated, or is narrow, or in a different place.
Therefore one must help with the perforation of it immediately after he is born, with a fine spatula, according to this form.
Then put in the narrow opening a thin lead clamp, and tie it: and hold it for three days, or four.
When therefore he wants to emit urine, remove it, and mix. Then return it.
And if you do not put lead, already possible is, that the urine which flows over the place, does not allow it to be closed.
But he whose opening is narrow, is cured with lead, as we said, for many days, until it is enlarged.
But those in whom the opening is in a different place, are hurt. That is, because of those who are born, the opening is at the end of the virgin's hair: therefore he cannot mix to the fronts, until he raises the hair with his hand to the upper parts. This is not due to his generation, therefore, because the seed cannot reach the matrix according to rectitude: and it is a loathsome illness indeed.
The method of treatment for him is that the weak one should be laid flat on his back. Then extend the head of the girl with your left hand by forceful extension, and cut the head of the girl's hair from the place of the priapus, with a sharp knife, or a spatula with an acute point: as is the incision of a pen, or as you cut something like a root, so that the middle of it comes to the head of the girl: and that the hole fall in the middle according to what is proper.
And beware of yourself during the operation from the flow of blood. For this often happens. Therefore apply to him with that which cuts the blood, and care for the wound until he is healed.
Concerning white spots that occur in the prepuce and on the head of a girl, and corruption, blackness, and adherence.
Chapter 66.
These white spots often occur in a girl, and there is a disfigurement of the flesh.
And from it another is evil, and another is not evil.
Therefore the non-evil one should be suspended with a fine knife, and cut it off, until it is completely cleansed. Then place on it a cotton soaked in Egyptian oil. Then care for it with that oil after that with the oil of dyafinicon, until it is healed.
If the white spot is evil, of foul color, then you should apply a cauterizing agent after its incision and its shaving.
If, however, Albather is in the foreskin of a captive, not circumcised, and part of it is inside the foreskin and part outside: then it is necessary to remove Albather, which is inside first, until it consolidates, then care for it externally: because when you care for it simultaneously, the foreskin does not heal but protrudes.
And now even in the testicles, and the foreskin blackness and corruption occur. Therefore, you must scrape off everything that is already discolored or that wants to rot, and that is already rotten.
Then apply a line on top of it after that with honey that has been beaten with flour, the shells of cherries, and crushed herbs.
Then care for it with the rest of the cure until it is healed.
If however bloodletting occurs, then administer a cautery with a crescent-shaped cauterizer, in this form.
For the cautery is a jointed instrument to two positions at once, namely for bloodletting and wounds when they rot.
If however it bites the head of a virgin and destroys everything in an hour: then you must insert a lead pipe into the urethra of the penis to soak the weak one on top of it.
In adherence however of the foreskin with the head of a virgin, and this adherence does not occur unless in him whose foreskin is healthy, and circumcision is not required above it: and sometimes adherence occurs because of a wound or abscess: therefore you must scrape it off with a Spatumili obtuse, until the ligament is dissolved, and the head of the virgin is freed from all parts.
If it is difficult to precisely distinguish between them, then you must scrape off something from the head of the virgin and from the prepuce. Because the prepuce, when it is thin, might be pierced due to its thinness quickly.
Then separate between the prepuce and the head of the virgin with a thin linen cloth that has already been made into water cold, so that they do not stick again.
Then it is treated with styptic wine until it becomes solidified.
Chapter 57
On the cleansing of children and the treatment of them from error that has happened to them.
Circumcision is not the solution to continuity, as are other wounds: nevertheless, since it is our operation, our will, and its use is proper in children, it is necessary that we mark in it a better operation and a way that leads more easily to salvation.
I say therefore that the ancients did not say anything about circumcision in any of their books: because they do not use it in their laws, and it is only what we have acquired through experience.
Because I have found that the majority of artisans and phlebotomists use cleansing by circumcising with a scalpel and with forceps: and they use those who are affected, and ligaudo with thread, and incision with a needle.
And I myself have already proved all these methods, and I have not found a better cleansing with forceps, and a binding with thread.
Because in cleansing with a scalpel, the skin often escapes. Because the skin of the prepuce has two layers: therefore perhaps the upper skin is cut and the lower layer is stretched: therefore it is necessary to make another incision and cause future pain. And when the cleaning is done by means of the affected part, that is, digitally, as surgeons use it, the incision of the external member's limb is not secured: because perhaps he may enter into its opening.
But in cleaning with a claw, perhaps the iron may avoid it, and spoil your operation: and the skin of the child is short by nature, and often born thus, which does not need cleaning: and I have already seen that.
But in cleaning with forceps and ligature with thread, a good experiment has been shown to me: because the forceps are proportional to the incision: therefore, since the sharpness which is above is like the sharpness which is below. When therefore you put your hand on it, two sharpnesses are proportioned, and they occur according to one operation at one time: and a compression of like figure is made, containing the skin of the maiden from all part, with which not at all an error falls.
And the mode of your own operation is, that you make him to suspect, especially the child, if it is of those who understand a little, which you do not do, except that you tie a thread in its own: and you let him go until another day.
Then make him to enjoy and rejoice in every way possible for you that he may receive his own understanding. Then make him to stand between your prepared hands of stature, and not be sitting: and hide the forceps in your arm, or under your foot, that the child may see them not at all, nor anything from the instruments.
Then introduce your hand into his maiden's skin, and blow in the skin, and draw it upwards, until the head of the maiden comes out. Then clean it from that which is collected in it dirt.
Then tie the marked location with a double thread. Afterwards, tie the lower part of it with a secondary ligature. Then hold with your index finger and thumb, and ensure good retention of the lower ligature, and cut between the two ligatures. Then quickly elevate the skin upwards, and extract the head of the woman. Then let the blood flow gradually (for it is better), and place powder above: and above the powder, a cloth in which the expanded vein was spread, boiled in rose water, shaken with rose oil. With recent good: and let him lie on it until another day: and care for the rest of the cure, until he is healed.
But the form of the forceps for cleansing is this.
Let the two ends be sharp and inclined: so that a branch of the crippled one does not exit in them: and let the length of the two sharp parts be as the length of two handles equally.
But the error that occurs in cleansing is: because perhaps the internal skin has escaped entirely, or a part of it near the incision.
Therefore it is necessary, that you extend it from your hour with your nail before the formation of the pus in the location: and cut it according to equality.
But if you cannot hold it with your nail, then extract it with a needle, and cut it.
But if three days have passed, and what remains under the wound is inflated, an abscess: then let it go, until the abscess sets warm, and scrape it with ease, and cut it according to what is prepared for you: and beware of the head of the woman. It will not harm him that.
Therefore, treat that with the powder that consolidates the wound from the powders which we mentioned in the treatise on powders: and if it occurs above the skin and reaches the upper parts, it does not harm him even that.
Therefore, treat that with what we said until he is healed.
Chapter LVIII.
¶ On the extraction of a stone retained in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder occurs from an operation done with stone, or frozen blood, or pus, or flesh born, and similar to those we mentioned from methods of treatment in division.
And if the stone does not dissolve, and you see the retention of it to be due to the stone which is already in the neck of the bladder: then it is necessary that he should be lying on his knees cared for. Then his feet will be placed on his back, and he will extend his belly from the upper part of his back, and bind his weak breath as much as possible to him. He is therefore pushed towards the neck of the bladder for the expulsion of the stone: hence the retention of urine is relieved.
If it does not dissolve with what we said, and the matter is strong on the weak: then it is necessary that the assistant of the extraction with the instrument which is called the sling, whose form is this: It should be made of silver, and be thin, light, concave like the cannula of a bird's feather in subtility of the ray, long in the likeness of the palm of one and half: it should have a thin cannula in its head.
And the mode of exit of urine through it is, that you take a doubled thread, and tie a piece of linen, or cotton, a good ligature at its extremity: and introduce the extremity of the thread in the lower part of the sling: and cut with forceps if there is any superfluity from the linen, but introduce into the cannula with force, as an eel.
Then anoint the catheter with oil or butter and chalk, and make the sick person sit on a seat, and brocate the urethra, and the penis with moist oils and oil of olives, and warm water.
Then insert the catheter into the penis with ease until it reaches the root of the penis.
Then double it from the upper part near the navel.
Then push the catheter into it until it reaches the bladder, and the sick person feels that it has already reached the empty place: and this is not done in this order unless the channel through which it goes is where there is twisting.
Then extend the thread with wool gradually. For the string will follow the wool.
Then withdraw it, and make the string run through the urinary channel: and repeat the catheter, and do not stop doing this until the bladder is emptied, and the sick person finds relief.
Regarding the quality of the bladder with Chlorphydrate.
Chapter LIX.
When an ulcer occurs in the bladder, or blood is congealed in it, or pus is contracted in it, and water and medicines are desired to distill into it: then make with an instrument called Chlorphydrate, and this is its form.
For it is deaf, that is, closed. And in it are three holes, two on one side, and one on the other, as you see.
And a hollow place, where the thing that pushes is according to the amount that fills it without addition until when something is drawn with it from moisture: and when it is pushed, it expels it far away: as Chlorphydrate does, which throws naphta, that is, Greek fire in battles of Mars.
When you want to draw out moisture from the urethra, insert the tip of a syringe into the moisture and pull it upwards with what is being pushed towards the top, as the moisture is drawn into the concavity of the syringe.
Then insert its tip into a needle, as we have mentioned in the syringe. Then push the moisture with what is being pushed, for that moisture has already reached the bladder immediately, so that the weak one feels it.
The form of a fine catheter by which the bladder is catheterized.
Let it be made of silver or gold: whose head is higher and similar to a small camel's hump, and under which there is a pouch in which the string lies.
Then take the bladder of a ram and place it in the moisture with which you want to catheterize the bladder. Then tie it between two pouches with a strong string and double thread, and warm the moisture slightly over the fire.
Then insert the tip of the catheter into a needle, and then tie your hand over the bladder with moisture with a proper string, until the weak one feels that the moisture has already reached the bladder.
If however there is not a bladder present for you, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle from it, and pierce it from all its roundness. Then insert a strong thread into those holes, as they unroll. Then gather the circle, like a roll of parchment: after you place it in it what you want from the moistures, oils, and waters.
Then tie it in the instrument: and make with it as you did with the bladder from expression with your hand, until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter 60.
On the Extraction of a Stone.
Now we have spoken of the division of the species of stone, and of its cure with remedies, and I have mentioned the difference between a stone formed in the kidneys, and bladder, and the signs of that disease; and I have spoken of the operation of stone in the bladder, with hand and incision: and it is a stone which is formed in the bladder properly: and that which is adherent to the lancet: and I am narrating this with clear explanation and abbreviation.
Therefore, I say that a stone formed in the bladder most often occurs in boys.
And from its signs it is known that the urine passes from the bladder like water in its fineness: and there appears in it white sand, and a weak man scrapes his lancet with it, and struggles with it, and often hangs on to it. Then he rises up, and passes with it the anus in many of them.
And the cure of boys is easy, from which they follow up to fourteen years. And it is difficult in the elderly. And in young people it is medium, in that which is between the two: and of him whose stone is larger, the cure is easier: and if small, its cure is opposite.
When therefore we come to the cure, it is necessary first of all to cleanse the sick man with enema, which draws out all the feces that are in his intestines: for often it prevents the discovery of the stone at the inspection.
Then the sick man should be taken with his feet, and shaken, and moved to the lower parts: so that the stone may descend to the bottom of the bladder, or jump from a high place several times.
Then make him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands should be under his buttocks, so that the bladder is entirely inclined towards the lower parts.
Then seek him out, and touch him externally.
If therefore you feel a stone in the space, then hurry immediately with a cut above it.
But if it does not fall entirely under your touch, then it is necessary for you to wipe the index finger with oil of your left hand, if the boy is weak: or the middle finger if he is a complete young man, and introduce it into his anus, and seek out the stone until it is under your finger: and turn him gradually towards the neck of the bladder.
Then press on it with your finger, and push it towards the external opposite place of the incision: and order the assistant to press the bladder with his hand, and order another assistant to extend the testicles with his right hand towards the upper parts: and with the other hand, to remove the skin which is under the testicles in the part from the place where the incision is.
Then introduce a probe with the following shape. And find in it what is between the anus and the testicles, and not in the middle, to the side of the left buttock: and let the incision be on it, and your finger be in the anus: and let the incision be transverse, so that it is external wide, and internal narrow, according to the amount that is possible for the escape of the stone from it not greater.
For perhaps the finger which is in the anus stones against the incision, and exits without difficulty.
And know that from the stone are those angles and margins, why its escape is difficult because of it.
And from it is smooth, similar to a gallbladder, and round: and its escape is easy.
To those who have angles and margins, add in the incision.
If it does not exit thusly, then it is necessary to place the ingenuity above it: or to tie above it with a belt that is worn properly, whose end is like the moon, which ties over the stone, and does not slip from it: or to insert an instrument under it, with a curved end.
But if you cannot do so above, then slightly enlarge the opening. If something from blood pinches you, cut it off with a knife.
But if the stone is more than one, then push the first large one against the wall of the bladder. Then cut above it. Afterwards push a little after that one: and do the same if there are more than two.
But if it is quite large, then it is better to separate above it with a large cut. Since it happens to a weak person of two things, either that he dies, or that he experiences constant drip of urine: because the place does not consolidate at all.
But administer its expulsion until it exits: or use ingenuity in the fracture of it with forceps, until you extract it piece by piece.
When therefore you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with thyme, and aloe, and dragon's blood: and tie it, and place on it a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or rose oil, and cold water: that the abscess remain warm.
Then lay the weak person on his back, and do not untie the ligament, until the third day. When therefore you untie it, rub the place with much oil and water.
Then care for it with diaphenine ointment, and basilicon ointment, until it is healed.
If, however, a hot poultice is added to a boil, and it is corroded, and similar things happen: as if blood congeals in the bladder, and urine is prevented from coming out of it: and this is known by the escape of blood with the urine. Therefore insert your finger into the wound, and remove that blood. For if it remains, it will cause the bladder to rot, and its putrefaction.
Then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt: and apply whatever is appropriate to it from the cure, until it is healed.
And it is necessary in the course of the entire cure, to bind two buttocks, and apply a poultice, as the reason for the medicines that are placed on the place.
But if the stone is small, and it is in the passage of the virgin, and it is stuck in it, and prevents the escape of urine: then cure it with what I will tell you before you reach the incision. Often you will be saved from the incision by this cure, for indeed I have proved it.
And it is, that you take a Perforator from ironwood, whose form is triangular at the extremity, sharp, fixed in wood.
Then take a thread, and tie it with that wand under the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
Then insert the iron perforator into the wand with ease, until the perforator reaches the stone: and revolve the perforator by your hand in it slowly: and try to make the perforation of it, until you make it penetrate from the other side.
For urine is discharged immediately.
Then press your hand upon what remains of the stone from the outer part of the wall. Indeed, it is broken, and exits with urine, and the sick person is healed.
But if this cure is not prepared for you because of something that prevents it from him: then tie a rope under the stone, and another rope above the stone. Then cut above the stone on the wall between the two ropes. Then remove it. Afterwards dissolve the rope, and clean the congealed blood that forms in the wound.
And it is not necessary to tie the rope under the stone unless it does not return to the bladder: and the rope above, unless when the rope is dissolved after the stone exits, the skin returns to its place, and covers the wound: and for this reason you must raise the skin when you tie the rope above, so that it returns to its complement, and covers the wound, as we said.
Chapter 61.
¶ On the extraction of stones in women.
Stones are not formed much in women.
But if it happens to some of them, then the cure is difficult, and it is prevented because of many ways.
One of them is: that the woman may be a virgin.
And the second is, because you do not find a woman who hides herself from the doctor when she is chaste, or from those who have husbands.
The third is, because you do not find a woman who knows this art well, especially the operation with the hand.
And the fourth is the distance from the place of the stone: therefore it requires deep incision, and there is fear.
If necessity calls for it, then it is necessary to take a woman as your doctor, one who is well-versed in medicine and not easily found.
But if you are unable to find her, then seek a chaste, clever, and present female midwife who is well-versed in the art of childbirth: make her present, and especially instruct her to do everything that you command her after examining the stone.
First of all, it is necessary for her to examine whether the woman is a virgin: then she should insert her finger into her anus and search for the stone.
If she finds it, then she should cover it with her finger, and then instruct the midwife to insert her finger into the weak bladder and search for the stone, after placing her left hand on the bladder and pressing it firmly.
If she finds the stone, then it is necessary for her to gradually move it from the bladder opening towards the lower parts with great skill, until she reaches it at the root of the thigh.
Then she should cover it over the bladder at the middle of the urethra and at the root of the thigh, from whichever part she prepares it and feels the stone in that part: her finger should not be removed from the stone, covering it underneath: and the incision should be small at first. Then she should insert the radium over that incision.
Then she should insert the radium over that incision. If she feels the stone, then she should add to the incision an amount proportional to the size of the stone that has emerged from her.
And know that there are many kinds of stones. From these, the small and large, gentle and rough, long and round ones with branches are to be distinguished.
Know therefore its kind, as it is indicated to you by this above what you wish.
If therefore it bleeds, then add at the place of the wound ground zegi, and hold it for an hour until the blood stops.
Then return to your operation until the stone comes out: and make, that you prepare with you from tools, which I said in extraction of the stone in men, that you assist by those in your operation.
If therefore it overcomes you the flow of blood, and you know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery which is cut: then put dust on the place, and bind it with dust with a decent binding: and do not remove it: and let go the stone, and do not take it out. Perhaps indeed the sick woman will die. Then heal the wound.
When therefore the sharpness of the blood is calmed after days, and the place rots, then return to your operation until the stone comes out.
Chapter 62
¶ On the cutting of the hydrocele.
Hydrocele is not, unless the collection of moisture in the white bag, which is under the skin of the testicle containing the egg: and it is called white.
And sometimes it is in its own pouch, which nature prepared for itself in the part of the eye, until it is thought: which is another egg, and is the skin of the testicle between the white, which we said: and it does not make that rarely.
And the generation indeed of this hydrocele, is from the weakness which happens to the testicles: therefore this matter is poured out to them. And sometimes it happens from the blow on the testicles.
This moisture has many colors. For its color is inclined towards yellowishness, or it is red bloody, or filthy, black, or it is watery white, and that is the most.
And the signs by which it is known where there is an accumulation of water, are these. For if it is in the side white, which we said, then the abscess is round to the length somewhat like the figure of an egg: and the testicle does not appear, because the moisture contains it from every part.
And if the moisture is in its own cloth, then the abscess is round with part of an egg, and therefore the man fears because it is another egg.
And if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white side, then it falls under the sense.
When therefore you want to know the color of the moisture, then try the color of the moisture in the abscess with a square instrument, whose form precedes. According to that which issues from the end of the instrument, judge of that which is between it.
When therefore we come to the cure with the iron, then it is necessary for you to command the sick person, that he be bled if possible, and you see his body full.
Then let him lie on his back on a high bed somewhat, and put under him many cloths.
Then you sit on his left, and command the servant, that he sit on the right of him, who extends his rod to one of the two skin of the testicles, and to the part of the belly.
Then take a wide-mouthed bottle, and dry the skin of the testicles from the middle by length, until near the nipple: and make the cut according to the straightness of the line which divides the skin of the testicles, until it reaches the white side containing: and remove him and observe, or beware that you remove him from this, so that your excoriation is from the part which hangs with the egg more: and subtly scrutinize with the excoriation according to the quantity that you can.
Then perforate the sponge full of water with a wide perforation, and extract all the water.
Then separate the two lips of the section with hooks, and extend the sponge to the upper part, and do not touch the skin enclosing the testicles: and cut the sponge however you can cut it, either entirely or in pieces, especially the thin side. For if you do not carefully examine, there is no safety in the incision, so that the water does not return.
But if it proceeds out from its own skin during your operation: then when you have completed the incision of the sponge, bring it back. Then gather the two lips of the skin of the testicles with a suture.
Then care for it as you would other wounds, until it heals.
But if you find one that is corrupted from another blackness, then it is necessary to bind the vessels, which are the supporters, fearing the flow of blood.
Then cut off the testicle with its supporter, and extract the one: then care for it with that which we said.
But if the water is gathered in two parts, then you will know that there are two roots: therefore cut off the other part according to what you did in the other one equally.
And if it is balanced for you, so that the operation is one, then do: and then wipe off the blood. And introduce into the sections immersed in oil, or in rose oil: and place a different wool that you have immersed in wine and oil over two testicles, and stretch it over the belly: and place double cloths above, and they are swabs: and tie them above with a bandage, which has six according to this form.
Then take two cloths, wash them, and fill them with carminative la na, according to this similitude: and make their extremities which are pressed from the cot, or wet wool: and they are gathered together with a binding in the loins of the beasts: and one extremity takes above the anus up to the back, and the second takes to the part of the comb: and two extremities above two hips inferior, and two extremities other on two groins, and it is gathered together all the binding in the loins of the beasts.
And sometimes this instrument is artificially medicated with a cautery at the place of the cut with iron: and it is, that you take the cautery surgical knife, and you separate with it the skin of the testicles: and it is ignited, according to what we have told: until when it detaches the white containing water: then take the cautery, according to this form.
The letter Greek is imitated.
Then pierce with it that sifac, and it is ignited, until the whole moisture comes out.
Then extend the sifac with hooks, and scrape with the surgical knife ignited, and cut it according to what is possible to you, until you remove all its roots.
And beware from the egg, lest it touch it fire.
And know that this operation is safer, and farther from the flow of blood, and better than the operation with cutting.
But if contradiction to you makes in the hour of cutting, or in the hour of cauterization abscess hot, or flow of blood, or other thing: then it is necessary that you cure what contradiction to you makes from that with the cure which corresponds to it, according to what was previously said.
If however the patient is timid and does not await this operation due to its horror: then perform the puncture as I have described it, and it is.
When it is certified to you by that which we have said about the signs, which is a watery ram's horn: then you must make the sick person sit on an elevated seat.
Then puncture the abscess in its lower part with a narrow-bladed knife: and place the incision according to the length of the body, and let it be a wide opening, until all the water runs out.
Then place on the warm place, and bandage him, and let him go to let out the remaining water: then care for him until the wound heals.
If however there is resistance to the outflow of water at the hour when you are puncturing it: and this is not because of any other reason, but because the white cloth causes contrariety in the wound's opening, and prevents the exit of the water: then you must insert a needle into the wound, or an instrument with which water from hydropsy is drawn out, whose form has preceded: or add to the operation of the wound for a little.
And know that the water returns and collects after six months, or about them. When therefore it collects, then repeat the same method, and the sick person will pass his days.
Chapter 63.
¶ On the care of fleshy rams' horns.
Know that in the cut on this ram's horn, there is often a danger of harm due to fear in many positions. Therefore it seems to me that its release should be saved from it.
And I remember the operation on it, and the appearance of abscesses.
I say therefore that many abscesses occur in the bodies of people, from which the testicles are composed: and this is caused by many reasons, namely.
either from an excess of sharp, or sharp, which is poured out towards the testicles. or from impact.
And the color of the abscesses is according to the color of the body, and there is no pain found for it: and it is a heavy abscess.
And perhaps it is a stone abscess, whose color is dark, and there is no sense for it.
And sometimes it is caused by the knotting of the arteries, and their swelling: as has already been mentioned: or from the swelling of the veins.
Therefore, what is caused by the swelling of the arteries is known by the position of the abscess, when you press it with your fingers. And it is not necessary to touch it completely.
But that which is caused by the swelling of the veins does not spread at all from it when pressed with the fingers.
And now it is possible that a cut be made on this kind, and on the remaining flesh: and it is to separate the skin of the testicles. Then extend the wound upwards, and extract it with a white sponge: and free the suspenders from the vases, and tie the vases: and cut the suspenders after you have freed it from all parts of the parts of the wound.
If therefore the wound is solidified with those fleshy parts, then it is necessary to draw the wound, and cut it.
And if there is an adhesion between something from the sponge, or in that which is between the vases: then it is necessary to free all that adhesion, and cut it with a round cut.
If however the birth of the flesh is in a place of adherence which is behind: then it is necessary that you cut all of it, and extract the egg, as we said.
When however the operation is completed, then fill the wound with wool soaked in rose-scented oil and wine: then care for it with the rest of the care, until it is healed.
Chapter 64.
Regarding the care of Rambis, which is with Vite.
A boil is inflamed in a certain inflammation, similar to a bubo, with the softening of the testicles: and it becomes difficult for an infirm movement and exercise, and walking.
And in the care of this sickness, there is from fear, because of that which preceded the remembrance.
But it is necessary, that we say the operation in it according to what they did first.
I say therefore, that you should do make sit on a raised seat. Then push the support of the testicles to the lower parts. Then hold the skin of the testicles with your fingers, with vessels which are near the virgin: and another servant holds them, and extends them with a strong extension.
Then cut with a broad flat sharp crosswise section in a straight direction of the vessels, until the vessels are exposed.
Then scrape off from all parts, as we said to you in the extraction of arteries which are in the temples.
Then fix in them a needle in which is the double thread, and tie it in the first place where the Vites occur: and tie it again in the last of them. Then cut them in the middle section straight according to the length of the body, and extract what gathers from the humidities putrefying.
Then, care for the wound and the healing of other wounds, in which the intention is to generate health, so that the vessels that nourish one testicle fall. For it is not an evil through that.
But if the grape occurs with all the vessels, then it is necessary to remove them for this reason, the testicles with the vessels: so that the egg does not lack nourishment, because of the incision, and it rots or dries up, and it is not a remedy with them.
Chapter 65.
¶ On the care of the intestines.
The event of this intestine is from the incision that occurs in the siphon extended over the belly in the part of the groin from the bladder.
Therefore, the intestines descend from that rupture to one testicle. And this rupture is either from the siphon or from its extension.
And these two species occur from many causes. Or from a blow. Or from a jump. Or from a shout. Or from a heavy lifting and similar things.
And the sign when it is from the extension of the siphon. It is that which occurs gradually over a long period of time, and it does not occur suddenly: and it is an abscess equal in breadth to depth: therefore, because the siphon compresses the intestine.
And the sign of it when it is from the incision of the siphon, because it causes to occur from the beginning of its severe pain suddenly: and it is an abscess different, appearing under the nearby skin: and that is because of the exit of the intestine, and the course of it to the external siphon.
And sometimes it exits with the intestine of the small intestine: and this is called the ram's horn intestine, and the small intestine: and sometimes it forms with moisture.
And sometimes it runs into the intestine of feces, and it is retained there: and it is with it a sign of weakness, because it causes a slight pain, and especially when it is pressed.
And in the treatment of this sickness's symptoms with iron, there is fear: therefore it is necessary to guard against such a case.
And the method of operation is, that you order the sick person, to reduce with his own hand the intestine to the inner concavities of its own, if it does not return. Then he should lie down on his chest between your hands: and raise his legs.
Then extend the skin that follows the skin to the upper parts, and dry the skin of the testicles all along the length. Then fix two hooks in the lips of the incision, according to what you need to open the incision with them: and the section should be according to the amount, that it is possible, so that an egg can come out of it.
Then scrape the skin of the testicle, and what is under the skin of the testicle, until when the egg is detached from the albumen, hard from all parts: then insert your index finger into that which follows the testicle, in that which is between the white egg, which is under the skin of the ovary, and between the white egg, and complete with it the adhesion that is in the posterior part of the ovary.
Then move with your right hand to the inner skin of the testicle: and when you do this, extend the white egg upwards, with your left hand: and raise the egg with the white egg to the part of the incision: and order the servant, to extend the egg upwards: and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind the completed solution.
And be careful with your fingers, so that there is nothing wrapped around the unfolded intestine in the white, hard sphincter. But if you find something from it: then push it down to the lower abdomen.
Then take a needle, in which is a thick thread, made of linen from ten threads: and insert it at the last sphincter, that is, the tunic, which follows the section of the testicles: then cut off the protruding ends until there are four threads. Then arrange some of them on top of some with the figure that is in the form of a cross: and tie them with the sphincter, of which we have said, because it is under the skin of the testicles by a strong ligament, until it cannot send anything from the vessels that nourish them to them anything: so that nothing hot inflammation comes from there. And place again the ligament according to the outer ligament, far from the first ligament by less than two fingers. And after these two ligaments let go from the sphincter, which is under the skin of the testicles, the quantity of the size of a finger: and cut off the rest of it all according to its roundness, and take out the egg.
Then cut off in the lower part of the skin of the testicles, from which blood and pus flowed, as we have mentioned in that which was previously mentioned.
Then apply a wet bandage in oil, and place on the wound: and apply the ligament that we have mentioned. And sometimes the white sphincter that we have mentioned is cauterized after its incision, fearing from the flow of blood. For often this happens. And release the ligament until it falls off on its own.
But if its fall is delayed, then apply hot water and the same thing we mentioned earlier until it falls off.
Then care for the wound with the rest of the wound treatment until it heals.
Chapter 66
¶ On the Fuzzy Caterpillar
In this fuzzy caterpillar, I have not seen anyone who dared to treat its wound with a knife.
And the first ones said that it happens just as we mentioned in the fuzzy caterpillar that is with the vine. That is, to tie the wounds after cutting with something below it: then dry in the middle, and care for it finally with what opens it, until the wounds fall off: and care for the wound as we mentioned earlier until it heals.
Chapter 67
¶ On the Disruption that Happens in the Groins
When a rupture happens in the groins, as we mentioned earlier, and the location is raised, and nothing from the intestines falls down to the testicles: but if it does fall down, it is only a little, and it returns to all hours: however, if that time prolongs with it, a fissure is added in the sifach, until the intestines fall into the sifach.
And that happens from the extension of the sifach, which is in the groins, as we mentioned earlier. That is, because the sifach is extended: then it is softened, and the location swells, and it rises up.
And its care is with the cauterizer, as we mentioned earlier in its story.
And sometimes it is cured with a knife, in this way: and it is, that the sick person lies on his back between your hands. Then cut the area of the burst abscess and protruding wound, across its width, according to the measure of three fingers.
Then tie the alsifak and those under the skin, until when it tears the white sifach, which is under the skin that follows it.
Then take the probe and place it on the protruding area from the sifach, and press it deep into the belly.
Then tie two protruding areas on the end of the probe from the sifach, and connect one with the other with a stitch: then remove the end of the probe.
And do not cut the alsifak at all, nor stretch anything, nor anything else, as I have taught you in the treatment of intestinal branches.
Then treat that with the treatment of wounds. So when you cut the thread, clean it and restore the wound until it heals.
For alsifak contracts, and no protrusion of the burst is added.
And the cautery is better in this place: because it is closer to safety.
Chapter 68.
Of the softening of the skin of the testicles.
The skin of the testicles is often softened in some men, because the flesh that is between them is softened, and it disfigures its appearance.
Therefore it is necessary for him who is asked about its treatment to make the sick person lie on his back, and cut the skin that has been softened over the natural skin.
Then he should join two lips with a stitch: and if you wish, use three or four stitches on the first excess of the softened skin, and a strong stitch.
Then, cut between the sutures.
Then, care for the remaining wounds until they heal, and the threads fall off.
Chapter 69.
About Castration.
You should know that castration is excommunicated in our law: and because of this, it was allowed for me not to mention it in my book: and it is not necessary to remember it, except for two reasons.
One of these is that it should be in the knowledge of a physician when asked about it: and that he know its cure for those to whom it happens.
And the other is that we often need castration of certain animals for our young, such as cattle, goats, and similar animals.
I say therefore, that Castration is done in two ways. Either by abrasion. Or by making a cut and a tear.
In that which is done by abrasion, the method of operation is as follows: that we make the animal sit in hot water until its testicles are softened and soothed, and hang down: then rub them with your hand, until they dissolve and do not appear under touch.
But in Castration by a cut and a tear, it is necessary to hold the animal, and press the skin of its testicles with your left hand.
Then tie the suspensory, and seal over all that section with one, until when the two eggs proceed: then cut them after you have scraped each, and do not leave on them any of the scarfskin except the thin scarfskin which is on the sacks.
And this method of Castration is better than that which is done by abrasion: because abrasion perhaps leaves something in the testicles, wherefore the animal desires copulation.
Then care for the wound until it heals.
Chapter 70.
On the care of Hermaphrodite in two ways.
Hermaphrodite is of men according to two ways. Their male organ is because it appears to follow the space, or on the skin of the testicles, in that which is between two testicles, a figure like a woman's vulva, in which there are hairs: and sometimes urine flows from that which is on the skin of the testicles.
In women, however, there is one species, and it is a woman's vulva above the breast like small male testicles projecting to the outside: of which one is like the penis of a man, and two are like two testicles.
And the care of three species, two from men, and one from women, is: because it is necessary to cut the added flesh until the impression of them disappears. Then care for those wounds with the care of other wounds.
In the second species of men, from which urine exits, which is on the skin of the testicles, there is no operation, nor is there its care at all.
Chapter 71.
On the incision of the tenting, and flesh projecting in the vulvas of women.
The tenting is perhaps added to the natural thing until it becomes deformed and ugly in appearance: and sometimes it is magnified in some women so much, that it expands like in men, and reaches even to intercourse.
Therefore it is necessary to hold the excess of the tenting by hand, or with a knife, and cut: and do not end in the incision, especially in the deep root: so that blood does not flow.
Then take care of the wound itself until it heals.
However, the flesh that is born, is flesh that is born in the opening of the womb, until it fills it: and perhaps it goes out to the exterior according to the likeness of a tail: and for this reason some call the sickness caudata. Therefore we must cut it as we cut the umbilical cord, and take care of it until it heals.
¶ About the care of Alratica, which is a wound of a woman not punctured.
Chapter 72.
Alratica is a wound of a woman not punctured, or it has a small opening. And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental is from the sickness that preceded it: and this is made either from flesh born added, or fine spider webs, or thick ones: and it is made in the deep of the womb, or on its sides, or on its upper part, or its lower part: and it prevents sexual intercourse and impregnation, and birth, and perhaps menstruation.
And the knowledge of it is made by the sight of the midwife, if the opening is visible nearby.
But if it is not visible, then seek it with your fingers, or with a rod.
But if the opening is from fine spider webs, and it is near two lips: then hurry, and tear it.
And it is, that you place on two lips cotton.
Then place your two fingers of your hands at the same time, and the woman is on her back with her legs spread. Then extend the two lips with force, until the fine spider webs are torn and the opening is opened.
Then take wool and soak it in oil, and place it on the spot: and the woman should cover it every day, so that the spot does not become hardened by another substance.
But if the pus is thick and foul-smelling, then it must be separated with a wide flat leaf of myrtle.
But if the pus is made of flesh, then hang it with needles and cut it: and let there be medicines with you that sedate the flow of blood without biting, such as acacia, and dragon's blood, and thistle aggregated with white lead.
Then administer a wide lead cannula, so that the wound does not harden quickly, hold it for several days: and then administer dry linen from flax, and then care for the remaining treatment until it is healed.
And sometimes the birth of flesh from the womb will occur: therefore it must be cut in this way: until there is no cancerous pus, for the cancerous pus that is in the womb, there must not be any contradiction with iron at all.
Chapter 73.
On the care of hemorrhoids, Athehelil and Bothor red in the wounds of women.
Hemorrhoids are indeed the opening of the veins, until blood flows from them frequently.
When therefore hemorrhoids are removed, they become Athehelil: and I have already said in the division of their species, and signs of them: and I will say here what can be received from them for treatment, and what cannot.
I say therefore, that hemorrhoids which are in the opening of the womb, and do not appear to sense: then there is no cure with iron for it.
These among them which are above the opening of the womb upon which the sense falls, are those which are treated.
Therefore it is necessary to introduce the woman into a cold house. Then extend the athyhelil with forceps, or with rough cloth, and cut them from their roots.
Then powder them on them at the flow of blood from one powdered cuts without biting: such as acacia, and dragon's blood, and thou, and similar to them.
Then press her feet against the wall for an hour. Afterwards lay her in cold water.
If the flow of blood persists: then make her sit in a decoction of sumach, and the shells of pistachios, and of hens, and similar.
Then take barley flour, and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a plaster with it on her back.
If therefore the blood is cut off with it, good: and if not, make it stick to her back windy, and breasts, without scarification.
Then take wool, and immerse it in the juice of tarathit, or the juice of arnoglossae, or the juice of the bark of alder, that is, in white wine, and make it stick to the wound.
When therefore the abscess rests, then care for the place with ointments, until it is healed.
But Albarth red is similar to the heads of alhaa, and is rough appearance.
Therefore it is necessary to cut what appears from it, according to what I said in the lil equally: and care for it, until it is healed.
Chapter LXXIV.
¶ Of the perforation of the exiture which happens in the womb.
In the womb, various types of abscesses occur, such as cancer and stone-like abscesses, ulcers, herpes, aestiomemus, fistulae, hemorrhoids, ragadiae, and hot abscesses.
Indeed, I have already discussed all these afflictions and their symptoms, as well as their treatments in this work. Now, I must mention the hot abscess that occurs in the womb when it is caused by abscesses that collect pus, and you want to know how to make its opening with a knife.
Therefore, you should consider. Then, if the pain from the abscess in its beginning is sharp with percussion, flame, and fever: and you see it reddening: if it falls on it, then do not rush with its piercing: and care for it with it so that it helps to mature, until when the sharpness of the accidents ceases.
Then, you should make the woman sit on a seat that leans back, and recline, or be placed on her back, and bring her feet to the lower part of her belly: and her hips should be expanded, and she should place her arms under her knees, and tie both convenient ligaments to it.
Then, the midwife should sit on the right side, and administer the instrument that opens the uterine opening.
And it is necessary when you want to administer this instrument, that you bend with a rod deep into the woman's womb: so that what enters from the instrument is not more than deep in the uterus, and does not hurt the weak.
If the instrument is deeper than usual, you should place cushions on top of the roof of the uterus to prevent the entire instrument from entering too deeply into the uterus. Then, you should place a rotating wheel, which runs in the instrument, on its upper side. The assistant should hold the instrument and rotate the wheel until the depth of the uterus is opened.
When the exitura appears and is touched by hand, and it is gentle and soft, then you should separate it from its head with a flat spatula.
When the pus is drained, then you should place a piece of lint soaked in rose oil or green oil (which contains some hemostatic properties) on the wound and apply it to the wound and remove the cut in the deep uterus.
And place it outside on top of the uterus, and on top of a clean sponge soaked in water containing chamomile flowers.
Then it should be treated after two days with an ointment that is suitable for it until it heals.
And sometimes the uterus and wound are washed with a clyster made of water and honey: then with water containing the root of lily or long-stemmed aristolochia, and then return to the ointment.
If the wound is hidden inside the uterus, then you should be prevented from treating it with a knife, but treat it with what we said in division.
Chapter 70.
® Instruction on obstetrical knowledge, how to treat fetuses that are born alive but not in a natural form.
It is necessary for the obstetrician to know the natural form of childbirth first.
From the signs of this (childbirth), you know that when you see a woman being pressed down towards her lower parts, and she desires to smell the air, and is relieved by what is above her on account of childbirth, and hastens the exit of the embryo: then you know that this birth is according to its natural form, and its exit is above its head, and the afterbirth with it: or suspended, or hanging from the navel.
When therefore you see these signs, then it is necessary that her belly be pressed down, so that the embryo may descend quickly.
For when it has descended above its head, the afterbirth also goes with it, and is cleansed of those superfluous matters by a good cleansing.
But whoever is other than this birth, is unnatural, condemnable.
For when sometimes the fetus comes out above its feet, and comes out of its body before its own head, and its legs, and one hand, or one foot: or comes out of its head and one hand: or comes out of its belly: and perhaps it turns over on its neck, and similar things from uncondemnable figures.
Therefore it is necessary for the obstetrician to be wise, subtle in all these things, and to guard herself from error and deception: and I am showing every figure from them, and how its nature is in it, and what is signified by it, and stands upon it.
When the fetus comes out above its head in its natural exit, and it becomes strong upon the woman, and difficult for her to give birth, and you see its strength already weakened: then make her sit on a seat, or women hold her: and vapor with a poppy decoction, and with wet oils.
Then the midwife should insert a small, flat instrument between the fingers of the woman, and rest it with the second instrument, and cover it with her nail until the moisture is removed from it: and press the belly of the woman until the child descends.
If however it does not descend, then the woman must be enema'd with mucilage of fenugreek, with oil of sisamine.
Then order her after the enema to be squeezed: and make her sneeze with the conditioned one, and hold her nose and her mouth at the same time. The child will come out immediately.
If however two hands of the child come out first, then the noose must be used to bring them back gently. If however it does not obey at the entrance, then place the woman on a seat, and raise her feet upwards: then shake the seat on the ground: and hold the woman, so that she does not fall at the shaking.
Therefore if however the hands do not come out, and the child dies: then cut them, and remove the remaining child: and tie its hand with a cloth, and remove it with equality: for it will come out.
The exit of the embryo is on its feet. When the child comes out on its feet, then it must be pushed upwards: then turn the child gradually: afterwards balance it.
Then receive one of its feet, and stretch it gradually.
When however they come out up to the hips, then order her to be squeezed, and make her sneeze with the conditioned one: it will come out if God wills.
And if it does not come out with what we have mentioned, then reduce the child gradually, until you place it according to its natural shape. For he will then easily go out.
But if he is prevented from doing everything we have mentioned, then take some mucilage of the marshmallow root, olive oil with sisalin, and dissolved gum: and grind all of it well in a mortar, then use a line with him to draw out the intestine of the woman below. Then make her sit in warm water until she has an erection.
When you see that his lower parts are already heated, then make him a poultice of myrrh and apply it to him. When he holds the poultice for one hour, then make her sit on a seat. Then make her sneeze: and press her mouth and nose, and press the lower part of her belly gently. For the stone will come out immediately.
The exit of the stone is on the knees and hands. When it comes out according to this form, then he should gradually introduce his hands into the opening. Then she should be bent over her neck, and her feet hang down to the lower parts: and she should lie on the bed, and intertwine her hands. Then press above her belly gently. Then take what is under her feet from the pillows, until it is prepared in the lower part. If the stone does not come out, then take her feet and move them with a strong motion. Then press what is above the hypocondria gently, until the stone rises to the upper parts. Then introduce his hands and balance the stone gradually: and tell the woman to press herself, until the stone comes out.
The fetus hangs out laterally from the hands. The method of reducing his hands is employed. If however he cannot reduce them, then elevate the woman, and make her walk.
But if she cannot walk, then make her lie on the bed: and shake her legs with a violent shake.
Then administer the liniment which you prepared from the mucilages.
But if she receives him in childbirth, then make her sit on a seat. Then strive in reducing the hands, and equal the fetus according to its natural shape: and make the woman sneeze, and order her to press herself, until she exits.
The fetus exits on his neck, with his hands spread out, and its face is towards the back of his mother. The midwife must hold the hand of the fetus, then gradually turn him, and equal him with ease.
When therefore he is equalized, then place on its blanket what we mentioned from oil and mucilages.
Then order her to move gradually. When therefore you do that, then make her sit on a seat, and order her to lean towards the right side. Then order her to be pressed: and make her sneeze with the prepared mixture.
The fetus exits prepared on its side. When it descends to the mother's opening in this manner with the afterbirth, then cut the afterbirth with your nail, until it is evacuated from its moisture.
But if it hangs on the face of the fetus and its neck, then cut it from the navel: so that it is not held back, and dies.
Then push the fetus towards the insides, until you have positioned it as necessary: and instruct the woman to press herself several times: for he will exit with ease.
The exit of twins, or of many fetuses. You should know that twins often give birth: and sometimes three, and four are born at once. However, this is unusual, and it rarely happens.
Five indeed is a thing outside of nature, and they do not live completely: and it contains them, although they multiply, one secondary: and they are separated by the membrane, distinguishing between them tied in the umbilical cord of each of theirs.
And sometimes they come out as one fetus comes out at a natural exit, easily: and they come out with an unharmed exit, as we have said.
If some of them are difficult to come out at birth, and they reach that which we said from unnatural figures, then take care of them as we have said: and let it be for a midwife who is subtle, and make it so that it does what it does with ease and delay, and fit it according to every figure with that which is prepared for it from the leading to salvation.
Remembering that what is formed in the womb from embryos, and are aborted.
Sometimes one is formed in the womb from embryos, and two, and three, and four, and five, and six, and seven, and more than ten: and it has already been verified to me that a woman aborting gave birth to seven, and another fifteen, all of them formed.
That which was done by the measurement of the glorious wise one.
Therefore, all of this must be in the knowledge of the midwife. Perhaps she will encounter something similar: therefore, let her place that which is necessary against it.
Chapter 76.
On the extraction of a dead fetus.
When you are caring for a dead fetus and it does not exit after the division as I mentioned in the section on medication, and you must perform an operation with your hand, then you should consider.
If therefore the woman is of sound virtue and is not with any of those accidents from which one fears for her life: then it is necessary that the woman should be reclined on the bed, on her back, and her head should be lowered below, and her legs raised: and the nurse should hold her from two sides, or she should be tied to the bed, so that her body is not drawn out during the extraction of the fetus.
Then moisten the mouth of the mother with warm oils mixed with honey, and with the juice of the poppy, and with the seeds of flax.
Then let the midwife anoint her hand with these oils and moisteners: then she should insert it into the womb with ease. Then let her seek with her the place where she can hook nails from the fetus, and suitable places near it.
Then consider whether the fetus is prepared to descend upon its head: then hook nails into its eyes, or into its neck, or into its mouth, or into its palate, or under its beard, or in its ribs, or in nearby hypocundria.
But if the descent is upon its feet, then into its shinbone, and in the middle of its ribs.
And it is necessary that she hold the nail with her right hand: and place the curvature of it between the fingers of her left hand: and insert it with her hand with ease, and hook a nail in one of those places which we mentioned, until she reaches the empty space.
Then he should fashion another hook, or a third one if needed, in opposition to the first one, so that the contraction will be equal and not lean towards one side.
Then the extension should be applied evenly, not just along a straight line, but moved towards all sides, to facilitate its exit: as is done with a tooth when it is being extracted.
And it is necessary that there be something between them to soften the extension. If a part of it is retained from that, then the midwife should apply some fingers with oil on them and insert them from one side, to turn back what is being retained.
If therefore a part of the baby is born, then they should exchange the hooks to a place that is higher: do this until the whole baby is born.
If therefore a hand is born before the other parts, and it is not possible to reduce it due to its contraction: then it is necessary that a cloth be wrapped around it. Then remove it until when the whole hand is born, cut it at the joint of the finger or the elbow: and thus you should do in the other hand and in two feet.
If however the baby's head is large, or contraction occurs in its exit, or there is water accumulated in its head: then it is necessary that a sponge with thorns be inserted between the fingers, and press on the head, and remove the water: or break it with an instrument called Almisdac: whose form comes with the forms of the other instruments in the chapter that follows.
Similarly he should do if the baby is naturally large in head: then it is necessary that he cut off the afterbirth: or remove it with a misdach, as we said. Then draw out the bones with forceps.
If the head protrudes and is tied at the fork, then it is pressed until the moisture that is in the chest is poured out.
But if it does not become entangled and does not obey the exit, then cut the head bit by bit, as much as you can.
If the lower part of the abdomen is an abscess or there is hydrops in it, then it is necessary to pierce it until the moisture runs out of it.
But if the fetus is above its feet, then its attraction is easy and its direction to the mother's womb is light.
But if it is tied at the abdomen or chest, then it is necessary to draw it out with the cloth that you have wrapped around your hand: and press the abdomen or chest until what is in them runs out.
But if the other limbs are taken away and the head returns, then the midwife should insert her left hand. If therefore the mother's womb is open, then insert your hand deep into the mother's womb and seek with it the head and draw it out with your fingers up to the mother's womb: then insert a hook or two hooks into it and draw it out with them.
If the mother's womb is closed, because of the abscess that has happened to it: then it is not necessary to labor over it, but rather at that time you should administer an ointment of moist things, greasy: and administer plasters: and let her sit in baths that will soften and moisten.
If the fetus is on its side, then it is possible to equalize it: then you should administer what we said about the living fetus.
If it is not possible to do that, then cut it bit by bit and draw it out.
It is necessary not to leave anything of the second matter inside at all.
Therefore, when you have completed your surgical procedure, then administer what we mentioned about hot abscesses that occur in the matrix.
If blood flow occurs, then descend into styptic waters, and administer the remaining treatment.
And indeed I have seen a woman in whose womb was a dead fetus: then she became pregnant with another man on top of it, afterwards the other fetus also died. Therefore it happened to her after a long time that an abscess formed in her own navel, and it swelled until it was open: and she began to emit pus.
Therefore I was called for her treatment, and I treated her for a long time: and the wound did not heal.
Therefore I placed on it some strong attractive plasters: and the bone came out of its place. Then she passed several days, and another bone came out. Therefore I was amazed from there, since the bone is not in the womb.
Therefore I thought that they were bones of the dead fetus.
Therefore I investigated the wound, and extracted many bones, the woman being in better conditions: and she lived thus for a long time, and emits a little pus from it.
And I did not firm this foreign one, except because in it is knowledge, and help to that, which the skilled physician administers with his hand from treatment.
Chapter 77.
¶ On the forms of necessary instruments for extracting a fetus.
The shape of the Vertigo that opens the matrix.
Here below is the form of the Tightener, by which the levers are equalized, with two pivots on the two ends of two pieces of wood. However, this Vertigo should be more subtle than the strictor: and it is made from either ebony or buxus wood.
And the width of the entire wood is almost like two fingers: and the edge of each of them is almost one finger long, and the length of each of them is a palm and half: and in the middle of the two pieces of wood are two additions of the same kind of wood, which have already been attached to both, whose length is half a palm and a little more: and the width of each is almost like two fingers, or a little more.
And these two additions are inserted into the mouth of the mother, so that it opens with them when you turn the two Vertigos.
Another shape similar to that one, more subtle and lighter.
It should be made from ebony or buxus wood, according to the similarity of a pair of tongs. However, at the end of it there are two additions, as you see above: and the length of each addition is almost a palm: and the width of each is like two fingers.
When therefore you wish to open the matrix with it, then let her sit on the bed, with her feet hanging down, with what is open between her legs. Then insert these two additions connected into the matrix: and you are holding the lower end of the instrument between her thighs. Then open your hand with the instrument, as you do with tongs, equally according to the amount that you wish from the opening of the mother's mouth, until the midwife does what she wants.
The shape of the other Vertigo that they said the ancients called the Form of Impelling, by which the fetus is impelled.
The form of Almisdac, by which a large head is crushed: and it resembles a pair of pliers, which have teeth at the end, as you see.
And sometimes it becomes lame, like pliers in this form, as you see, which have teeth like the teeth of a saw, by which it cuts and crushes.
The form of Uncinus having one spine.
The form of Uncinus having two spines.
The form of Spatula having two ends for cutting off the head.
The form of two spatulas and also holders.
These instruments are all used and the more varied their species are multiplied and prepared by the craftsman, the faster they are in their operation and higher among men, because of their quantity.
Therefore do not look down on any of these instruments as if it were not prepared for you. For the necessity of them is inexcusable.
Chapter LXXVIII.
¶ On the extraction of the second tooth.
When the second tooth is retained at birth, then you must order the weak to hold their breath. Then make her sneeze with a conditioned: and hold your hand on her mouth and nose. If therefore it comes out through this, it is good.
Then take a pot and drill a hole in the cover: and put in it opening herbs of the matrix, such as calamint, rue, and aneth, and chamomile, and savory, and lime tree bark, and centaury: take all these herbs, or some of them, and boil them with water, and put them over fire.
Then place a reed bulb on the opening of the breastplate pot and at the other end on the bone of the mother: and hold it until steam reaches the hollow of the mother's bone.
Then make her sneeze, as we said. For Secundina will exit with ease.
But if she remains after this treatment and does not exit: then command the midwife to dip her hand in sesame oil or marsh mallow. Then she should insert into the uterus and seek for Secundina with it. When therefore she finds her, then take her and stretch her slowly.
If however she is attached deep in the mother's womb, then she should insert her hand as we said until when she finds Secundina and slowly extracts her according to rectitude so that the matrix does not fall during a strong attraction: rather it should be changed with ease to the right and left sides: then add to the amount of attraction. For she then obeys and is kept and avoids adhesion.
If the mother's mouth is tightly closed, as we have already said: treat it with sneezing and from the remedy of the pot with herbs.
But if she does not exit with all that we have said, then beware lest you weary her with repetition of extraction.
But it is necessary that what exits from the mother's mouth to the bone of the mother be bound around the woman's hip. Then smear her with TetraPharmacon ointment. For it will indeed rot her after days and dissolve and exit.
But when it rots, the bad smell is lifted from her stomach and head and harms that weak person. Therefore, appropriate incense should be administered for that purpose.
Some of the ancients were already familiar with the use of mustard and dried fig incense.
The form of the instrument used to smoke a woman during the retention of Secundinae and menstrual periods is as follows:
Let a similar vessel be made of clay or brass: and place the wide end of it over the fire: and the smoke should be placed on the burning coals: hold it until that smoke is consumed, and then repeat another one.
Chapter 79.
¶ On the treatment of an unperforated anus.
Many boys are born, and their anuses are not perforated, which have already been narrowed by a sharp spicula. Therefore, the midwife should pierce that spicula with her finger: and if not, she should pierce it with a sharp, pointed instrument: and she should be careful not to touch the testicles.
Then place on it a cloth soaked in wine and oil. Then care for it with an ointment until it is healed.
But if you fear that it will become narrowed again, then place a lead tube with many holes in the opening, and remove it when the boy wants to defecate.
And sometimes anus narrowing also occurs from the consolidation of the wound, or abscesses. Therefore, it should be incised, then treated with what we said about the treatment and lead.
Chapter 80.
¶ On the treatment of fistulas that occur in the lower part.
Fistulas that occur in the lower part are Nodosities and Grossness which occur near the anus, deformed: or in the space of one part: and it is a fistula, or several.
When that ancient bandage is removed, it reveals a flow of watery, white liquid or thin pus from it.
And sometimes these fistulas penetrate through them. Therefore, those that penetrate are known by what exits from them due to diarrhea and softness, when an infirm person has diarrhea: and perhaps it exits from them worms.
And they are fistulas when they extend up to the bladder and the vaginal opening. And they are penetrating up to the hip joint and the tailbone.
From that, however, from which it is known that the penetrating fistula extends up to the anus, even from one that does not penetrate, is to insert your finger into the anus and insert a thin probe of air or iron: when there is no twisting.
If there is twisting in it, then insert a thin probe of lead or a horsehair needle until you feel the probe or the needle in your finger.
If you do not feel it entirely, nor does anything exit from the opening due to diarrhea, nor softness, nor worms as I said: then you know that it is not penetrating: therefore hasten to treatment.
And when the fistula is penetrating up to the bladder or the urethral opening: then its meaning is the exit of urine from it, and its prevention from this that the place may consolidate with medicines.
But if it is penetrating up to the hip joint or the thigh bone: then its sign is that the probe reaches there, if there is no twisting up to the bone: and the discovery of pain in the circumference of the part, and that pus exits from it always: and that medication does not hold in it, nor consolidates with ointment.
And in these fistulas that penetrate everything, there is no cure at all: and the cure of them is a labor and vanity to him, from which they are formed by foolish doctors.
But in that which is not penetrating and not ancient, there is hope of healing with a probe: according to what I tell you, and I have already proven: and it is, that the sick person lies under your hands on his back: and lift up his legs up to above his hips, and his hips are inclined towards his belly. Then he will insert the bent end of lead or air, if there is tortuosity in the fistula, until you know where it has reached the probe.
But if the sick person feels it around the anus, then you must insert your finger into the anus.
So if you feel that the probe has already penetrated itself through your finger, besides what you feel between your finger and him, or flesh: then you certainly know that it is penetrating: therefore do not labor in it, since there is no healing in it, as we said.
But they said that in some men flesh is healed, and from the medication by which it is hoped to be improved, it is, that you burn a thin cauterizer according to the width of the fistula, as it preceded, and insert the burning one into the fistula, until it reaches around the anus. Then repeat that twice or three times, until you know that all the flesh added with filtered ashes, which are like the quill of a bird's feather, have been burned.
Then care for that with unwrapped linen in butter, until those flesh that have been burned come out: then care for that with ointments generating and consolidating flesh.
If he is healed, it is good.
And if not, then he will never be healed with any other treatment.
And if he exits, try again, and if he does not reach up to your finger that is in the anus, and it is between him and the tenting cloth, which is thick and slimy from flesh, or puss: and you see a fistula following the surface of the skin, then dry the skin at the beginning of the fistula, and you go drying with the tent that is in the fistula, until the cutting reaches where the tent's extremity reaches, and the tent is freed and falls.
Then clean those filtered fleshy parts, which are similar to the feathers of a bird's quill, so that nothing remains from them.
But if blood binds you, and dissolves between you and the operation so that you can cut those fleshy parts: then it is better to do it, and faster for healing, to cauterize it with fire, or with sharp medicine.
Because the cauterizer with fire collects good relations, it adds burning of those fleshy parts added, and removal of blood, and drying of moisture.
Then care for it with unrolled linens in butter, or crushed cabbage leaves, until the place emits pus, and those burned fleshy parts come out into the pus.
Then care for that wound with solidifying ointments, generating hard flesh: and they are medicines in which there is stypticism and drying.
For when it is restored, then he is already healed: and do not fear repetition.
But if the fistula has already reached up to the depth of the anus, and is extended away from the excess of the body: then put your finger into the anus, and inquire with it.
If you feel a pull and there is between you and it a cloth from silk, or flesh, and it is close to penetration, then there is no operation in that unless according to the way of trust and hope.
Which is, because it is administered in it one of three ways: either to cauterize it as we said, or to separate it, until you reach its concavity, so that it may be possible for you to insert linen and cure it from the nearby. And do not proceed too much with the cutting, so that you may not cut the muscle containing the anus, and it happens above the weak outcome of defecation without will. Then cure that with what we said.
Perhaps it may be healed: or lengthen that cloth, and cleanse it after you have separated it almost to the anus, as we said, or with another sharp-ended tool. Then cleanse those fleshy parts which are in the cutting, until where you can with examination.
Then try the healing of the wound with the cutting, and the upper opening where it is consolidated: and there remains an open fistula in the inner part of the anus, and it will be lighter on the weak.
And sometimes it will follow the fistula in this way: and it is, when you insert the probe into the fistula: and it is on the side of the anus around the surface of the body with skin and margin of the anus: then take the probe with sharp-ended, which is like a needle, that is, preparing leather, in this form. And insert into it a rolled thread from five threads, and about it. Then insert the probe with thread into the fistula, until you reach its concavity.
If, however, the penetration is in the inner margin of the anus near the edge, then remove a thread from that opening: so that you insert your finger into the anus, and remove the end of the thread, and gather both ends together: and tie them, and release it on one day, or two days: and as much as the thread enters into the flesh, tie it well, until those parts of the flesh which are between the two ends of the thread fall off: then care for the wound, until it heals and becomes healthy.
But if the opening of the fistula is not penetrating: then make it penetrate however you are prepared for it, unless it is very deep. For you do not have to do it so that you do not cut the tendon.
Then do with it as we said, until it heals.
The shape of the spiculum of the fistula, in which it penetrates, whose curvature is very sharp and pointed, and the other part is not sharp, so that you do not cut what is not necessary, as you see.
Chapter 81.
On the suture of hemorrhoids from which blood flows from the incision of them: and care for the fissures.
There are hemorrhoids in two ways. For indeed they are inside the anus, like coal or plums: or rather they are like the grains of wheat themselves. And from them there are small and large ones: and blood flows from them always, and it is one, and there are many. And they are outside the anus, and at its extremities.
However, those which are outside the anus, are for the most part few in moisture, from which flows clear water, or little blood flowing constantly: and they are according to the color of the body.
The treatment of what is inside the anus is, as you advise the sick person to sit on a stool: and it is expressed until the anus opens and the ashes appear to you. Therefore, also suspend them with hooks: or hold them with your nail. Then cut them at their roots.
But if they do not hold in them the hooks, because of their moisture and softness: then take them with a rough cloth, or with a coarse cloth from double-woven linen, and extract them with your fingers. Then cut them, and powder some hot powders on them after the incision, so that they remain in place as a cauterizer. Or cauterize them according to what preceded in the chapter on cauterizing. Then care for them with the other treatment, until they are healed.
But if the anus does not obey the egressions, then enema the sick person with a small-mouthed enema in which there is a bite, so that it may be washed out with what is in the anus, and it may obey the egressions quickly, when the sick person expresses himself.
But if the ashes are outside the anus, then the matter is light, easy: and it is that you take them with your nail, or take them with a hook, and cut them. Then care for them with what we said, until they are healed.
And those who abhor incision with a knife, then it is necessary that you administer a suture to them in this way. Take an unwound thread, and insert it into the needle. Then extract the ashes to the upper part, and make it penetrate with the needle from the other side of its root: and unwind the two ends of the thread in the lower part of the needle, and they should be horizontally: and tie the ashes with a strong knot. Then draw out the thread, and remove the splinter.
Do this with all the splinters, and let one of them remain: do not remove it so that excess blood does not flow from it.
Then place a rose-scented or pitch-soaked cloth on the buttocks, and place it on the buttocks: and order the sick person to rest. Then let it go, until it falls off.
When the splinters fall out, take care of them with ointments, and the rest of the treatment, until they are healed.
¶ On the Treatment of Wounds. For many times it happens from the dryness of the dung, and the constraint of nature.
When they are dry and do not respond to medicine: then you must scrape with the Spatula of the lancet, or with your nail, until they become moist, and remove the upper skin that prevents them from healing. Then take care of them, until they heal according to what is appropriate.
If they do not heal: then repeat them with a stronger razor than the first, until they bleed much, and then scrape them, and take care of them, until they are healed.
¶ On the Treatment of Wounds that are inverted and not inverted: and Splinters of Bristles, and Ants.
Chapter 82.
You should know that Almirmar is not other than a round knot according to the color of the body, similar to the head of a claw: and it is found in the whole body, especially in the lower parts of the feet, and fingers: and pain occurs from them when walking.
Therefore it is necessary to follow what is around the claw, and to be held with forceps, or with a hook, and to be removed from its root.
Then, follow this care: and if you wish to cauterize it according to what was previously mentioned in its chapter.
However, from the dry ones, there is one prominence that is small, rough, poured out, round on the surface of the body. And often happen in the hands of children.
And its treatment is, that you stretch the dry ones, and cut it: or tie it with a silk thread: or with hair, until it falls. And if you wish, cauterize it with fire, or with a sharp medicine: and now the dry ones will be eliminated, both those that are not, with the instrument that I say.
And a formica is also a small prominence that is poured out, coarse, on the surface of the body, bending deeply into it: and when it finds it, cold is felt in it, similar to the sting of an ant, and it becomes in the whole body: and much of its effect is in the hands.
And its treatment is, that you take a needle from the feather of a goose, or the feather of a strong-winged bird: and place the needle on formica, until the circle of the needle is contained in its parts. Then turn your hand with the needle, until you separate what is in the circumference of formica: and place it in deep flesh, and eliminate formica from its root.
And if you wish, do it with the needle of air, or iron, according to this form.
Let the upper part of the needle be pulling the uncovered sound, so that it alleviates the apprehension and its rotation on the finger.
And if you wish, cauterize formica according to what was previously mentioned in the cauterization of athelil in the chapter on cauterization.
Chapter 83.
The forms of instruments that are used for lancing in intestinal ailments, and for the solution of the belly, and the colon:
Sometimes the lancet is made of silver, or of gold-plated metal, or of bronze, or of hammered metal.
And sometimes it is made small and large, according to those in which it is used.
Therefore, that which is used for the treatment of small children, should be small: and those whose bellies are weak, or painful, likewise their lancets.
Large lancet.
The handle of it, that is, the upper part in which the sheath is attached, should be wide according to this manner: and there should be a distinction on it so that the sheath can be tied as you see, and the lower part which enters into the anus, should be deaf, that is, not open, gentle, sharp, drawing to subtlety: and in one of its sides there should be two holes, and in the other side one hole.
And the width of the holes should be according to the thickness of the needles, and a little less, and the sheath in which they put medicines from the bladder of an animal: or from paper which is according to the form of a small asafetida: whose root is one palm.
And it should be pierced through the holes as it is turned, and there should be a space which is the thickness of a finger between each hole. Then insert into those holes a strong thread from raw silk, which is from ten threads, or about that, and gather with it an utrem like asafetida. When therefore it is put in that sheath, it should be tied in the head of the lancet between two distinctions with a strong constriction. Then apply a poultice with it.
This is the shape of a circle drawn here, and the hole.
The quality of applying the poultice with it is: to fill a jar, or bladder, with medicine, which should be warmed according to the amount of tolerance of the sick person: and beware that it is not very hot, or very cold.
Then the sick person should be laid on his back, and raise his legs to the upper parts: and place under him an inthaan, that is, a skin on which men lie, or linen.
Then anoint the extremity of the poultice with oil, or with white lead, or with mucilage of fenugreek, or similar. Then insert it into the anus with ease. Then the attendant should take the jar with both his hands simultaneously, and squeeze it with force, until all that is in the poultice comes out into the intestine.
Then remove the poultice, and raise the sick person's legs to the wall.
If the medicine drives him to the end, then hold as much as possible. And if he sleeps with it all night, it is more effective.
But if you apply the poultice to him in the sicknesses of the solution of the belly, and hasten its exit: then repeat the poultice, until he is healed.
But if there are hemorrhoids, or painful abscesses in the anus, then the poultice should be thin, very soft, from the poultices with which children are treated.
And this is the shape of a thin poultice on top of which there is tight skin.
Chapter LXXXIV.
I have already spoken of the division of wound treatment in the book, and now I will explain their cure by hand and with medicines according to the completion.
I say therefore that wounds are divided according to the way they occur and according to the place where the wound falls.
The things that often cause wounds are like the throw of a stone: either an impact from a sword or a knife, or a blow with a lance, a stick, or an arrow; and similar things from many objects.
But wounds that occur according to the parts of the body are like a wound that falls on the head, or neck, or chest, or belly, or back; and similar things from those limbs.
And I am telling about the cures of some wounds, so that I may place this reasoning and rule on the rest of the wounds.
And I will begin with simple wounds of the head, because the memory of complex ones will come at the beginning of Chapter 3.
I say therefore. When a simple wound occurs in the head and there is no fracture of bone: consider if it is from the throw of a stone or something similar, and if it has already broken the skin only: and it is a large wound, and you fear for the bad outcome of a hot abscess: then hurry, and perform cephalic phlebotomy immediately: and do not delay this: and remove from him according to the amount of its power: if there is nothing prohibiting phlebotomy, especially if it is little blood that flows out of the wound. And let the phlebotomy be from the opposite side of the wounded part.
And let the phlebotomy be from the opposite side of the wounded part. And let the weak person beware of overeating, wine, and coarse foods.
But if something prohibits a purge, then the food should be reduced, and one should not approach meat or wine.
And place on the wound if it happens to him an abscess hot, a lotion infused in rose oil alone, or with wine in which there is a styptic.
But if you are safe from an abscess hot, then place on the wound, if it is recent with its own blood, and has not changed its air, the powder that I will tell you about a little later: and if it has already changed its air, then place on it some ointments, until it heals.
But if the wound is large, or is from a cut of a sword, and similar: and the lips of it are not gathered together by swabs, then gather it with stitches, according to what I will tell you about wounds of the belly about their stitches.
But if the wound is already detected from the bone, and hangs, and there is no retention of it, except in a small suspender: then cut it. Then care for the wound with medicines, and restore in it hard flesh in the place of the skin, and command the weak person to be fed on foods in which there is coarseness, such as heads, and cooked wheat, until it is like a paste: and similar things.
But if you find in the skin a putrefaction, and it does not stick to bone: then cut the whole putrid thing, and throw it out: then care for that.
But if in these wounds there is an artery, or a vein from which flows blood: and it is not cut by medicines, then examine over the artery. If you cannot find it, then cut it off with a sharp knife or tie it. But if necessity provokes when it does not provide what we said, then cauterize it until the blood stops flowing.
But if these wounds are small, simple, then the matter is easy and light: so that you sprinkle powder on them with this powder, because it hardens them before they change them into air.
Method of Powdering for Flesh Wounds. Recipe a piece of bread, and two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of unburned lime: grind it all thoroughly, and sift it: and fill the wound with it, and bind it with a good binding, until it sticks well on top of it, and coagulates with blood.
Then bind it from above with bandages, and let it go, and do not dissolve it while it remains, so that it does not stick. For that medicine is not removed from it until it is healed.
And sometimes it does that alone, when you do not have bread and dragon's blood with you in the presence, and lime also makes the same operation in many from great wounds, when it is appropriate to put it on them and bind them, and are recent wounds with their own blood, which has not changed into air.
But if it has already changed into air by some alteration, especially when it is in the time of summer, then there is no intention of this powder's position: therefore take care of it with that which we said, so that you put on top of it some digestive ointments: or put on top of it some pastes made with barley flour, with water and honey, until they emit pus. Then take care of the remaining cure until they are healed.
But if indeed it happens with a wound fracture in the bone, and it is small, then remove it with a probe: and I will now tell you about the treatment of head fractures in what is to come.
Concerning Wounds of the Neck.
But if a wound occurs in the neck, then there is no difference in treatment between it and a simple head wound.
But if the nerve of the neck has already been cut, or the artery: then if it is a nerve, there is no ability to avoid its treatment with what causes strong hemostasis, such as styptic powders, and zegi, and similar things. Because nerves are harmed, and they contract them.
And do not place anything very cold at all on the wound: because the substance of nerves is cold, and its continuity is with the brain, which is higher than the members: and let that which is used to cure it be from medicines that are mild, such as chalk lotus with sweet water frequently infused with oil, or with rose oil, and tuthia, when it is also washed with sweet water: and other mineral stones, in this way, and moist ointments.
But if the wound is large, then administer a suture: or cut its lips with cotton. Then take care of it until it is healed.
But if the wound is deep, or it occurs in the sinuses in the lower part of it, where already pus has collected, then pierce it in a more depressed place in it.
If the artery has already been cut in the wound, and blood flow from it follows: then separate, or dry it, and ligate it: or cauterize it, if necessity requires it.
If the spinal cord has already injured the throat, or the entire throat, and the patient's life is saved: then gather the lips of the skin with a suture over the cannula of the throat, and do not touch the throat, but rather keep it even, and reduce it back to its natural form. Then apply a suitable constriction, and leave it for several days. Then care for it with ointments that have astringency and drying properties, until it heals.
If the wound has already made an impression on the bone, then remove it: if there are fragments of bone in it, remove all of them, or as much as you can from them: and what cannot be prepared, leave it until the wound rots, and separates and heals its exit.
If the wound is recent, then sprinkle powder on it that I have mentioned. If it seems that the bone is in the wound and a fistula forms: then care for it with the ointment that I mention in its chapter.
About wounds in the palms of the hands or soles of the feet.
If it is a blow of a lance or knife: and you see its depth, then consider. If therefore a draft escapes from the wound when he is breathless from it, then you know that the wound is mortal.
If it is not deep and is recent with its own blood: then do not put powder on it from the first hour, nor apply a constriction to it, so that the blood is not retained in its depth, and returned to the heart, and kill the sick person: but place in it an attractive ointment, and dissolve it in the day twice.
If indeed you do not have oil present, then place an old cloth in the wound opening to absorb what is coming out of it due to moisture: and make sure the sick person sleeps over the wound, so that what is collected in it may be drawn out.
If indeed three or more days have passed since the wound, and no spasm has occurred in the sick person, nor trembling of the heart, nor stricture in breathing, and you see other aspects of his condition good: then know that the wound is healed. Therefore care for him and with liniments, and with other treatment, until he is healed.
If indeed his healing is excused, and he always opens, then know that it has already become a fistula. Therefore care for it from its chapter.
And if the wound is from an incision of a sword, or knife, and is simple on the surface of the chest, or back: then care for him with that which preceded from the stitch, if it is large: or with powder, if it is small.
But if it has already made an impression on the bone, and has cut out pieces from it: then examine the wound, and hasten to remove those pieces, if they are separated. But if they are not separated, then leave them until the wound rots, for the extraction of them is eased.
But of other wounds happening in other members the judgment in treatment is the same as that which we said.
¶ Of wounds of the belly, and the exit of the intestines, and their excretions.
The rupture which happens to the belly is great, and middle, and small.
When the intestine sometimes escapes from a great wound, or when there are many intestines.
Why is it more difficult and challenging to insert them and suture them back in place.
Even a small rupture becomes difficult to repair due to another method. Therefore, if you do not quickly insert them back to their original place immediately after the rupture, it becomes difficult because they swell, open, and expand, making the insertion difficult.
For this reason, a medium-sized rupture is better than a small one, as the insertion and reduction of the intestine are not difficult in these two types.
You should know that there are four ways to perform the suture of the wound.
Two common sutures are used for the wound of the intestine and for other wounds of the body, while two other sutures specifically communicate with the remaining wounds. However, they are more proper for the wound of the intestine, and I will tell you each one with an explanation and declaration.
I say that when the wound is small and something escapes from the intestine through it, making it difficult to reduce it, then it is because of one of the two methods. Either due to the smallness of the rupture, as we said earlier, or because there is swelling in the intestine due to cold air.
Therefore, when it is like this, you should heat it up by soaking a sponge or wet cloth in warm water alone. Or boil it in water with vinegar, pepper, and salt, and massage it with that until the swelling is resolved.
Sometimes wine with its strengthening property helps in resolving the swelling better than water alone.
When you see that the inflation is already resolving, then moisten the intestine with the water in which it was boiled, either hot or warm. For through this, its entrance is soothed with a small amount of salt.
But if its return is excused after this treatment, then cut a little in the rupture, with the instrument by which hemorrhoids are cut.
And the first cure is better when it is prepared, than cutting: and no force is made to cut after need and lack of instrument.
Let one part of it be curved, sharp, and the other part not sharp, and its tip should not be very thin with Spatula's thinness, but rather a little blunt: and that is what resembles a hook, as you see.
When therefore the wound is enlarged, and enters the intestine, then it must be reduced to its natural form in its own place, if possible over it: because it is better.
But when the rupture is large in the lower part of the belly: then you must make the sick person lie on his back, and put his legs higher than his head. And if it is in the upper part of the belly, then put his head, and the chest of that person higher than its lower parts.
And similarly if it is a rupture in one of the two parts of the belly, then put your attention, and always your consideration in this, that the part in which the wound is higher than the other part.
And thus it must be, that you administer it to great wounds, and to medium wounds.
But in small wounds, put it according to how it is prepared to you.
Then have a faithful servant stand present between your hands, who holds the entire incision with his hand: and bring together his lips. Then gradually remove from her what follows the stitch, bit by bit: and this is the common method of a single stitch.
And it is, that you take a needle, or a number of needles according to the size of the wound. Then let go from the end of the incision a length equal to a digit's ring, that is, the length of a doctor's finger: and fix the needle on one side, and insert the thread in both ends of the skin, with both ends of the sifac which is under the skin from the inside, until you make it penetrate from the other part, and now you have gathered together two ends of the skin, and two ends of the sifac: and there are four rows.
Then tie with double thread around the needle several times from both sides at once, until two lips of the wound are gathered together by proper aggregation.
Then let go the thickness of a finger also, and fix another needle on them: afterwards, tie it with thread, as you did with the first needle. Then do not cease doing this with that which you need from the needles, until you complete the constriction of the wound entirely.
And the needles should be of medium thickness between thickness and thinness: because thin needles very quickly pierce flesh: and thick ones are difficult to enter into the skin: therefore it is necessary that they be of medium thickness in thinness, and thickness.
And it is not necessary, that the needle be fixed in both ends of the skin nearby much: so that flesh does not quickly pierce, and the wound open before its consolidation, and they do not lengthen even with the stitch, so that the wound be not hindered from consolidation.
Then incise the tip of the acum, so as not to wound the weak one while he is sleeping; and place on them pullovers made from cloth from all sides, which will hold the tips of the acum: and let them go, until you know that the wound has become consolidated.
And this kind of stitching with acum is indeed more suitable for small wounds. Because it is sufficient in their stitches for one needle, or two, or about those.
But the second stitch is common, as it aggregates with the stitch the extremities of four: extremities, two skins, and extremities two sifac in vice one, with a needle in which is wrapped the thread equally in fineness, and thickness.
Then when you have penetrated with the needle these four extremities, reduce the acum from the part from which you began, so that the thread wrapped from the upper part of the wound falls: so that it is a stitch, just like the stitch by which they tie the cloth together, and place between every stitch an amount of thickness equal to the little finger.
But this stitch men know.
And with this stitch I healed the wound of a man which had occurred in his belly, who had been wounded with a knife, and there was a tear in the wound of about one palm: and it had exited from the intestines about two palms from the middle intestine, and there was a tear in the middle of the belly.
I therefore reduced it after it had stood outside the wound for 24 hours.
The wound was therefore consolidated in the space that it was for about 15 days: and I cared for him, and he was healed: and he lived after that for many years, returning to his dispositions.
The physicians had judged that it would not be healed.
And by a miracle, I did not cure it with ointment. Since I was in a place where ointment was not found, nor anything from the medicines. Therefore I placed on the wound an old rag twice a day, and frequently washed it with honey water, until it was healed.
However, two kinds of sutures are called proper according to the account of the story.
And there is, as you begin with a sharp suture: and you insert the needle from the outer to the inner part.
When therefore the needle penetrates the skin and the flesh going according to the length and width of the whole body: let go the end of the thread in the side in which you inserted the needle, and make it penetrate in the other end from the inner part to the outer in the other end.
When therefore you have made it penetrate, then make it penetrate thus in the same end from the outer part to the inner: and let go the end of the thread which is in this side, and make the needle penetrate in the other end from the inner part to the outer: and make the needle penetrate with your penetration as you make it penetrate in the end of the thread, until it penetrates into the whole of it.
Then also from this same side, and follow it with the end which is from the other side out of the thread in another side, and draw out the needle from the skin which it penetrated.
Then bring it back to that skin, and follow it with the end of the thread which is in another side with this end: and draw it out from the skin which is from the part of it, and make it once and again, and make it thus after thus, until you have drawn it out entirely outside according to that example.
And the main method of this suture is to suture the pelts of sheep in such a way that one edge of the skin meets at one end, and you let the other edge meet at the other end until it is completed.
The second type of proper suture, as Galen said.
This method is described as follows: to make it similar to the way some doctors treat them, so that they gather all parts to their corresponding part by nature: and they apply one edge of the skin to its other edge, and the other edge of the mirror to its other edge. And it is done as I told you.
You should shape the needle into the edge of the mirror near you from the outer part, and make it penetrate to the inner part in that place only: and let go of both edges of the skin. Then turn the needle and make it penetrate from the outer part to the inner part in both edges of the skin.
Then turn both of them and also make it penetrate both from the inner part to the outer part in both edges of the mirror, which are on the opposite side.
And this method of suture is better than a common easy suture, and it is the suture that precedes the memory.
This is also the saying of Galen.
And some said. The suture of the belly with two needles is corrected. This means that you should insert one thread into both of them: and begin with the insertion of the needle, which is at your disposal, and make it penetrate to the other side, according to the way those who suture the pelts equally.
And know that when the disruption is in the middle of the belly, then its suture is more difficult than those of the other parts of the belly.
The judgment indeed of the treatment of wounds, is the judgment of the other wounds.
Because when you seek the recent wound with its own blood, before it changes itself by air: and reduce the intestine, and its own, and prepare it: then place on top of the powder of the flesh of a man.
But if the air has already changed the wound: then place on it some ointments which are present to you, until they make pus: and fall the threads, and harden the sinew, and the marl. Then care for it as is the cure of the other wounds, until it is healed.
But if you do not have the medicines present to you, then place on it immediately, from which it begins to emit pus, old wool: and change it twice a day, as I taught you, until it is healed.
For you do not need other treatment in many positions, when the wounds are simple.
But if you fear that the wound communicates to the main members in the injury, then it is necessary that you immerse old wool in oil of tempered warmth, or in rose oil: and place it in the circumference of the places which are between the groins, and under the ribs.
Because if it feels pain, or punctures, or putrefaction in its intestines (for this often happens): then enema it with strengthening wine, black, warm: especially if the putrefaction has already reached the intestine, and made a penetrating hole up to its concavity.
And know that what is from the thick intestine is easier for healing: and that what is from those which are from the thin, more difficult for healing.
The intestine known as the Jejunum does not heal from a wound that occurs in it at all: and this is because of its multitude, which is made up of veins, and the size of them, and due to the delicacy of its body, and the proximity of its nature to nerves.
But if that which proceeds from the wound is pus, and you are able to extract it: reduce it according to your reduction, by which you reduce the intestines equally.
But if it has passed a certain time, and it has become green or black: then it is necessary to tie it with thread above the place where the discharge came from it, in order that blood does not flow. For in pus there are veins and an artery.
Then cut that which is beyond that ligament, and place two ends of the thread hanging from the lower part of the wound outside it: in order to relieve the pull on you, and the extraction of it at the case of pus, and the emission of pus from the wound.
Remembrance of the wound that occurred in the Intestine.
When a rupture occurs in the intestine, and it is small: then it is possible to be restored in some men: because I saw that he was wounded in his belly with the thrust of a lance, and it was a wound on the right side of the stomach, and it had become an old wound: and it became a fistula, and there was emission and flatulence from it.
I therefore placed the cure, until I was not confident in his healing: and I did not stop to delicately care for him, until he was healed and the place was consolidated.
After I saw that the place was already consolidated, I feared for the weak, that something bad would happen to him on top of what had happened in his belly: and it did not happen to him from that bad thing. And he remained in better conditions, eating and drinking, copulating, entering the bath, and exercising in his daily activities.
And now some experimenter said, because when a wound occurs in the intestine and it is small: then it is necessary to bind it according to this method. And it is, that you take large ant heads. Then gather two wound lips, and place one ant head with an open mouth on top of the two wound lips. So when it sits on them, and closes its mouth, cut off its head, for it sticks and is not dissolved.
Then place another ant head near the first, and do not stop doing it with the ant after the second ant according to the quantity of the entire wound.
Then reduce it back, and its wound. For those ant heads remain attached in the intestine, until the intestine is fed, and healed, and no harm is caused completely.
And now it is possible to bind the intestine even with a fine thread: which is scraped out from the intestine of an animal, and attached with it when it is inserted into the needle.
And it is, that you take the end of this thread from the intestine, and scrape off a lot. Then bind the fine thread at its end. Then insert that thread into the needle, and with it heal the intestine. Then reduce it back to the rupture.
And this method of suturing with ants and intestine is only according to the way of trust and hope.
You know, a wound that is large, wide, especially if it is in one of the thin intestines: then there is no remedy except cauterization, and there is no healing at all.
Of the Care of Boils and Fistulas.
You should know that every wound or abscess, when it becomes chronic and develops into an ulcer, does not heal, and always emits pus, but is not cut out: then it is universally called a fistula in any member, and we call it by this name.
And a fistula in reality is a filtered constriction, hard, white: with which there is no pain, and no concavity of a bird's feather: and because of this some call it by the name of Risati, that is, a feather.
And in some hours it emits pus. And perhaps the moisture is cut in some hours. And sometimes this moisture is much and little: and it is coarse, and it is delicate.
And I have already mentioned in the division, when I said wounds, that every ulcer which does not heal, and does not grow flesh in it, is not that except for one of nine causes.
Of which one is, because of the lack of blood in the body: or because of its malice: or because there is hard flesh between him and his lips, preventing the birth of flesh: or because it is very dirty and filthy: or because the ulcer in itself is putrid, and the matter that is put into it is of bad quality: or because the medicine is inconvenient in its cure: or because the corruption falling in the region is a kind of pestilence, or by the property of the region, as it happens in Caesaraugusta, where digestion of difficulties is difficult, and healing of the abscess is delayed by nature: or because there is one bone, or a number of bones.
And I have already demonstrated all these causes and signs of them, and their cures along with their medicines in division: and it is necessary for me to teach you the cure of Fistulae and Zuken, which is done through the way of operation with the hand.
Therefore, know that Fistula occurs in all parts of the body. For from these are the Fistulae that reach to great veins and arteries, or nerves, or sinews: or to the intestines, or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs: or to some of the spine of the back, or to some jointed compositions: such as the hand, and foot: and from these are those that approach to the proximity of the principal member, and similar.
Therefore, of these Fistulae, according to this method, is difficult to heal from afflictions, and does not receive a cure, and the treatment with it is labor and ignorance.
But if it is from some Fistula whose depth does not reach these places which I said: and you hope, and trust in its cure, and wish to approach to the knowledge of it, then receive a probe from air, or iron, if the Fistula tends according to straightness, and seek it with itself.
But if there is crookedness in the Fistula, then investigate it with a probe of fine lead. Because lead with its own body is soothed, and cured around crookedness.
But if the Fistula has many openings, it is not possible for you to indicate over it with a probe. Therefore, clean out from it one opening from its own openings.
For the moisture by which you cleanse itself goes towards other openings, and runs out of them.
Then carefully examine in what manner it is possible for you: to know whether there is an opening (os) or a nerve, and whether the fistula has a long or short concavity, or whether it is a single fistula with many openings, and stands over the entire area, with great strength of your hand, with questioning of the patient, and feeling of pain upon compression with your hand on the spot, and similar signs and causes of an abscess.
Therefore, when you stand over all those places truly, then go to the cure according to your confidence: and it is, that you consider then, whether the fistula is near (propinqua) appearing, or far from the joint, or from a nerve, or an artery, or a vein, or one of the places which I have told you: then cut the fistula according to what was previously said by me, and remove what is in it from filtration, and corrupt flesh, which grows in its opening from flesh, or thelul, and similar things: and cure it, until it is healed.
But if the fistula is far in depth, and is according to straightness: then it is necessary that you cut it as deep as possible. Then cleanse it from all its corrupt flesh.
Then administer liniments uncovered in sharp medicines: and put them into the concavity of the fistula which you comprehended with the knife: do it with her several times, until the sharp medicine corrodes all that remains in the concavity of the fistula from corruption.
Then restore it with ointments which generate healthy flesh, until it is healed.
But if it does not heal by that, then cauterize it according to what we have told you.
If the cause of the fistula is an opening, and it has been confirmed to you that this is the case, then inquire about it and dry it according to what I have told you. If something prevents you from doing so from a vein, nerve, or main member, as we have said,
If the opening is revealed to you and there is something decayed and discolored within it, then scrape it until all of its corruption is removed. Then care for it with what covers it until it is healed.
If it does not heal and still discharges pus as it did before, then you will know that you have not completely removed the corruption.
Then reveal it again and carefully make a cut in it and cleanse it with your utmost strength.
Then restore it. If it heals, that is good; but if not, then you will know that the corruption is deep within the body, which you have not reached. It is therefore not for you to reach it unless you are willing to let nature take its course.
If the opening is small and it is possible for you to do so, then draw it out with fine forceps that are suitable for that purpose.
If there are many bones, then carefully draw them all out and do not leave any of them behind with your strength.
If something resists you from the moisture and there is no fear or mistake in the incision, then cut the moisture and flesh, if there is any, and free the bones.
If you do not have the preparation to remove the bones at that moment, then place on the wound something that will putrefy it and leave it until what is around the bones from the flesh and moisture putsrefies.
And guard the wound so that it does not consolidate. And constrict the incision that you have made in your surgery. But if you fear, place on top of it, soaked in crushed sulfur with oil: or soaked in Egyptian ointment, or some green herbal ointment.
For when those moistures rot and separate the bones from them, their removal is relieved, and their attraction.
But if it is one large bone, such as the thigh bone, or the hip bone, and similar to them, and that which has rotted from it is a large part: then shave it with the last razor, until that darkness and corruption is removed. Then restore the wound.
But if that which is in it rotted is a large part, and corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to saw it, and cut it entirely until the place where corruption has reached: then care for it, until it consolidates.
And I tell you of Zuken, which happened to a man in his thigh: so that you may place that example and aid on your surgery.
There was a young man of about thirty years, to whom it happened pain in his thigh, from the cause which moved above him inside his body, that is, from the interior, until the matter reached the thigh, and there was a great abscess: and he did not have an external cause.
Therefore, with him time passed with the error of doctors, until the abscess was opened, and many matters converged with him. And his cure was postponed until the thigh was fistulated, and there were many openings made in him: which all emitted pus, and moistures of the body.
Therefore, a multitude of physicians had been treating him for about two years, and there was not among them a wise one in the art of hands, until I was called, and I saw his leg, and the matters that were flowing out from those openings with great speed: even his whole body was already gangrenous, and his color was yellowish.
I therefore attempted to probe one of the openings, and the probe reached the bone.
Then I examined all the openings: and I found that they all opened into each other from all parts of the leg.
I therefore hastened, and closed over one of those openings, until I uncovered a part of the bone: and I found that it was already rotten, and discolored, and putrefied, and perforated, until it had penetrated as far as the marrow.
I therefore sawn off what was discovered to me, and prepared it from the rotten bone.
And I ordered that there should not be in the bone anything but that corruption which I had cut off and sawed off. And I was already eradicating it.
Then I placed the healing of the wound with solidifying medicines for a long time. And it was not solidified.
Then I probed again, and uncovered above the bone second above the first discovery: and I found continuous corruption with the bone: and I sawed off what appeared to me even from that corruption.
Then I attempted to heal it again. And it was not healed.
Then I uncovered it again, and did not cease to dig into the bone separately, and try to heal it: and it was not healed, until I dug out about a span of bone, and extracted it with its marrow.
Then I restored him with medicines, and it healed quickly and was cured. This repetition of the operation and incision was not necessary for him, except due to the weakness of the patient, his intolerance, and my fear of causing his death, as he was experiencing symptoms of syncope from excessive evacuation at all hours.
Therefore, he was cured entirely by the cure, and a solid piece of flesh was formed in the place of the bone, and it was made good in his body, and his strength returned: and he returned to his usual dispositions: and he did not cause him any harm at all in walking.
But if the bone is already broken in the place of the body, then it must be bound like this: take a bandage and bind it at the end of the prominent bone, and order someone to stretch it upwards: and put another bandage of thicker wool first. Then bind it over the flesh that is under the bone, and stretch its end so that you can pull the flesh downwards: and you cover the flesh over the place where you want to saw, so that the saw does not cut the flesh.
Then place a piece of wood or a board under the lower bone, because when you do this, it does not prevent the flesh from decaying.
And it must be that the cut is over the place of the decay a little, so that there is no decay in the hollow of the bone: and it does not appear to his senses, and forces him to another sawing.
But if the bone is decayed and not prominent, but continues with its part: and the decay is in the middle of it, or in that part: then cover the flesh from all parts completely. Then place the lower log.
After that, use the saw on the first side, where the corruption is, until the sawing is completed from the second side: and let the sawing be according to the length from the corruption by a little, as we said.
If the corruption is in the joint, cut the corrupted joint itself, and use the saw from the second side where it continues.
But if indeed the corruption is in the continuity of two joints, then there is no skill in it except for scraping.
If indeed the corruption is in the claw of the hand, or in the claw of the foot: then the matter is quite difficult. But it is necessary for you to investigate the corruption as it appears to you. And scrape it off, and clean it in any possible arrangement to you, and with whatever skill it is corrected for you: when it does not cause you contradiction of the vein, or nerve.
And know that the teeth and saws for cutting these bones are many, according to the position of the bones, and their preparation, and their roughness, and their subtlety, and their size, and their proportionality, and their hardness, and their rarity. Therefore it is necessary for you to prepare every kind of suitable tool for that operation.
And know that these operations signify to you the kind of tool you need, when you have with you the study of a long time. And knowledge of this art is a witness of the ways of diseases: for then you will already find through yourself that which suits it from the tools for every infirmity.
And I am confirming to you in the last number of this chapter's tools, which you will set examples on top of which you will cut, and proof by which you experiment on others.
Another form of the saw.
The form of the razor's blades. Let the head of this razor be in the form of a star-shaped cap: and its points should be in the form of the points of an eagle.
And it does not suit, unless they are rubbed with this razor when they are rotting, or a large mouth and it is big.
The form of the larger razor.
The form of the wide razor.
The form of the razor with a hollow.
The form of the other fine razor.
The form of the other curved-end razor.
The form of the small fine razor.
This is similar to a chisel, and its end is like a saw: it will be shown in many places from the reason of bones.
The form of the razor that suits its reason for shaving bones that are pierced.
Its end is triangular, and its ends are sharp.
It is made from indigo. And similarly, it should be made from razor blades, and cutters, and saws.
About cutting the ends and sawing bones.
The extremities putrefy, either due to an external cause or an internal cause.
Therefore, when you have treated that corruption with medicines and the cure does not take effect: and you see the corruption spreading to a member, which nothing stops: then it is necessary to cut off that member up to where the corruption reaches, so that the sick person may escape from death, or from the greater evil that is the defect of the member.
The sign that this happens is, that the member blackens, until it is thought to be burned by fire, or putrefies after a gangrene: until the corruption reaches up to what follows that member, and spreads throughout the whole body.
Therefore, when you cut off that member, and also if the cause of the corruption is from the impact of certain poisonous creatures: such as the sea scorpion, and the viper, and the rattlesnake, and the like.
If therefore the corruption, or the impact is in the extremity of the finger, then cut off the finger, and do not leave space for the corruption, so that it may reach up to the other hand.
And similarly if it happens in the hand, then cut off that from the root of the finger, and do not leave space for the corruption, until it reaches the finger of the arm.
And if it attacks that, then cut off the arm at the elbow, in its joint.
But if the corruption passes through, and you see it around the elbow: then the sick person will die. And to administer besides that from the cure, is the quantity of virtue.
And similarly do with the foot, when the corruption attacks in the finger, then cut off that at one joint: and if it reaches the toe of the foot, then cut off the whole foot. If however it rises up to the knee, then cut the leg at the joint of the knee.
But if the corruption has already reached above the knee, then there is no skill in it, except for the release and leaving behind the weak to death.
And the way of cutting the member, or of sawing it, is this, that you bind the ligament below, which you wish to cut: and bind the ligament above the place. And the servant should stretch one ligament downwards: and the servant should stretch the other ligament upwards. And you should separate the flesh which is between the two ligaments, with a broad spatula, until the flesh is completely exposed. Then it is cut, or it is sawed.
And it is necessary to place cloth on all parts of the body, and not touch the sawed place with the saw: and an additional wound should not occur to the weak, and a warm abscess.
But if blood flows inside while you are operating, then you should cauterize the place quickly: or place on top of it some powders which absorb blood. Then return to your medical treatment, until it is completed.
Then bind the wounded member with a suitable ligament for it, and care for it, until it heals.
And I tell you what happened to a man in his foot, this same thing happening to him which I tell you.
That is, because blackness occurred in his foot, with a burn which resembles the burning of fire: and that corruption first occurred in his finger, until it began to affect the whole foot.
Therefore the man removed himself from himself, after he saw the corruption occurring in his member with its violence, which he found from his pain, and burning of it: and he cut it at the joint, and he was healed.
And after a long time had passed, the same corruption occurred in his own index finger of his hand.
So he came to me, and I attempted to restore the excess moisture with the medicine I placed on his hand after washing his body: but the excess did not rebound, and it began to spread to another finger: until the corruption began in his hand.
So he called me to cut off his hand: but I refused to do so, hoping for the return of that excess moisture: and I also feared for him during the cutting of his hand. Because the power of man was above that case.
Then, since he had lost hope in me, he returned to his own land: and he came to me from him, because he rushed, and he cut off his whole hand: and he was healed.
And I did not bring this story, unless it be an aid to that which falls under this kind of sickness: and so that there may be a signification by which it is signified, and according to which it is done.
¶ On the care of wounds, and the quality of cleansing with medicines.
When an abscess occurs in certain fleshy members, and the time of the abscess is prolonged until it forms a collection of pus: then it bursts or is pierced, and that which is in it from the pus exits, and there remains a vacant place as if it were a vessel: and the skin which is above it is like a fabric which has become thin: and it does not reach its ultimate corruption, nor does it touch the mouth, nor the nerve, nor the ligament: it deserves to be called a sinus: and it is not called a fistula: but if the time of its existence is prolonged until it touches some of these members, then it is called a fistula, or zuken.
And its care is that you incise the entire skin as it unfolds: and especially when it has been thinned out and made like cloth: and you trust that it will not adhere to the place because of its decay.
But if you hope that the skin will adhere and there will be no decay from that final contact: and if there is thickness in the skin from flesh, then care for it with Clisteri: and it is, that you consider to the Sinus.
Then if it is large, and the pus that emits from it has a foul smell: then treat it with Egyptian medicine, which is acetic acid, oil, and zinc, equal parts receiving, they are gathered in a jar: and they are boiled over fire, until the medicine turns red: and it comes to the thickness of honey.
Then take from it what you need: and dissolve it with water and honey, and treat the Sinus with it: and bind its opening, and let the medicine into it at a quantity of two hours.
Then extract it with expression: make it for days total, until the Sinus is cleansed, and the smell is removed.
And sometimes it is treated with water of ashes, when you do not have this medicine present: and it is, that you take charcoal of vine wood, or charcoal of ilex wood: and throw it on it water. Then wash it, and treat it with it, until you trust that the Sinus is already cleansed.
But if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine, nor water of ashes, then treat it with water and honey, which has already mixed with some of crushed zinc. 1. Either apply honey mixed with wine and water to it, since honey has the property of cleansing and washing: and the wine makes it adhere to the wound, especially when there is an excess of its astringent and drying properties.
1. If you do this repeatedly and trust that the wound has already been removed of corruption, then apply honey with that which makes flesh grow in it.
1. And there is, that you take from the plaster dyafinicon: and dissolve it with rose oil and astringent wine: or apply honey to it with certain medicines and other ointments, of which I have written their properties in the treatise on ointments.
1. But if the wound is narrow, in which the catheter does not fit: then enlarge it slightly with a small iron: or place in it a lint soaked in Egyptian ointment, or in basilicon ointment, until it is enlarged.
1. And similarly if the wound is also large, then gather its lips with a suture: and leave out of it as much as will enter the catheter without addition.
1. And similarly if the wound from which pus is flowing is elevated to the upper part: then dry it in a lower part which is in it, so that the pus flows out of it downwards: for when pus is compressed in the depth of the wound, it prevents flesh from growing in it.
1. But if it is not possible for you to dry the wound around its lower part as you wish: then try to prepare the limb with a preparation so that it can drain pus from it with ease according to what is prepared for you. 1. Try to make sure that nothing at all from the pus is retained in it: and take consolidating remedies which are placed on the sign, corresponding to what you wish. And spread them upon a linen cloth. And let the cloth be of such quantity that it may cover the entire wound. Then cut with forceps directly into the opening of the wound, a little beyond the opening of the wound. Then spread on the opening with a soft ointment on another cloth, according to the size of the opening: and place it on top of it at a long distance from the opening of the wound, so that the exit of pus is eased from it: and do not remove the large cloth unless after several days.
But the one that is over the opening of the wound is the one that you remove every hour, so that what has accumulated in it from pus may come out: and so that you know whether that which runs out from it is much or little: digested or undigested.
And when you have again considered the place of the wound itself, whether the master feels pain in it, or whether there is no pain in it: and whether there is an abscess in it, or whether there is no abscess in it.
When therefore your medication is applied in this way, and you see the matter that comes out over the opening of the wound, then you know that the wound has adhered, or is approaching adhesion: then therefore dissolve it in the morning, or on the third day: and when you heal the wound, then change the cloth and renew the ointment.
But if after a long time virulent matter runs out from the wound, then do not despair of its adhesion, for its healing is approaching, because there are people who slow down the generation of flesh in their wounds: and there are those who act contrary to that.
But if after many days undigested pus runs out from the wound, then you know that the wound does not adhere.
If the adhesion of the sinuses is delayed and its duration is prolonged, then in the drying of medicines, the physicians should make them such that they are in the substance of their moisture and in the power of their dryness, just like the addition of excess from zegi to the unguent of diaphinicon.
And from the most recent that is cured, it is, that you take the unguent of diaphinicon and dissolve it with rose oil, and rub it on top of equal old wine in its substance.
Then mix it with that, and use it with that.
And now it performs a similar action to this when you do not have the unguent of diaphinicon present for you, honey, when you cook it until it thickens, and use it with that. Or take myrrh, and aloe, and frankincense: grind everything, and powder it on top of honey while it is on the fire. Then draw a thread over it on the cloth, and tie it over the sinus: and draw a thread with the honey that you cooked, until it thickens: and powder it on top of it, and put it on top of it, and tie it on.
And sometimes it is administered in the long-leaved aristolochia, and the roots of the heavenly lily, and there is a lily: and the flour of the herb, and centaury. Use them simple or mixed, grind them, and the mortar itself: and powder it on top of the honey that I have cooked, and use it with that.
If the duration of the sinus is prolonged and it is not healed by this treatment: then know that there is corruption in its depth: or already it has made an impression in the bones, or in the other hard members, or ligaments: then cure it with the treatment of fistulas, according to what was prescribed before.
On the Care of Paronychia and Worn Nails, and on Incision of the Finger, and on Section
Paronychia is an abscess that arises under the nail of the thumb, or foot: and perhaps it may arise in the other fingers as well.
When, however, the condition persists and is neglected and treated with a hot abscess, or it rots and emits pus until it corrodes the root of the nail: and perhaps it may corrupt the whole of it, and perhaps the corruption reaches the bone, until there is an odor of putrefaction: and the end of the finger becomes wide, and its color becomes dark.
Therefore, when you are treating it, since what we said about the division does not apply to your treatment, then it is necessary that you incise with a knife all the remaining excess from the nail. Then cauterize the wound after that. Indeed, a cautery is very helpful.
If, however, the bone is healthy and the nail is also healthy, and the additions of the nail already compress the flesh to the interior, and they begin to prick it, and they wound it: then it is necessary that you place a thin radium under the angle of the nail which pricks the flesh, and push it upwards: and incise the flesh with ease, and place on what remains of the flesh from medicines that burn, corrode, until all of it is removed. Then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
If, however, the corruption has already pressed into the bone, then it is necessary that you incise that bone, and remove it: for it never heals while the corrupted bone remains in it.
If you see signs of corrosion and decay spreading in the finger, then cut it off at one joint, according to what was previously mentioned. Then take care of the remaining part until it heals.
But if a nail is injured by wear and tear, or by a blow: and there is severe pain in it, then it is necessary to perform bloodletting on the affected part. Then cut the nail with a sharp spatula from below upwards to the sight.
And guard against the cut reaching the flesh beneath the nail, for you will cause severe pain and it will be a cause of additional inflammation in that location.
Then take care of the affected area with what alleviates pain.
Indeed, the finger that grows in some people's hands may be entirely fleshy: and perhaps there are bones in some of them, and perhaps there is a nail: and some of them grow at the root of the joint, or its growth is in some of the joints of the finger. Therefore, the one that grows in some joints of the finger does not move: and the one that grows at the joint of the finger may move.
Therefore, the cutting of the one that is entirely fleshy is easy. That is, you should cut it at its root with a flat spatula.
But the treatment of the one whose growth is at the root of the joint is difficult. Therefore, avoid cutting it.
But in the one that grows at the last joint of the finger, then you should cut into its flesh roundly up to the bone. Then use a saw with one of those suitable saws for that. Then care for yourself until you are healed.
However, the consolidation that occurs in the fingers is often due to birth, meaning it is born with it, or from the healing of a wound, or from burning by fire, and similar things.
Therefore, you must separate that consolidation until the fingers return to their natural shape. Then place between them linen or cloths soaked in rose oil: so that they do not consolidate quickly and separate between them, or place between them a thin sheet of lead until the place is consolidated as it should be.
And similarly if a consolidation occurs between certain fingers and the palm, then dry that consolidation according to how it is prepared and fits the shape of the member.
§ On Incising Wounds.
There are veins that are not covered, thick, full of superfluous melancholic humors which occur in many parts of the body: and their greatest effect is in the legs, especially in the legs of those who walk and suffer and carry.
Therefore, the administrator should give a strong shaking of the body from black bile several times.
Then bleeding of the patient through the basilica.
The cure of them with iron is indeed in two ways. One of them is that they are dried and the black blood is drawn out. And the other way is that the vein is raised and the whole is drawn out.
The incision of it is indeed in this way. First, rub the leg with hot water many times until the thick bloody feces are dissolved. Then tie the weak leg from its upper part of the hip, down to the lower part of the knee with a bandage. Then cut the vein in one place, or two, or three wide sections.
Then remove, that is, draw the blood out of your hand from the lower part of the leg, upwards, and from the upper part, it is necessary to bleed the sick first. Then cut the nail with it down to the lower part: until enough blood comes out that you see is sufficient, and as much as the strength of the sick can tolerate.
Then tie it up: and tell him to abstain from foods that generate black bile: and repeat evacuation and bleeding when the veins are filled, and it harms this sick person.
However, his bleeding is done in this way. Shave the leg of the sick person if there are many hairs on it. Then immerse him in a bath: or foment his leg with hot water on it, until it reddens, and the veins are full: or exercise strong exercise if there is not present a bath, until the limb is warmed.
Then cut the skin in a straight line across the vein: or at the last of it by the knee, or in the lower part of it by the heel.
Then open the skin with a hook, and scrape the vein from all parts, until it appears to the sense: and at its appearance, which you see is reddening downwards to blackness. When therefore it goes out of the skin, you see it white like a string.
Then immerse under it Radium, until when bled and goes out of the skin: suspend it with a blind hook, gently.
Then cut another section near that section with three fingers. Then scrape the skin from the upper part of the vein until it appears. Then clean it with a brush and hang it up with another peg as you did before.
Then cut another section or several sections if you need them. Then clean it and cut the last section near the heel.
Then remove it to the section that is above it.
And do this until you remove it from the section that is above or higher with all sections until it comes out completely: then cut it.
But if it does not obey you in removing and cleaning: then insert a needle with strong thread doubled, and tie it, and remove it: or insert a brush under it: and turn your hand to all parts until it comes out. And beware, do not cut it. For if it is cut, it will be difficult for you to clean it greatly, and it will cause harm on the weak from it.
When therefore you have removed it all: then place it on the wound with a moistened cloth in wine and rose oil or oil: and care for it until it is healed.
But if the grape is contracted, having a twisted shape to which there is an unrolling to all parts and it is not as we said according to straightness: then it is necessary to cut over it to all part of its twist and the places of its unrolling.
Then hang it up with pegs until you clean it all: and beware at your cut on it that you do not cut the vein or wounds: for it will be difficult for you to clean it or remove it. Therefore, use your wisdom.
The Form of Incision for Healing a Vine.
The Form of Incision for a Blind Eye.
It does not have curvature like other eyelids, nor is it sharp at the edges, so as not to wound the eye: and it is thick and flexible, mild: for if it were subtle, it would pierce the eye with its subtlety: indeed it should have excessive thickness, as we said.
On the Extraction of the Leg Vein.
This vein is generated in the legs on earthly hot lands, such as Alizaga, and the Arab lands, and in dry, hot, and few-tending lands, that is, where there is no grass or tree.
And perhaps it is generated in other places of the body besides the legs.
Its generation indeed is from the putrefaction that occurs under the skin, just like what happens inside the body with snakes and worms of ascarides, and worms generated between the skin and flesh.
And the sign of the beginning of this vein is that which happens in the leg, a severe inflammation. Then the place is opened up. Then the vein begins to exit from that place of its opening, as if it were the root of a plant or an animal.
When therefore it appears from that end of it, then you should roll over it a fragment of lead, whose weight is from the drachma keil, up to two drachmas and the knot: and let go the lead hanging from the leg.
Whenever therefore something exits from it to the outsides, roll that in lead and knot it. If it is prolonged too much, then cut off a part of it and wrap up the remaining part. And do not cut it off at its root before it has fully emerged. Because if you cut it off, it contracts and enters the flesh, causing an abscess, putrefaction, and a bad ulcer in that place.
Therefore it should be handled gently and gradually removed until it fully emerges from its last part, and nothing remains of it in the body. In some people, this vein exits in a length of five palms and ten. And now it has reached me, because it has exited from a man after twenty palms.
If it happens to you during your medical treatment: then insert the needle into its opening, and pierce it through the hole with the body, until all that is in it from the matter is evacuated. And administer putrefaction of the place with medicines for several days. Then care for the wound with the treatment of the abscess.
And this vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot, or in the foot itself: and it has many openings, and exits from every opening.
Therefore care for it as we said in the division, and with what was previously mentioned.
¶ On cutting out worms that are generated under the skin, and it is called "Bouini's disease.
This disease is called "Bouini's disease" in a certain land among us because it often happens to worms, and it is a small worm that is born between the skin and flesh.
And it wanders throughout the entire body, ascending and descending: and it is shown to the senses during its walking from one member to another, until it breaks down any place in the skin where it exits.
Its generation is from the putrefaction of certain humors. Just as it happens to worms and snakes, that is, roundworms and tapeworms in the belly.
And it is feared from its malevolence. Because when it walks in the body, and is raised to the head, and reaches the place: then perhaps it opens in that, and exits, and destroys the eye: and this happens often.
When therefore you wish to cure it, and extract it, then it is not done unless during its walking and appearance to the sense.
Therefore, you must bind what is above it, and what is below it with a strong ligature. Then dry over it, and extract it.
If it is sunk into the flesh, and you do not find it: then place a hot iron on the place until it dies.
And the greater thing that is feared, is its corruption, by which it corrupts the eye, as we said.
But if you see that it has already reached the head near the eye, then bind under it the eyebrow with a good ligature. Then dry over it, and extract it.
And you must use a weak cleansing of his body, with dissolving medicines that remove foul humors.
And he must guard himself from foods that generate putrefaction.
§ On cutting for pain in the jaw.
This affliction is called by us in our land as "Nakir": and it is a pain that affects certain limbs, then passes from one member to another.
And indeed I have already seen it myself, as I tell you. I was called to an ill woman in certain villages. And she extended her arm, and I saw inflammation of the small vein in the tendon of the arm.
And after I remained for an hour, I saw one inflammation moving with a stick, like a snake, ascending to her shoulder more quickly than is possible: so that it is like living silver when it runs from place to place.
The pain therefore departed from that place, and fixed itself on her shoulder.
Then I sat for an hour, and it ran to the rest of the body, until it reached the other arm.
Then she told me that it was turning around her whole body, as I saw.
I was therefore amazed at the swiftness of its change from one member to another. And indeed I had not seen this affliction with my eyes in that way according to this manner before that. But indeed I have seen many who find the pain changing from one member to another: and I have not seen it with my eyes as I saw it in that woman.
And I do not think that it is, except that it is because the woman was from those who are from dry bodies' veins detected: hence therefore it appears to sense that swiftness changed.
And it is necessary that they do not appear according to this reason in those who are delicate, and bodies humid, hidden veins.
When therefore you wish to cure her pain, and the patient feels it: then if it is appearing to you with your eye, as we said, then bind above it, and under it quickly: and dry above it, until that swiftness confined exits: and cauterize the place.
If you do not see it with your own eyes: then care for it with body massage, and with that which expels worms, and rub it with foul-smelling powders, and powders of sappor, and similar things.
On the Extraction of Arrows.
Arrows vary according to their kinds, and according to the places where they fall from the body.
However, their variety is such: because there are some that have large and small, concave, and deaf points. And there are some that have three angles. And there are some that have tongues. And there are some that have stars.
Those that are according to the members in which they fall, are according to two ways. For indeed the members are from the principal concave members, such as the brain, and heart, and liver, and lung, and kidneys, and intestines, and bladder, and similar things. When therefore it falls into any of these members, and the signs of death appear to you, which I tell you after, then it is necessary that you follow the extraction of that arrow from them, for death follows it in many positions. And when those bad signs do not appear to you, and the arrow is not hidden in the depth of the member, then extract it, and care for the wound.
For from the signs of the brain when the arrow falls into it, and penetrates the mouth, and exits that which is above the brain, is: because these things happen from it strong soda, and scotomia, and vertigo, and redness in the eyes, and inflation, and redness of the tongue, and spasm, and permixtion of intellect, and vomiting of cholera. And perhaps blood may issue forth from the nostrils, or from the ears. And perhaps speech is cut off, and voice is destroyed. And a white fluid like pus issues forth from the wound. And a similar discharge of flesh issues forth from it.
If therefore these signs appear to you, then refrain from healing, and extract the arrow if it does not issue forth.
But the signs of an arrow when it falls into the heart are: that it is near the left nipple; and it feels with it as if it were itself fixed in a hard thing, not in a void. And perhaps the arrow is similar to the motion of a blow: and black blood runs from the wound. And there follows a chill of the extremities, and cold sweat, and shortness of breath. Know therefore, that death is approaching without doubt.
And the sign of an arrow when it wounds the lung is: that foamy blood runs from the wound: and the wounds following the neck swell up, and the color of the sick person changes. And he breathes out a deep, cold breath: and seeks the attraction of cold air.
If the arrow falls into the lung, which is in the chest: then it is near the small ribs: and there is great panting with intense pain, with a sigh: and all the limbs of the shoulders are moved.
And if the arrow falls into the stomach, then perhaps something undigested from food issues forth from the wound.
And if the arrow falls into the bowel and sticks in it: something of feces issues forth from the wound, or a mass, or an intestine that is already broken. Therefore, there is no hope of healing him, nor in extracting the arrow.
If the arrow falls into the bladder, and urine comes out from it, and something proceeds from it to the outside, and the pain is stronger on the weak person: then you will know that it is a mortal wound.
The other parts of the body, such as the face, neck, throat, shoulder blade, ribs, backbone, hip, and leg, and similar parts from the limbs are saved according to many arrangements: when the arrow does not hit an artery or nerve: and it is not a poisonous arrow.
And I tell you that I have seen these arrows, to signify for your healing.
That is, because an arrow fell to a man in the lacrimal duct of his eye, in the root of his nose. Therefore, I extracted it from the other side, under the ear fat: and he was healed, and no harm came to his eye.
And I extracted the arrow from a Jew, which fell to him under the fat of his eye, under the lower eyelid: and the arrow was already hidden, and I did not follow it except its small tip with which it sticks to its wood: and it was a large arrow from the arrows of Turks, with a weak iron, in which there are no ears.
Therefore, the Jew was healed, and no harmful event came to his eye.
And I extracted the arrow from the throat of a Christian.
And it was an Arabic arrow, and it is that which has ears. Therefore, I followed over it between two ribs: and it was already submerged in his throat. I was subtle with her until I extracted her, and the Christian was healed.
And I extracted another arrow from a man which had fallen into his belly: and we thought that he would die from it.
After therefore three days had passed over him, and nothing was changed on him from his dispositions, I followed after the arrow: and I probed it, and extracted it: and he was healed, and no evil accident happened to him.
And I saw a man on whom an arrow had fallen on his back, and the wound was hardened over it. After therefore it was after seven years, the arrow came out of the root of his thigh.
And I saw a woman on whom an arrow had fallen into her belly, and the wound was hardened over it, and the arrow remained inside her: and nothing was changed from her dispositions, and the woman did not find any harm in any of her natural operations.
And I saw a man another, on whom an arrow had fallen on his face: and the wound was hardened, and it remained, not finding much pain: and similar things to these many.
And I extracted an arrow from a man of the king's principal officers, which had fallen on him in the middle of his nose, and it was already slightly declined to the right side: and the arrow was hidden entirely.
I was therefore called for healing after the fall of the arrow up to three days. I therefore found the wound of the arrow very tight.
I therefore probed it with a thin probe, and I did not find it: and he himself found pain and pricking under his right ear. I therefore hoped that this prick was from the end of the arrow.
Therefore, I placed the plaster with the plaster that had the power of attraction and digestion, trusting that the abscess would form in that place, and it appeared to me to be a sign of an arrow, so I cut above it: and it did not happen that the arrow followed the place.
Therefore, I applied the plaster to him for many days: and it did not happen that the wound became worse, and the wound healed in the meantime: and he remained weak from its extraction for a period of days, until he felt the arrow inside his nose on a certain day. And he told me about it.
And he told me about it. Therefore, I placed on that wound an acute and corrosive medicine for many days, until it was open: and when I probed it, and felt the delicate tip of the arrow that stuck to the wood.
Then I added to the open wound that medicine, until the tip of the arrow appeared visible to us: and it passed by me with him for a period of time, approximately four months.
Then, after the wound had been enlarged, and it was possible for me to insert forceps into it, and move it, and it did not obey its exit: then I did not cease to sharpen, and invent on it with ways of ingenuity, until I began one day with well-made forceps, according to the form that they will have at the end of the chapter, until I extracted it. Then I healed the wound.
And indeed, the doctors judge that the cartilage of the nose will not be healed. Therefore, I healed it again, and the wound healed, and the sick man was healed with complete health: and nothing at all harmed him.
And I tell you about the method of extracting certain arrows: place that rule and meaning on what I have not said.
Because the parts of this craft and their distinctions are not comprehended in narration: nor does that book understand it, and a wise craftsman compares with little above much: and with what is present, he finds on that which is absent: and he discovers a new operation and a new instrument among the descents of external things of this craft when they happen.
I say therefore that arrows do not exit from the members in which they are fixed, except according to two ways. Either by attraction from the place from which it entered. Or from the opposite part.
And that which exits where it entered, is either an arrow proceeding in a fleshy place and is attracted and exits.
But if it does not obey the exit from the hour in which it falls: then it is necessary that you let it go for several days until the flesh which is in its circumference rots: and its attraction is alleviated and its exit.
And similarly if it sticks to bone, and does not obey you for exit, then let it go also for several days: and repeat it with attraction and motion every day until it exits.
But if it does not obey you for exit after days: then it is necessary that you bore through the circumference of the arrow in the bone from all parts with a fine drill until the arrows are enlarged. Then attract it and extract it.
But if the arrow has already hidden itself in a place of the body, and is concealed and hidden from sensation: then search for it with probing. But if you feel it, then draw it out with some instruments that are suitable for its attraction.
But if you cannot touch it, due to the constriction of the wound, and due to the length of the arrow in the deep place: and there is no bone, nerve, or vein: then cut over it, until the wound is enlarged, and it is possible to extract the arrow.
But if there are ears to which it is attached, then free the flesh that is fixed in them from all parts, with every skill that you can, and skills, if it cannot be removed over the flesh in the fracture of the ears, and the twisting of them, until it comes out.
And you when you are administering the extraction of the arrow, in whatever place it is, then use the twisting of your hand, with forceps to all parts, until you make it come out: and subtle last subtleties, so that the arrow does not break, and it becomes difficult for you to attract it, and its extraction.
If you cannot apply it to her within an hour, then let her go for several days until the affected parts around her decay. Then repeat the application: it will heal the wound. However, if it causes opposite effects on your blood flow, then administer what we mentioned in the chapter on treatment, and guard your virtue from incision of vein, nerve, or string.
And administer your skill in every possible way that is possible for you to avoid the arrow: and let it be with facility, and tranquility, or slowness, and firmness, as I told you.
And it is necessary that when you pull the arrow, it should be weak according to its form, as it was at the time of the arrow's wound in the same place. Because it is more beneficial. However, if it is not possible for you, then administer what is possible to you from the figures.
The arrow that comes out from the other part, or already proceeds from it to the exterior: or makes stiffness of the extremity of the arrow through sense from the upper part of the skin near, and you see it projecting: then cut on it, and let the incision be according to the amount that the pincers can take in it.
Then pull it: for it becomes easy to exit.
However, if it retains in the bone, then twist your hand according to its roundness, until the arrow hits the bone, and enlarges itself: then pull it.
And if not: let her go for several days: then repeat it until she exits.
However, if the wood of the arrow is in her, then push it with it.
If however a log has fallen and you wish to administer an impulse to it, then introduce the concave instrument into it so that its concavity enters the tail of the Arrow: then strike it along with it.
If however the Arrow is concave, then strike it with the entering instrument. The Arrow is relieved by that.
If however the Arrow is poisoned, then it is necessary to hollow out the entire flesh in which the poison is: if it is possible for you to do that. Then care for it with that which is suitable for that.
If however the Arrow is falling in the chest, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the side: and it is close to that which you touch with the thread, and it is possible for you to cut above it: then cut, and avoid from the incision of the vein, or nerve, and extract it.
Then care for its wound, if you see it, and heal that, until it is healed.
And this is the shape of the Forceps by which Arrows are extracted.
Let their extremities be similar to the beak of a bird, which are made like iron: when they take hold of the Arrow, they do not let it go.
And many shapes are made from them, large and small, and medium-sized, according to the quantity of the size of the Arrow, and its lightness, and the width of the wound, and its constriction.
The shape of the Striking concave.
And the shape of the Striking deaf.
This is the deaf extremity like a Radius, so that its entrance into the concave Arrow is relieved, and it is struck with it.
Chapter on the Phlebotomy of Veins.
The veins that are customarily bled in the body are thirty.
Of these, there are sixteen in the head: two pulsating veins that are located behind the ears, called "the herbs"; and two arteries that are visible in two temples; and two veins that are located in the two lachrymal ducts of both eyes, called "the spectators"; and a prepared vein in the middle of the forehead; and a vein at the end of the nose. And two jugular veins that are located in the neck. And two veins that are located on the upper lip of the mouth. And two veins that are located on the lower lip. And these are the veins that are called "the alchemists". And two veins that are located under the tongue.
The veins that are bled in the arms are five in each arm.
One of them is the cephalic vein, and it is located on the sulci side; and the people call it the "vein of the head". And the dark one. And the middle vein is composed of a branch of the basilica and a branch of the cephalic vein; and the people call it the "vein of the body". And the basilica is located on the domical side; and it is also called the "titillating vein". The people call it the "vein of the belly". And the "brachial string" is located above the elbow; and it is the one that is bled, and it is the one that appears above the wrist with the palm facing up.
And Saluatella: and it is a vein that is between the ring finger and the little finger: and it has two branches.
And there are three veins in the leg and foot. One of them is the vein that is under the pollicis curvature from the side of the sylvestris. And the second is the Saphena: and its location is at the calcaneum from the side of the domestic. And the vein Nesse: and its location is at the calcaneum from the side of the sylvestris.
And in the leg there are other three veins similar to those.
¶ On bleeding from two veins after the ears.
Bleeding indeed from two veins which are after the ears is a remedy for ancient catarrhs, and hemigraine, and sahafati, and old head sores.
And the quality of bleeding it is according to what I say. And it is, that the head of the sick be rubbed: and the back of his head is rubbed in the place of two veins with a rough cloth rubbing well. Then the sick person will tie his neck with a string, until two veins appear. And their locations are after the ears in two depressed places of the head. Therefore seek them with your finger, and where you feel them being pricked by your finger, there mark with caustic.
Then take a bleeding lancet, and it is the one that is called Incidens. Then insert it under the vein into the skin, until the bleeding lancet reaches the bone. Then wipe your hand with the vein and skin to the upper, and cut the vein with the Incidens cutting. And let the length of the incision be an amount equal to two fingers of a scribe, or about that: and make it bleed as much as you wish.
Then bind it with cotton, and let it go, until it is healed.
And now at the beginning of the book, the incision of them, and their cauterization.
Of the two arteries which are in the two times of bleeding, is a benefit to the ancient hemigram: and bad salt, and frequent ointment: and the course of the flowing sharp drops to the eyes.
And the quality of bleeding them is according to what I tell you. The sick person ties his neck a lot, until two veins appear to the sense of appearance manifest: and shows the pulse of them under your finger. For then the signs with the cauterizer.
Then lift the skin above the vein to the upper with your index finger, and insert the bleeding incoming from below, and lift the vein to the upper. And cut it, as you did in two other veins: and make it flow out of the blood according to the amount of your need.
Then dissolve the sick person's bandage, and put your finger on the vein for one hour. Then put on it the cotton and bandages, and bind it above with strong constriction: and let it go, until it is healed.
And now the reminder of them, and their incision, and their extraction at the beginning of the book.
The true indication for phlebotomy of the veins in front of the face is after phlebotomy of the Cephalic vein, for ancient facial ailments: and for hemicrania, and redness: and foul ulcers.
And the quality of that phlebotomy is as I tell you. The sick person should flex his neck with a bandage until the vein appears. Then take the instrument called the Fossorium.
Place the sharp point that is at the head of the Fossorium over the vein, and strike it with a lancet, or with another instrument in its manner: and let the blood run according to the quantity you wish. Then dissolve the puncture of the sick person, and bind it until he is healed.
And sometimes it opens with a broad lancet. However, it is not necessary that the lancet be sharp at the end, like other lancets, but rather flat at the end. And use the lancet according to the transection: for the mouth is near: and perhaps the lancet will break in it if it is delicate.
The indication for phlebotomy of the two veins that are in the two lacrimal ducts of both eyes is for eye pain and redness: and sebel in the eye, and facial ailments.
And the quality of that phlebotomy is that the sick person should flex his neck with a bandage. Then use the lancet on them: and you should be standing over his head.
And let bloodletting be performed according to the transverse direction, for a short length, with a small lancet, slightly wide, because there is no flesh in that place. For if the bloodletting is too delicate at the extremity, perhaps it will be broken.
Then let the blood run out as much as is necessary for you. And place a bandage on them, and tie them up at night in one night, and dissolve them.
But bloodletting of the nasal bones is for comparing to acute fever, and strong soda, and face aches, such as hemigranes, and redness that occurs in the face: especially when it is old.
And the quality of its bloodletting is to tie up a weak neck. Then hold its nose with your left hand, and take a thin bloodletting, long: and fix it in the middle of its rabbit, between that which distinguishes its nose according to straightness. Because the vein does not appear to sense there, and because blood begins to flow immediately.
And it is necessary, that your last hand with the bloodletting slightly: and let the blood run out according to your necessity. Then tie it up at night in one night. For it is restored quickly indeed.
However, the benefit of bloodletting of both guide bones is for constriction of breathing, and inception of leprosy, and melancholic aches, and impetigo and bad ulcers, and corroding, that is, herpes zoster.
And the quality of its bloodletting is that it ties up a weak one under both in its neck with a bandage: and let the craftsman stand on the head of the sick man, and the sick man sit on him.
Then, the vein is punctured at a length equal to the width of a wide incision. Then, extract an amount of blood that is moderate, or according to what you see as necessary for that. Then, do the same with another vein.
Afterwards, loosen the ligament, and tie two veins together with a median ligature: so that the weak one is not preferred. And let it go until morning. For the wound heals.
Concerning the vein bleeding of Albucasis. Veins, however, are the support of Albucasis's bleeding: because they bring relief to colic in the mouth, and corruption of the gums: and bad sores: and fissures of the lips, and bad sores, even those which are in the nose, and around it.
And the quality of their bleeding is that you make the sick person sit in front of you: and tie his neck with a ligature. Then, roll his lip back, and look at the two veins: one of which is on the right side of his lip, and the other on the left: and the demonstration of each is by the darkness of both. And that is true: because there are small veins, black, around them. Therefore, make an incision on each of them with a cutting instrument.
But if there is doubt over you, and you do not know which of them is: then direct to the incision of the larger ones, and their more manifest.
And likewise do with the two veins which are on the upper lip: and most of all custom does that with it: and make an incision on the two veins which are on the lower lip.
Regarding bleeding from the vein under the tongue after bleeding from the cephalic vein. However, bleeding from the two veins under the tongue is beneficial: it is because bleeding from the cephalic vein is for conditions that are in the throat, and pain in the neck, and conditions of the mouth.
And the quality of bleeding from these veins is that the sick person should sit with you facing the sun, and elevate his tongue, and look under his tongue from one side for a vein, and from the other side for a vein: and the color of both should be declining towards blackness.
Therefore bleed from both: and watch, lest your last hand in bleeding from these. For under them are arteries, and perhaps it may happen that blood flows from those arteries.
However, the three veins that are bled from in the elbow, are in which bleeding has become customary in all people.
And bleeding from them is done in two ways. Either pricking with a flat-tipped myrtle bleeder: or oilily to the fineness of decline: or cutting with a knife bleeder, and it is called Alnesil. And this is its shape.
And from them are species wide and fine according to the size and tightness of the veins: the shape of the myrtle bleeder should be wide, as you see. And it is suitable for opening concave, full, protruding, apparent, thick, and those that contain thick, turbid blood.
This bloodletting lancet is of lesser width and more delicate at its extreme tips.
It is suitable for the vein bloodletting of delicate needles, which contain thin, yellowish blood.
However, the basilica, which is one of these three vein bloodletting, is its jewel. Because it draws blood from illnesses that are under the chin and neck, from the chest and abdomen, and follows this, as a bloodletting physician with a lancet, he should be cautious and have fear of it, as under it is an artery. If therefore he errs and adds to the bloodletting puncture, he will cut that artery, and an accident of blood flow will occur. Therefore it is necessary, not to bloodlet it with a sharp lancet, but to cut it with an alnasil.
If it does not appear with a clear appearance of the basilica, then you should exchange it with another one, or seek some branch of it: or bloodlet in place of its arm brachial. For it is clear and cut it with an alnasil lancet, as we said.
If however you wish for the bloodletting of its own, then you should before the stricture of the arm, to touch the place, until you know the place of the pulse. Then sign over the place with a cauterizer, then the arm, and cut the vein with a hollow cut with an alnasil lancet, as we said. And be careful that the impact does not fall over the distance from the place of the artery.
And when you see, with you tighten the bandage, inflation in the place that you signed with a cauterizer, then that inflation is the inflation of the artery: therefore avoid it.
If you see blood gushing out from the phlebotomy, like a child's urine, and it is thin and red, then you know that it is from the artery's blood. Then therefore rush, and place your finger on it for a long time, then remove your finger. If therefore the blood is cut off (often indeed it is cut off), then tighten the arm, and let it go: and let the weak one be cautious of its motion: and let him be on guard against his fear.
And do not move it for several days until it is healed.
But if the blood does not cut off, and it overpowers you: and there is no medicine for you present in your moment, then cut the artery, if it appears to you. For its extremities are contracted, and the blood is cut off.
Or take the boxer's corticem, and press him: take half of it, and tie it over the place of the vein neatly, with a bandage and cotton until another day.
Then if the blood is cut off, it is good. And if not: then take care of it with him whose memory preceded from the place of dust abscinding blood flow: and cutting of his blood is not difficult in many positions, because of the small wound location, and possibility of bandage from the arm.
But the veins Black phlebotomy is a benefit, which draws blood from the upper part of the head, and lower body: because it is composed of the branch Basilica, and the branch Cephalic, as we said.
And it is appropriate for the phlebotomist to have fear of her, because beneath her is a nerve. Therefore, if the phlebotomist adds to the puncture and discovers a nerve, it may cause stupor in her, making her recovery difficult, and perhaps she will not be healed completely.
And this nerve often appears to the sense. But if it is hidden in some people, and is subtle, and does not show itself: then you must place your phlebotomy where the phlebotomist makes the cut, with Alnesil, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
If the vein is between two nerves, then find the vein in length.
About the Cephalic Vein. However, the phlebotomy of the Cephalic Vein is a remedy, because it draws blood from the head, and brings it to eye ailments.
And it is proper in this vein, if you wish, to puncture it with a phlebotomy oil lamp, or with a phlebotomy myrtle: because it is safer than all veins, since it is not beneath an artery, nor a nerve.
However, it is appropriate for you with the phlebotomy to avoid with the phlebotomy the tail of the lizard, and seek a gentler spot: and it does not harm him, if it is not found with the first blow, to repeat the phlebotomy on her several times.
However, perhaps an abscess forms in some people when it is not punctured in the first blow, but it does not harm him that abscess in some place.
About the Usefulness of Phlebotomy, and Precautions to be Observed in it. The quality of bloodletting and its accidents depend on the correction of which you must think.
Therefore, the first thing you should know about bloodletting is that it is not administered unless for the preservation of health, its continuity, and caution against the onset of illnesses.
And so that bloodletting may be performed on one of the three veins in the arm, namely the cephalic, fusca, and basilica. And so that bloodletting may be performed at the beginning of spring on fasting, in the spring, and in summer; and in autumn and winter after eating, when the signs of repletion appear.
And bloodletting should be performed on the first or third day after three hours have passed since the previous day.
However, bloodletting that is administered in illnesses does not have a determined time; but when convenience and necessity prompt it, at night or during the day, and in every hour, and at all times.
And it is not proper for children to undergo bloodletting until they reach the age of fourteen. Nor should a pregnant woman undergo bloodletting, except from the fourth to the seventh month. And the elderly who have already crossed sixty years should not undergo bloodletting.
When therefore someone wants to undergo bloodletting for any reason, it is proper that they clean their intestines before bloodletting with a mild enema if there is much feces retained in them: so that the veins at the time of bloodletting do not draw out from the intestines harmful superfluities which are noxious to the principal members.
Nor should a patient with toctina, that is, nauseous satiety, undergo bloodletting, nor one who has overeaten, nor one who is trying to avoid drunkenness, until that is removed from them. Nor is the weak one with hydrocephalus.
And bleeding should be avoided again after colic pain, vomiting, diarrhea, frequent intercourse, labor, exercise, and sleeplessness, and fasting, and everything that dissolves strength from the body or the animal.
Then consider the subtlety of the humors before that, if the blood is thick with food and drinks, and medicines: if it is possible for him to have that.
Then he should take a bath, if nothing prohibits him: or he should be exercised with some exercise, so that the blood becomes subtle.
And place bleeding on his chest, around the third day, as we said: and try to evacuate his chest that day from all animal misfortunes: such as anguish, and anger, and fear: and from all bodily misfortunes, such as labor, and punishment, and superfluousness, and similar things.
And let his seat be made to have the presence of those things with which he became accustomed to use from the custom of men from aromaticity, and perfuming, and dancing and similar things by the quantity of possibility.
Then the bleeder should sit on a litter, which is higher than the litter for bleeding: then he should draw his arm, and rub it with his hand twice or three times. Then he should tie a ligature with a bandage, and wrap it twice.
And let the binding be temperate, because when the binding is unequal, or by excess in the binding, then it prevents the course of the blood: or in the softening, then also it prevents the course of the blood.
Then after the binding, it is necessary to rub the bleeder with his hands simultaneously, until the veins swell, and declare themselves to the sense.
Then, the phlebotomist washes the phlebotomy site with a little oil, as is proper and ancient.
Then, he places his index finger of his left hand on the vein, under the spot where he wants to perform the phlebotomy, slightly: so that the vein does not escape, and the blow is contained. For since the veins are like a slippery cord when you find them at phlebotomy: and from them is what is full of pliability: and when you place the phlebotomy on it, it contracts under the phlebotomy, and deceives the phlebotomist, and does not open the vein: and if it opens it, it is tight: therefore for this reason it is necessary that the phlebotomist be firm, and be careful in all these things.
Then he should lay down the phlebotomy. If therefore the vein opens from one side, then it is good. And if not, then repeat that side in another place slightly, or above it with haste: if the spot does not become inflamed.
If it becomes inflamed, or the patient is weak, then let him go on the day, or in two days: and do not tighten the bandage. For perhaps the abscess will attract heat. And he should not enter the bath.
Then he should repeat the phlebotomy, if he likes.
If the opening is small, or the blood flows thinly: and you fear that not enough blood will come out: then repeat the phlebotomy in the same hole according to straightness, and add a little in the operation.
And do that with haste, before the spot becomes inflamed, for an inflamed spot is in many people at small operations.
If you see that it is already suppurating, then do not press on it at all, for nothing excuses it in your eyes. And place something oily on it: for it will soothe the course of the blood. And it is better in this place than oil itself, and than other oils.
And similarly administer the oil in all your phlebotomies, where the phlebotomist prohibits the course of the blood: and they make it tyriaca alfarach, and sagzenea, when it is placed on one of them on the spot.
For the blood is thinned and dissolved when it is thick.
But if an abscess occurs in the place of phlebotomy, for it often happens, especially to those who are not phlebotomized except at that time, or is a small opening of the vein, then hurry and place a sponge soaked in water and salt on the spot, heated for a while: and bind it for an hour: for it will dissolve.
And you should do this after the exit of blood from the vein itself, with its own supplement, or from another vein.
But if something remains in the spot after a few days, black or green, it does not harm it: and if you wish, place something aloe, or myrrh solutes on it: or something from the juice of menthastr, that is, calamint or similar to it.
But often indeed abscesses and boils occur at the phlebotomy of the basilica.
Therefore place your hand on it, then if you find softness at your compression on it, then that boil is bad. Therefore beware, so that you place something from what we said on it. For perhaps blood flows from that artery.
But apply a plaster to it with the one that has astringency, so that the wound is hardened. Then care for it with the other cure until it heals.
And it is necessary to extract all blood from every man according to the quantity of its virtue. And what appears from the color staining on the blood.
For if the blood is black, then let it go out, until it turns red: and similarly if you see it thick, then let it go out, until it becomes thin: and similarly if it is sharp, then let its sharpness be removed.
And it is necessary for him who is full, strong, and needs bloodletting once, to increase the venipuncture, and to be on the left side: and in him who is weak, the opposite.
And it is necessary to extract it at certain times, and that there be a narrow opening: and better what is administered in bloodletting from the vein is that it be transverse section, not puncture.
And this method of bloodletting is safe from the flow of blood, and from the cutting of the nerve: and it is more praiseworthy, and safer than bloodletting by width and length.
And to whom it is customary to arrive at bloodletting with syncope, it is necessary that he eat before bloodletting a little bread soaked in water of pomegranate: or secaniba if he is hot: and extract him from the blood in three times, or four.
And if he is of a cold complexion, then he should take before bloodletting bread soaked in syrup of myrrh, or in syrup of honey aromatized with species, or in aromatic syrup fragrant.
If a case of syncope occurs among phlebotomists, and the cause is the escape of blood, then it is necessary for them to take a drink of meat water and odoriferous syrup: and they should use aromatics with algalia, and bandage their chest with that: and they should use the other things we mentioned in the division in the chapter on syncope from evacuation.
But if someone wants to evacuate their arm and dissolve their blood secondarily: it is necessary for them whose phlebotomy is for evacuation of much blood, and whose virtue is weak, that they dissolve the blood gradually by the amount of virtue in consecutive days.
But if someone wants to evacuate their arm and dissolve their blood secondarily, and their body is strong: then they should do it after seven hours, or nine from their first phlebotomy.
But if someone wants to draw blood from their body towards the opposite part of which they lean: it is necessary for them to evacuate on the second or third day.
In whose body there is much blood already heated and sharpened, and makes fever to happen: it is necessary for the blood to come out of it in one draft, and a large amount to be drawn from it: and the opening should be enlarged until syncope happens: after you have been preserving all the conditions of phlebotomy: and that you place your hand on the vein during the course of the blood, so that death does not happen in the place of syncope. For often this happens when the phlebotomist does not know, and negligence falls.
And it is not necessary when you want to evacuate the arm, and dissolve the blood secondarily, when the opening of the vein has already been closed, and difficult exit of the blood is made, that it be applied with force, and extended quickly. For that is a great evil, but let it go until he is bled again.
Or remove with the sharpness of the bleeding needle that which has coagulated from the blood in the vein opening, and place on it something dissolved salt in water. And place on it something from the Tyrian alfaroch, or sagzenea, and place it with gentle compression until the blood comes out.
But if indeed the vein has already become an abscess, then let it go, and do not cover it until the abscess is formed.
But if necessity provokes to solve the blood again, and there is no excuse, then either with the bleeding needle above that place, or in the other arm in another vein.
But the arm's vein is bled at the place of the Fuscus and Basilica, when they are not found, and they are hidden, because it is composed of them.
And the quality of its bleeding is that the sick hand enters into hot water, until it reddens easily, and the vein appears clearly.
Then it is tied above it with a small bandage in the middle compression. Then the bleeding needle is done according to transversal, not latitudinal, nor according to the length: and it is a wide opening, and your bleeding is above the joining of the hand for a moment.
But if the exit of the blood is forbidden, then repeat the hand in hot water, and let the blood run in the water until you achieve your need.
But if you are in the days of summer, then you will be excused from repeating the hand in hot water. Indeed, very much is placed on the course of the blood in hot water in the time of winter.
This bloodletting from this vein is safer than all other veins, since there is no pulsating vein nor nerve under it.
Indeed, the bloodletting from the Salute's right hand is beneficial for the liver's ailments.
And the quality of this bloodletting is such that you should tie the vein with a ligature or with your hand, after you have inserted it into warm water, until the vein is filled and the sensation is very strong. Then, the bloodletting is to be performed by puncturing. And if you puncture it entirely, it will not harm her in any way.
And save, do not use your last hand with the bloodletting instrument. Under it are the nerves of the fingers exposed from the flesh.
Then repeat with your hand to warm water, and let the blood flow into it. For if you do not repeat it in warm water, the blood will coagulate in the opening of the vein and be prevented from flowing.
When therefore you have extracted the necessary quantity of blood, then place oil and salt on the vein: so that it does not clot quickly.
And likewise, you must do with every tight branch.
The remedy for this bloodletting from the left hand is: because it is beneficial for the ailments of the spleen; and likewise do in its bloodletting, as you did in the second one, equally.
The remedy for the bloodletting of the saphenae is: for ailments that are in the lower part of the body, such as uterine ailments, retention of menstruation, kidney weaknesses, and old ulcers of the thighs and legs, and similar from ailments.
The quality of the bloodletting is such that the sick person should put his foot in warm water and perform friction on it until the veins are full, then tie above the ankle with a bandage. The veins are indeed located at the heel, visible towards the big toe, and branch out from there into many branches in the face of the foot.
Therefore, perform bloodletting in a larger branch of it, or at the heel in its collection, as it is better and safer.
If bloodletting is performed on the face of the foot, then be careful of the nerves that are under it on the face of the foot.
And place your bloodletting where the bloodletting comes out of the transuvers, as if you wanted to cut it: and let the bloodletting be Nesil.
But if the exit of blood is forbidden, then repeat the foot in warm water: and let the blood run into it until it is evacuated.
But if the bloodletting needle misses the vein in the first attempt, then repeat the bloodletting with blood to the upper part for a little, as it is a safe place, and you do not fear harm from it when you avoid the nerves, as we said.
And similarly with the other equal Saphena of the foot.
But the veins of the Sciatica are, as we said, located at the heel on the side of the wood.
And the relief of bloodletting from it is for pain in the ankle, when it is due to warm blood.
And the quality of bloodletting from it is that the sick person should enter the bath quickly and bind his leg from the side of the ankle up to the heel with four fingers, with a thin long bandage, for it does not appear except because of that.
When it is apparent, then perform a phlebotomy on it according to whatever method is possible for you, or by transection: and it is better, or that you cut it with an incision, or separate it with a section. For its location is safer, and it is hidden greatly in many people.
For its location is safer, and it is hidden greatly in many people. If you do not find it, and it is not apparent at all to the senses: then perform a phlebotomy on some of its branches, and that one which appears in the back of the foot, and towards the ear: and beware of the nerves, and make it bleed a quantity of blood as you wish.
Then dissolve the constriction, and place the skin on the location of the phlebotomy, and tie the location. For it is healed quickly there.
¶ Of Ventilation, and its quality of use.
Ventilations are made from horns, and from air, and from glass.
And ventilation is indeed made in two ways. With scarification and extraction of blood: and the other is ventilation without scarification.
And this ventilation which is without scarification, is in two ways. For it is indeed with fire. Or it is without fire.
And those ventilations which are administered with scarification and extraction of blood are fourteen locations of the body. Of which one is the ventilation of Alnocrati, and it is the last of the head: and Alkehel, and it is in the middle of the neck: and the ventilations of Alhagdahim, and they are two layers of the neck from two parts at once: and the ventilation of the mind, and it is under the jaw in the lower part of the mouth: and the ventilation of two spatulas: and the ventilation of Alachosos on the end of the tail: and the ventilation of two forks, and they are in the middle of two arms: and the ventilation of two legs: and the ventilation of two wings.
And wind suction does not draw blood from your wounds that are spread thinly in the flesh, and for this reason its power does not remain, as is the case with phlebotomy. Nor is it necessary to apply wind suction whether with fire or without fire in any ailment that arises from overfullness until the entire body has been emptied.
But if necessity provokes wind suction from the ailment or because of custom, we apply it at every hour in the beginning of the month, at its end, and in the middle of it, and at any time it may be.
Which is because there are people who when blood multiplies in them until they need its extraction by wind suction, find heaviness and pain in their head.
And from them is found overfullness and redness in their face, on their head, and on their neck. And from them is found itching in their face, and on their forehead, and darkness, and dullness in their eyes.
And from them is found sweating at the place of their wind suction. And from them is found whose laughter multiplies. And from them is found whose tongue has a taste of blood: or their tongue swells and vomiting blood. And from them is found whose sleep multiplies. And from them is found who sees in their sleep blood and redness, and killed people, and wounds, and things similar to those.
When therefore we see something from them, and if it is properly in the middle of the month: we command then for wind suction to be done after they have passed two or three hours past midday.
The bandage for ventosation of the ankle is as follows: since it contributes to heaviness in the head and that which is poured out affects the eyes. Indeed, it should be after complete evacuation of the body.
And this is indeed a place for cephalic phlebotomy.
And it is not allowed to use it for those who are of cold constitution or in whom there is a catarrh. For it does him great harm.
And for that reason, it is not allowed to use it for the elderly or in whose head there are cold ailments.
But those who become accustomed to it, become drowsy on it.
And for that reason, you should command the ventosator to lay his hand with the ventosa briefly on the lower parts, fearing the generation of drowsiness.
Ventosation or Alkehel is a place for phlebotomy of the femoral vein, and phlebotomy of the basilic vein, and for that reason it brings asthma, and constriction of breathing, and cracking of the instrument of breathing, and cough, and repletion.
And it should be pushed slightly upward, because if it is placed lower, it causes weakness in the heart and stomach.
Ventosation of alhagdahim brings pain from accidental headaches, and obtalmiae, and hemigraneae, and perforation, and pain in the roots of the teeth: and it is a place for phlebotomy of the basilic vein.
And you should command the ventosator not to press his hand with the scarification, so that he does not pierce the artery and cause bleeding.
Ventilation under the chin, applies alcohol to the mouth, and prevents corruption of the jaw, and similar things from discomforts that are in the mouth: and it stands in place of phlebotomy, which are in two lips.
Ventilation with spoons, applies to the alchefachem, which is made from folding and heat.
True ventilation of the two internal parts of the forearm, applies to the bandage of phlebotomy of three veins, Basilicae, and Fuscae, and Cephalicae: because it attracts blood from all the small veins that are in the flesh: and those small veins attract from other larger veins, until the attraction reaches three veins.
And it is necessary that you command the Ventosator not to proceed too much in scarification: because the place is bare of flesh, and under it are nerves and arteries.
The ventosator that ventilates on the buttocks, applies to hemorrhoids of the anus, and lower ulcers.
And it is necessary that you command the Ventosator to be large and made of air: because the place requires strong suction, and perhaps the thin ventosators are broken: and scarification is done with a large scarification.
The ventosators of the legs reduce the manifest diminution: because they attract blood from the whole body, and apply to old pains in the kidneys, and matrix, and bladder: provoke menstruation, and apply bothor, and ademenul: and stand in place of phlebotomy of the two saphenar veins, and alhorcobeni.
However, they weaken the body a lot, and cause syncope in many people.
The remedy for the wound of a horse's neck is close to the remedy for the wound of two horses' legs.
The quality of the position for the wound is that you should place the horse in a first empty stall and suck the wound with moderate suction: and do not prolong the position of the wounds, but place them quickly and remove them quickly, so that the humors come to the place with equal advent: and do not cease to repeat this and continue until you see the place already red and inflated, and the appearance of blood redness: then therefore scarify, and repeat suction gradually. Then consider in the position of the body.
For if it is a person of tender flesh, of rare pore, it is necessary that you scarify him once, not more: so that the place does not hurt.
And command the horse to enlarge the scarification and to puncture a little: and regulate suction with ease, speed, and gentle motion.
If there is thickness in the blood, then it is necessary that you scarify him twice. In the first juice indeed the way is opened to the subtle thinning of the blood and its moistening: and in the second indeed the thorough investigation of the exact extraction of thick blood.
But if the blood is very foul, then make the third scarification: so that it follows the last.
And finally, when we want to extract blood gradually or a little, one scarification is enough for us. If we want many extractions of blood, we will scarify with multiple scarifications.
And if we measure that the blood is thick: then it is necessary that you scarify with deep scarifications: and the end equal in scarification is the depth of the skin.
What is that thing that must be administered from oils at the position of the Wind-pipes, and what should one be cautious of when applying it?
In that case where the skin is rough, hard, dark, and its pores are tightly closed, it is necessary to anoint the Wind-pipe areas with oils that are open, gentle, and resolving: if it is in the time of summer, such as the oil of alkermes, or the violent oil, or the oil of sweet apricot kernels, or the oil of cucumber seed.
And if it is in the time of winter, then the oil of narcissus, or the oil of lily, or the oil of camomile, or the sarbatinum: and similar things.
But if the excess is rough, cold: then the oil should be myrrh, or the oil of balsam, or the white oil, or the oil of anise: and similar things.
But if the Wind-pipe is of large pores, and of tender flesh: then it is necessary to prohibit oil, and it is necessary for them to wash the Wind-pipe areas after application with rosewater, or with cold water, or with water of the comforter, or with water of cucumber, or with water of portulaca: and similar things.
But that person whose blood is of much moisture, they should wash the Wind-pipes with vinegar, or with water of myrtle and sumach: and similar things.
But that person whose excesses are rough, they should wash their Wind-pipes with old wine, or with water of sambucus, or the decoction of anise, or of chamomile: and similar things.
And it is necessary to be cautious of Wind-pipe application in the bath, or at the edge of the bath: indeed it is necessary to administer after exiting from the bath for an hour, or for two hours.
It is not necessary for someone to sleep after a nosebleed.
What should be done before a nosebleed to control it or to have it bled by a phlebotomist?
Then, after the nosebleed, it is important to consider whether the person was bled or had a nosebleed beforehand. If they were choleric, the sharpness and inflammation in their blood will be increased. In this case, they should take cooling substances such as pomegranate rind, and also eat aceto (vinegar) with lettuce, secania (a type of herb), and julep (a sweetened drink) regularly.
And give them foods such as chicken eggs and cooked meats, and condiments with agreste (a type of herb).
If their constitution is cold, they should drink a syrup made from honey, almonds, or secania seeds, and also take a medium-strength aromatic wine that is between old and new. They should also be advised to eat little food. And give them foods such as chicken eggs and canebir (a type of herb), and also small birds, that is, sparrows, and the young of doves.
And they should drink more than they eat on the day of the nosebleed and bloodletting. In some people, it is recommended to give them a drink made from tyriaca alfaroch (a type of herb), or a medicine made from musk (a type of perfume), or aleselith (a type of herb) before the nosebleed, or after bloodletting, to strengthen their main limbs and thin their blood. They should not drink it hot.
On nosebleeds without scarification. Ventosae, which are without incision, are placed on the parietal, spleen, podagra, abdomen, umbilicus, and renal areas, as well as the perineum and anchored peg: because these parts do not tolerate incisions made upon them.
And they are not sought through these, except for attachment of blood from a limb to a limb: such as we place a ventosae on the breasts in the case of nasal bleeding. And we use them to dissolve the cold ventosities that have formed in a limb due to freezing: such as we place a ventosae on the abdomen and umbilicus. For indeed, they rarefy the limb, and warm it, and remove pain because they have dissolved that ventosity.
They are also placed on the kidneys when there is a stone or rock in them. For perhaps by virtue of their attraction they may open the obstruction, or remove the stone from its place.
And similarly, when it is placed on the parietal and spleen in both places where ventosity needs to be drained from them.
And these ventosae are administered empty with only a small incision. And sometimes they are administered with fire.
And sometimes they are administered full of warm water in pleurisy: and this is that the ventosae be filled with warm water alone, or with water in which herbs have been boiled that are suitable.
The form of a ventosae administered with fire.
Let the width of its mouth be two open fingers, according to how we have shaped it: and let its depth be half a palm: and let there be on its side in the place that is approximately in the middle of it, a small hole, according to the size that enters it: let it be made of air simultaneously, or citrine, coarse margin, linen, equal, clean: so that it does not hurt the limb at its position on top of it: and let there be in the middle of it a transverse rod from air, or iron, where the candle is placed with fire.
And now this sponge becomes very large and much larger than we have described, and somewhat smaller than the one we mentioned, according to his illness and age who uses it.
For boys and those who are thin, other sponges are used, which are not as large as those for men and people with thick bodies.
However, the quality of applying this sponge with fire to a limb is that you should light the linen with fire from flax cloth properly, or a small candle from earthenware: and place it on the middle of the transverse strip which is in the middle of the sponge, so that the fire may be applied to the lower part of the sponge, so as not to burn the body of the sick person.
Then it is placed on the limb: and the finger is on the hole that I mentioned, until we hold the sponge: while we need it, we remove the finger, and the steam comes out through that hole, and the sponge dissolves immediately.
Then again with fire according to its proper amount, and repeat it if you need it.
But in the sponge that is administered in the illness of pleurisy with water, there is no transverse strip, nor hole: and it is not administered unless it is filled with water, and placed on the limb only.
And this is its shape.
And this sponge, the larger it is, the better it can hold much water.
¶ On the hanging of Sanguisugarum.
Sanguisugae are not administered in many places, except in those limbs where it is impossible to place the sponges, due to their size, such as the lip, and the gum, and similar things. Or in a limb stripped of flesh, such as the finger, and the nose, and similar things.
The quality of their use is: that they come from bloodsuckers which are in sweet waters, clean from corruption.
Then they should be released during the day and night in sweet water, until they are hungry, and nothing remains in their stomachs. Then the body will be evacuated first with phlebotomy, and with ventosis. Then wipe away the weak member, until it reddens. Afterwards, they will be placed on top of it.
When they are filled and fall, and suction of the location with ventosis is possible, then it is more appropriate for healing: and if not, then wash the location with vinegar. Then with much water, and rub, and express it.
If the course of blood continues after the death of bloodsuckers, and it is dripping: then pour cold water into linen cloth, and place it on top, until the dripping is cut off.
If the blood multiplies, then powder on top of it zeig tritum, or galls, and similar to them from stiptics: until the blood is cut off.
Or they are placed on top of the location of peeled beans: and they are released, until the beans stick in the location, because the blood is cut off.
And if necessary is repetition of bloodsuckers, when it is possible, change them.
But if bloodsuckers are prevented from suspension, then wash the location with fresh blood. Or put clay in locations, until something comes out of the blood. Then they are placed, because they when feel something from the blood, stick immediately.
When you want them to fall out, sprinkle some powdered aloe, salt, or ash on them, and they will fall out immediately.
This chapter is also often necessary in the art of medicine, and it is the restoration of fractures and dislocations of bones that have occurred by accident.
Know, O Sons, that fools among physicians and the common people, and those who have never examined an ancient book nor read a letter from it, boast of this chapter.
And for this reason, this method is private in our earth's sciences. And I have never benefited from it at all, and I have not acquired that which I have acquired except through the length of reading ancient books, and the study beyond their understanding, until I extracted knowledge of it from them.
Then I adhered to it by experiment and study throughout my life.
And now I have described to you in this chapter all that it contains of my knowledge: and on what my experiment has passed over, after I have abbreviated it for you, and relieved it from the burden of length, and abbreviated it at the end of abbreviation, and shown it at the end of declination: and I have formed in it many forms from the forms of instruments that are administered in it, since it is from the addition of declination, as I did in two preceding chapters.
Chapter II.
It is necessary for us to say in the prologue of this chapter, the main terms and headings, about which understanding requires the craftsman to be at a position above their truth: namely, so that you and those who are ready know or learn this noble art, and others from you.
I say, therefore, that when it happens to someone a fracture, or dislocation, or twist, or accident: then it is necessary to go quickly in the first place to bleed him, and to solve him, or both at once, if something does not prohibit it, such as weakness of strength: or he is that to whom something happens from those boys, or old man decrepit: or is time of very hot heat, or very cold cold greatly.
Then he should be content with his food, cool herbs, and meat of birds, and sheep: and prohibit wine, and coarse meat, and filling from food and all food that fills the veins with blood. Until when he is secure from the hot abscess, and does not fear the effusion of matter to the member: then the sick one should return to his first regimen with which he was accustomed.
Therefore when he begins to restore his broken jaw, then it is necessary for the sick one to be fed with nutritious food in great quantity, coarse, heavy, in which there is viscosity: such as made from cooked wheat with water, and rice, and heads, and feet, and bellies of suckling animals, and eggs, and fresh fish: and thick wine, and similar to those. For with this regimen the fracture is coagulated faster, and better.
And know that it is impossible for broken bones in men who are in their prime and the elderly to always be united and consolidated according to their natural form, due to the dryness of their members: and those which are from them at the end of the period of healing are consolidated and united like the bones of small children.
However, nature connects something similar to glue to the broken bone from all parts, in which there is thickness, which adheres and binds it, until they are united and bound together again, until it comes to the end of strength and firmness, as it was in the beginning, until something does not prevent it from performing its functions: and for this reason it is necessary to place nourishment for the weak foods, in which there is heaviness, and viscosity, and thickness, as we said.
And know that the appearance of fractures is different, according to the diversity of the members: for the fracture of the leg is different from the fracture of the skull: and the fracture of the ribs is different from the fracture of the backbone: and similarly all other members exist differently one from another: and I come with the remembrance of all the species of fractures exposed in their respective chapters, distinct from one another. And the species of fracture of bone are also diverse in themselves.
For it is broken into a curved shape, besides which stars occur in it. And sometimes the fracture of it is according to the length of the bone: and its splinters, that is, stars, and additions proceeding, as they are in a reed, when it is fitted with a knife for writing. And not proceeding: and it is a fracture with a wound and tearing in the head: and it is a fracture of a small fissure.
And every kind has its own proper talent or instrument for its restoration, according to how it will come back into memory, distinguished in its own places.
And from the fact that a bone fracture is known, its twist and elevation are also known; and its appearance to the sense and the sound when you grasp it with your hand.
Therefore, when there is no twist apparent in the place, nor a sound at your touch when you grasp the bone with agitation, and you do not find a weak great pain: then it is not a fracture, but possible that there is a twist or small fissure. Therefore, it does not need to be moved with your hand and completely compressed, indeed put on top of it from the medicines, of which its memory comes after the moment that fits the place: then it is bound tightly with a thin bandage.
And know that when the place is bent and split into two, besides what happens to it, indeed all part is removed from its comparison: then you should begin with your hour to correct it, equalizing it before it happens to it hot abscess.
But if a hot abscess happens to it, then leave it for several days until the abscess is quiet. Then equalize it according to whatever manner can from alleviation and talent.
And know that the restoration of it, and its equalization, is easier than bone in which happen afflictions.
Then bind it, according to what comes to you memory of it.
But if there are afflictions in the bone, then it is necessary to extend this broken member from two parts, if hand is, or foot: or with your hand, if the member is small: or with two ropes, or with rope and hand.
And let your position be where you place the member on an equal place, according to its natural shape, until when the parts of the member are extended: then try, that you make those additions with all ingenuity, and according to whatever manner you can in their places: and beware according to your strength, lest any pain or injury occur through your operation, and try according to your strength, that you apply one of two bones with its partner, according to better forms.
And at that hour, you must attempt and touch it with your own hand. If therefore you see something different there, correct it, and make it equal by the quantity of your strength.
And beware of strong extension and strong compression, as many fools do. For often they cause to occur through that operation of theirs a hot abscess, or contraction in the member: as we have already seen that often from their operations.
Then after the equaling and decent operation, and the binding of that member, and its quietness, and tranquility: and warn the weak one on it. And make him beware, that he not move it in his own hours of wakefulness, and his sleep at its revolution, and its agitation, and its excretion, and all its movements with his last strength. And that he beware, that the position of the member be not a position with which pain follows. That is, because when he feels pain in the position of the member, or injury: then it is necessary, that he change it to another position from that with which he does not feel pain.
And beware with him, that that position be equal, straight: so that no twisting occur in the member when it is restored.
The quality of the constriction of the broken limb, as I have described it.
You know that broken limbs vary in their size, and their magnitude, and their form.
Therefore, for those that are small, such as the arm, and the finger, and the little finger, and similar to them, it is necessary that the wrapping of the soft cloth should be thin and delicate. But for those that are large, such as the thigh, and the leg, it is necessary that the wrapping should be wide and hard.
Because a broad ligament connects the large limb and binds it from all sides evenly, so that it does not enter it with a stain.
Then after your evacuation, you should place a suitable plaster on it, in soft wool over the place of the fracture itself. Then you should wrap the ligament over the place of the fracture itself with three or four bandages, according to what the limb deserves: and press your hand slightly with the ligament.
Then go with it to the upper part from the place of the fracture, and press less than your previous binding, which you bound the place of the fracture. Then stretch yourself with the bandage away from the place of the fracture slightly, and soften the constriction gradually, until you take out a large piece from the healthy place.
Then take another clean bandage, and wrap it again over the place of the fracture with bandages. Then go with the bandage to the lower part from the fracture. And your operation should be in the constriction of the bandage and its softening, according to what we said in the first upper bandage.
Then place between the folds of a soft cloth or cloth, with which you will equalize the crookedness of the fracture, if there is crookedness in it; and if not, you will not place anything on it.
Then fold over another cloth on top of it. Afterwards, quickly place small, well-made stars on top of these folds, if there is no inflammation or heat in the wound.
But if there is inflammation or an abscess in it, then place on top of it what will sit on that abscess and remove the inflammation, and let it be left for several days. Then tie over it then the stars.
And the stars should be made from the flat parts of a cane, smoothly shaped, wisely formed: or they should be made from the wood from which brushes are made, that is, from pine, or gerade, that is, from the branches of a palm tree, or calingi: and the size of all stars should be according to this form, and the same figure.
However, it is necessary that the star that is placed on top of it should be a little thicker and wider than the other stars: and the length of the star should be according to what can be tolerated by the limb from its size and strength.
Then tie over the stars with another cloth, according to the first tie. Then tie over it with threads wisely, as we said about the first tie: and it is so that your tie should be above the place of the fracture more: and the further it is from the fracture, the less the tie.
And it is necessary that the threads should be of medium thickness and fineness, and they should be made of soft linen.
Because if the threads are thick, as I saw from the operation of foolish people who use their own threads made from twisted linen ropes, there is a great mistake: because the tie falls off with them outside of quality.
And thin threads no longer come together: for you will not obtain through a narrow opening that which you wish.
It is not necessary for it to be between the stars and the stars less than a finger's width.
But if the weak one is injured through the extremities of the stars after the narrow opening in healthy places: then place under them from the soft wool, or the dyed wool, until nothing is injured from it.
But when there is a fracture with a wound, and disruption occurs in the skin, I will come with remembrance of it in the chapter according to singularity.
And you should know that not every broken limb needs to be bound with stars from the first day. Which is, because the limb when it is large, does not need to be placed above it stars, unless after five days, or seven, or more, according to your security from the event of hot pus.
And this is the method of plasters, which the ancients placed on a fracture and dislocation.
¶ The common method of the plaster, restoring a fracture, suitable for many constitutions, especially women and children: because it is from that which does not bind with heat, nor cold.
And it is, that you take from the dust of the mill, and is the marrow of the flour which hangs in the walls of the mill near the moving millstone: and make it thus, except that you grind it with the shell: and place the confection of it not thick, nor thin. Then use it.
¶ Another method of the plaster, restoring a fracture, and dislocation, and twisting. Take ammonium, and laudanum, and acacia, and enulae, and mugath: and suc, of each ana ʒ X myrrhae, and both aloes ana ʒ V and alethil ʒ XX they are all ground, and ground with the shell: and mixed with water alethil: or with the shell if the constitution of the weak is heated. Then use this plaster. For it is of good composition, it heals broken bones quickly, and benefits many people.
Another method of plaster, which also heals fractures and twists. Take mugwort, mess, and tall white lilies, of each ana ʒ X myrrh, and both kinds of aloes ana ʒ V acaciae ʒ VI boli armeni ʒ XX, they should all be ground thoroughly, sieved, and made into a paste with water, or egg white: and administer.
Another method of plaster for joining broken bones and separating them from their places: and it soothes the pain caused by them, and the crack in the bone, and the fracture. Take shredded wool, and immerse it in vinegar, and boiled oil: and place it on the spot.
In this plaster there is no power of healing, but it is good for soothing hot abscesses: and it expels pain properly.
Another method of plaster, which heals a broken bone. Take the leaves of wild figs and sycamore: and grind all of them, and make a plaster from both.
Another method of shortened plaster, administered for the healing of broken bones: and when you want the resolution of remaining abscesses. Take the root of tall lilies, and chamomile, and flowers of violets, and flour of herbs, of each ana partem unam: they should all be ground, and made into a paste with wine, if there is not a heated member.
If indeed it is heated, then make that with water of coriander wet, or with water, and use it.
This is another method of preparing a plaster for the more forceful resolution of a hard abscess that occurs during the restoration of a member. Recipe for the roots of althea, and the seeds of linseed, and balm, and melilot, and savory, and violets, and chamomile, all in equal parts, grind them all, and mix with water of willow, or with sweet water, or with wine. All of that according to the warmth of the member, and the peacefulness of its heat.
Hippocrates indeed did not say in his book that a poultice should be placed on the broken member during its restoration, unless it is made of a clay and oil: nothing else: and he said that it should be between the thickness and thinness.
Galen, however, saw that things should be placed on the broken member during its restoration, in which there is a drying out of heat, such as myrrh, and aloes and frankincense, and similar to those which we have mentioned.
This is the method of preparing a plaster that brings together an injury and pain. Recipe for mugwort, and chickpeas, and human hair cuttings, or the feathers of a bird, and althea, and equal parts of salt: grind them all, and sift them, and make into a plaster.
However, the amount that is necessary, so that it remains a bandage, then dissolves, is such that you should consider at that time, if there does not occur to the sick pain, nor itching, nor moves the broken bone from its place: then do not dissolve it for many days. If however it happens to him in the place of intense itching, or pain that does not quiet down, or inflation: then hurry, and dissolve it in the hour itself, and remove the plaster from him: and take a soft cloth, or a mild sea sponge, wet: and immerse it in warm water, and wash with it the place, until the itching is quieted, and the pain sits.
If however it happens to him in the place of intense itching, or pain that does not quiet down, or inflation: then hurry, and dissolve it in the hour itself, and remove the plaster from him: and take a soft cloth, or a mild sea sponge, wet: and immerse it in warm water, and wash with it the place, until the itching is quieted, and the pain sits. Then let the member rest for one hour. Then place on it a piece of linen soaked in vinegar and oil, or rose oil: and tie it overnight, until you are secure from the hot abscess, and let the inflation of the member rest, and the pain be removed.
Then repeat it to the tight bandage and a small plaster: and do not bind it with your first tight binding, and the thin ones with it, until it is healed.
If you see that the abscess, redness, pain, inflation, and all other symptoms have been completely removed, and you need a plaster and bandage, then repeat it as you did in the first place equally.
If none of those things happen to the member that we said, then do not unbind it, unless after three days, or four, or five, or seven. And when it is unbound for twenty days all of that, according to what appears to you from the solution of the member, as we said, until when the fracture sticks, and the coagulation of flesh approaches over it: also add at that time in the bandage more than your first binding entirely: and also add at that time in the feeding of the sick, according to what preceded the remembrance of it.
But if you see the place of the fracture already dried up, and wasted more than it should be: then know that nourishment is prevented from coming to it. Therefore foment it with warm water at every place where you unbind it, and let it be in all three days, and slightly loosen the bandage.
Through this operation nourishment comes to the member, and it is healed quickly.
But that which the stupid restorers do from the fracture of the member, when it is not restored in the first place, according to what ought to be, and is restored according to its tortuosity, is an error from their operation, and great fear: and if it were right, they would say that in their books, and have operated with it.
And I have not seen any trace of that among them at all, and it is indeed better that it not be done.
On the formation of an accidental deformity in the head.
The types of fractures are diverse, and their shapes are many, and their causes are distinct.
For a fracture is that which is caused by a blow with an axe: and the blow removes the entire bone until it reaches the periosteum, which is beneath the bone, just like an ax in wood: and because of this, this type of fracture is called Axial.
Or a sword cuts off something from a bone, and it cuts its face, and the cut does not penetrate to the very end of it: and this type of fracture is called Kalgan, that is, Luxation absolutely.
And there is a wound of two fractures, either large or small.
And a fracture is that which is crushing or grinding: and its cause is a blow with a stone, or a fall on a stone, or something similar.
And this fracture is also either penetrating, which approaches the periosteum, which is beneath the bone: or it is in the face of the bone: and this wound is of two fractures, either small or large.
And a fracture is that which is hidden in the bone in its fineness of hair: and it is a small crack, and because of this, this type of fracture is called Capillary.
And from these is a fracture that is caused by an accident, or by a blow with a stone, and similar things that make the lamina of the bone enter into its interior, and it becomes a hollow in that place: just like what happens to copper pots when they are hit, and part of them enters into their interior.
This is especially true for the heads of moist bones, such as the heads of children.
All these species of fractures have separate treatments, and I will return with a remembrance of the whole in its place.
And we know all these species of fractures by examining them, and inquiring about them with probes, and removing the rotten flesh that is on them.
The species of capillary fracture is known by this, that it is scraped over the bone, and cleaned, and smeared with cauterizer on top: for the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of fractures, first consider the symptoms of the infirm person: then if you see from the symptoms that it clearly indicates great fear, such as vomiting cholera, and extension, and loss of understanding, and loss of voice, and syncope, and acute fever, and exit of the eyes, and redness of them, and similar symptoms in many positions, undoubtedly he is not cured: and if you see symptoms that do not frighten you, and you hope for salvation, then begin his treatment.
That is, if he comes to you wounded in the first place with his wound: and this is in winter days, then it is necessary for you to strive for the removal of the bone before the fourteenth day according to every position.
And if it is in summer days, then it is necessary for you to quickly remove the bone before the seventh day, before that which is under the bone from the bandage rots, and those symptoms occur that we have mentioned.
That is, if the fracture of the bone has already reached the bandage touching the brain, and it is with minutiae, and attraction: then it is necessary for you to cut the part that is broken and worn, according to what I tell you.
And it is, to cut the head of the wounded: and uncover over the mouth as much as possible for you: and according to the shape of the wound, and what is light on the weak.
If however it happens to you at the detection of bone bleeding blood, or hot abscess: then place it with what is necessary. And it is, to fill the place with infused cloths in wine, and rose oil: and make the wound rest, until the abscess sets, and you are secure from bleeding. Then begin in the cure of the bone, and its removal.
And that is done according to one of two ways.
One method indeed is, to cut the bone with a strict-bladed incisor: and this is its shape.
Another method is, to administer another incisor after the first one a little further: and this is its shape.
Then also administer another incisor even wider than the second.
And the second method is, that you have a number of incisors of different kinds: some of which are wider to some, and some of them shorter to some: and they are in the last extremity of their sharpness, and they are made of iron, or fuled: and use ease in percussion on the incisor, so that it does not shake the head, and it does not hurt it.
But if the bone is strong, hard: then it is necessary, that you pierce in the circumference of it, before you administer incisors, with drills called Terebra not deepening: and they are not so called, because they do not pass beyond the end of the fleshy part to that, which is after it: because Terebro is the round extremity on top of it, which is under the sharp head, similar to the edge, and a small circle prevents submerging, and passing through the thickness of the bone.
And it is fitting for you to receive from these drill bits a large number, each of which corresponds to the thickness and density of the bone, until you have in your possession every skull drill: whose sharpness in length and brevity should correspond to the thickness and density of that skull.
This is the form of three kinds of drills, or trephines.
The quality of drilling around a broken bone is as follows: you should place the drill on the bone, and rotate it with your fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated. Then change the drill to another location, and place what is between all the holes in the thickness of the radius, or approximately that.
Then cut with the incisor that is between all the holes from the bone: and make it as thin as possible above that from the end of its lightness, as we said, until you remove the roots of the bone, or by your hand, or with some other instruments which you have prepared for that: such as delicate shears and forceps.
And it is necessary to guard the eyes with every caution, lest the drill or incisor touch anything from those.
When therefore you are drilling the bone and it has been separated from those, if it is continuous with that, and you have extracted it, it is necessary to cut, and equal the extremity of it which remains in the bone with another similar incisor. However, it should be thinner and more delicate than other incisors.
If there remains anything small and brittle from the bones, then take it with facility, with that which is at hand from your instruments. Then care for the wound after that with bandages and ointments which we said.
And another method of surgery is easy and very far from fear: which Galen spoke of and praised it greatly: and this is his saying. It is necessary for you to first begin to uncover the part of the bone from the place where the fracture is more violent and more obvious: until when you have uncovered that part, and have placed the extremity of this lens-shaped incisor under it, whose form is as follows.
And the lens-shaped part does not cut anything: and the sharp part of it on both sides of it advancing in length, as you see: so that the lens-shaped part is leaning against the bone, with its sharp part facing the bone.
Then strike on the incisor from one side with a small mallet, until you have cut through the whole bone with ease, as it revolves: and you will be secure from the cloth, that nothing accidental will happen to it, which you fear absolutely.
And if the doctor were not more foolish than men, and more ignorant of it, and not asleep, then if there remained anything attached to the bone from the cloth in certain places, he would cut it off from it with the extremity of this lens-shaped incisor, and free it from it with ease. For it is freed from it without harm, and without fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate to the cloth, and what is cut off from the bone is its face, and there remain in it roughness and fine scratches: then you must smooth that roughness, and eradicate those fine scratches with fine rasps from which you prepared a variety of different quantities, so that it may be possible for you to apply to them in every suitable place and more rectangular and rectified forms, according to what leads you to the operation, and the fractured bone, and its figure. And it is necessary that administrators in your ratio, where in the first place the root's mouth, more widely than those sharpeners. Then use after him with a finer one.
And it is necessary that administrators in your ratio, where in the first place the root's mouth, more widely than those sharpeners. Then use after him with a finer one. And do not cease to do that according to continuity, until you reach administering thinner and finer than all of them.
In each of the remaining cracks, hair-thin, and fine fracture, it is necessary that you administrator care, according to that which leads to its correction.
And there is a matter which does not hide over all, to whom in this art there is anything study, and it has stood above that which we wrote, and showed in large fractures.
But if the cloth is detected to retain when you eradicate the root: then it is necessary that you take the cloth linen, according to the quantity of the wound, and immerse it in rose oil, and place it on top of the wound opening. Then take another cloth doubled, or tripled, and immerse it in wine and rose oil, and place it on top of the first cloth: and make it as easy as possible on top of that, so that it does not weigh down with it.
Then administer above it the wide bandage: and do not tie it, unless by the quantity which holds the wound only: and let it go with this care on one day, or two days, until you are secure from hot abscess. Then dissolve it, and administer after that medicines with which is excessive dryness: such as the roots of lilies, and flour of herb, and powder of turpentine, and aristolochia, and similar to them: and it is, that you make from these medicines powder, which is powdered on the wound as are dry.
Universally apply this medicine to that area for its property to soothe and not to bite or cause pain. And cauterize according to your skill, so that the wound in your treatment is clear: neither is there any dirt from the ointment, nor filth.
And cauterize according to your skill, so that the wound in your treatment is clear: neither is there any dirt from the ointment, nor filth. And do not release the virus to gather in that area at all: for when the virus gathers on the brain cloth, it corrupts it and rots it, and brings great harm upon the weak after that: and now it happens in the head, when the mouth is cleaned by it, especially when its care is neglected, blackness on its surface.
Therefore consider then, if such things happen to the weak as we have said, know that it is certainly harmful.
And if blackness does not occur, except from the medicine that is placed on it, and it is in the power of that medicine to cause that blackness: then you must take from honey one part, from rose oil three parts, and linen cloth with it. Then place it on the head: afterwards care for it with the species of cures that come together, until it is healed.
§ On the restoration of the nose when it breaks.
Know that the nose is not broken except from its two upper parts at once, or one of them: because it is two bones: for below it is cartilaginous, it does not break, and nothing happens to it except wear and tear, and twisting, and swelling.
If one of the two parts is broken, then you must insert a small finger into the nostril, and equal that break with your index finger and thumb bent, until the nose returns to its natural shape: and do this with skill and ease. And beware, lest that pain of yours occur through your operation.
But if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose, and it does not reach that finger: then it is necessary to equalize the end of the radius, where there is a small swelling.
But if the fracture is in two parts, then do the same as that: and hasten with its restoration on the first day of the fracture, if it is possible. And if not, then after the seventh or tenth day, at the heat of abscesses, in quiet.
Then introduce into the end of the nose a linen cloth, if the fracture is in one part: or introduce two linen cloths if the fracture is in two parts: and let the swelling be of such quantity that it fills the nasal opening.
And some of the ancient healers said that linen cloths should be soaked in butter and changed every day. But that does not seem to me, rather it is necessary, that the linen cloth be soaked in white of egg, completed with flour of mill. Then let go the linen cloth, until the bone hardens and the cartilage becomes hard.
And sometimes a goose quill is introduced into the place of the linen cloth, after it has been covered with a soft cloth: and it is made that it holds the nasal fracture more strongly, and that it does not hinder the sick person from breathing.
And this matter is not necessary. If you wish, do that: and if you wish, make linen cloths.
But if it happens to the nose again while you are operating on the abscess, nose plasters with lead, or with cotton dissolved in rose oil, or with a little from dayquilion.
If, however, a hot abscess does not occur, then it is necessary to apply a plaster made with flour of sesame, and a powder of frankincense mixed with egg white. Then place a soft bandage on top of it, and do not bind the nose at all.
If, however, the bones of the nose are broken or crushed, then it is necessary to cut through them and remove them with the tools that are suitable for them. Then close the cut with a suitable ointment or plaster to heal and solidify it.
If, however, a wound occurs between the nose and the nostril, then it is necessary to close it with lint and give a lead tube until it heals.
CONCERNING THE RESTORATION OF THE LOWER JAW, WHEN IT IS BROKEN
When the lower jaw is broken, and the fracture is not accompanied by a wound, observe whether the fracture is deformed only and not broken into two pieces, and treat it to the interior: then its diagnosis is easy.
Therefore, if the fracture is in the right jaw, then insert the index finger of the left hand into the weak bone: similarly, if the fracture is in the left jaw, then insert the index finger of the right hand: and push the roughness of the fracture outward with your other hand from the interior part of the bone properly and evenly.
If the fracture of the jaw has already been separated into two pieces, then it is necessary to apply extension from both parts according to the straightness until it is possible to make an even match.
If, however, the teeth have already been moved or broken, then tie them with gold, silver, or thread wire. Then place a broken leather bandage on the fractured jaw. Then place a double piece of cloth on top of it, and place a large well-made starry (asterism) shape on the cloth: or an equal piece of skin from the sole of the foot, in the length of the jaw.
Then bind it from above, according to how the bandage of that is prepared for you, and its application suits him, until it does not destroy: and instruct the sick person to use it with tranquility and quietness: and place his drinks gently.
But if you estimate that something is already changing the shape by some means: then hurry, and dissolve it on the third day. Then correct what has been changed from it, and make plasters of it from the flour of the millstone, with egg white, or with sisami flour, after you have removed the leather bandage: and place a soft cloth on the plaster.
While therefore it remains attached to that plaster on top of it, and the disposition of the bone is not changed, leave it, so that it does not dissolve, until it heals: or bind the fracture. For often this fracture is bound for three weeks.
But if meanwhile a warm abscess occurs, then administer what we said often in the sedation of it, until that abscess is removed.
And if the fracture is with a wound, consider. For now the fragment is separated from the bone, or from the splint: then carefully remove you in this, so that you take those fragments of the splint with it which suit you in the removal of them from the instruments.
But if the wound opening is tight, then enlarge it with a lancet according to the amount of your need.
Then, when you have removed that stitching, and nothing remains from it, smear the wound opening, if it is large: and if not, place on top of it an emplaister that is suitable for that, and let it heal, until it is healed.
On the restoration of the breastbone, when it is broken:
The breastbone is most often broken from the front part on the side of the arm, and its fracture occurs in one of three ways:
For indeed it is broken and separated into two, except that some stitches may occur in it: and it is easier for its restoration.
Or rather, so that something happens to the bone of the stitches: and it is more difficult for its restoration.
Or rather, so that there is a fracture with a wound.
And operation in it when the fracture is without a wound, is, that you make present to be two assistants, that one of them holds the instrument that follows the broken breastbone, and the other extends the neck towards the part.
Then equal the fracture with your fingers, until its form is made, according to what it should be: and there should not be in it prominence, nor concavity.
If you need more extension, then it is necessary that you place under the weak sphere of the infirm a ball from cloth, or wool: and its size should be according to the amount of your necessity: and extend, and raise the breastbone, and cut the ball by your hand, until it is equal the fracture, according to what it should be.
If you cannot pull the end of the breastbone to the outside: because it reaches deep: then it is necessary that the infirm be bent over their shoulder: and place under their arm a pillow in size, and press the assistant's arm to the lower parts, until the breastbone that is in deep is raised upwards: and then correct the fracture, and make it equal with your fingers.
If you feel a fracture in the coccyx and it moves, then it is necessary to make an incision over it and extract the broken coccyx with ease.
If it is retained in the bone, then use your skills in making an incision on it with one of the prepared incisors, after you have placed the tool that will hold the fracture under the coccyx. This tool is made of wood or iron. And this is its shape.
It is shaped like a spatula without a hollow.
Its width should be according to the size you need from the size and shape of the bone. Its length, however, should also be according to what is possible for you in the operation.
It should have two ends, as you see: one wide and the other narrow.
If the wound that you cut when extracting the fractured bone is wide and you want to prevent infection, then gather two flaps of the wound with stitches.
If the fracture is small and you fear infection, then fill the wound with cloths and powder according to the size of the cut.
If infection occurs, then pour cloth in rose oil, vinegar, and wine, and place it on the wound.
The stitching of the bone when there is no wound and no cut is made by placing a plaster made from flour and egg white on the bone. And place a soft bandage over it. Then place a sphere under its tip if you need that. Then take the reamer, that is, the drill used by the Saracens, which should be long and wide: its width should be the size of one palm or about that. Then place a doubled-over sponge on the gauze and apply the plaster. Then take a thin, flexible plate, whose width is three finger widths, and similarly in length. Then wrap it in cloth. Then wrap the cloth with the plate in the location of the injury that falls over the fracture and the wound. Then place the bandage over the fracture as it is rolled, and wrap it around his neck, and under the healthy tongue, and under the unhealthy tongue: and reduce it to all parts, and as you see that the bandage holds the fracture properly: and this is what should not be hidden from you, and everything, so that the gauze does not move above the broken bone. And for this reason, you should look at the unhealthy one every day. Therefore, when the ligament is softened, and you see the gauze is already moving: then correct it, and tighten the ligament.
Then place the sick person's pillow on his back, and place under his tongue, in his sleep at night, a small sponge, so that when he is lifted up, his helper is raised from his side. The fracture of the backbone is therefore raised by the elevation of the arm.
Or bind his arm to his neck: and do not release the ligament, if it does not occur in the place of accident from scratching, or from an abscess, until twelve days.
Then reapply the plaster, if you see his face towards it. And add in the bandage, and let him go, until he is restored and congeals.
And the fracture of the backbone is indeed bound and strengthened as much as possible in twenty-eight days: and sometimes it happens in some men in less than that.
Translation: "Of the Restoration of Fractured Spoons.
It rarely breaks the spoon, and not in its wide place; and only the edges of it are not broken from it.
Therefore, when it breaks from that place and in the middle of it, and it is not known except by touch: then according to what is the figure of the fracture, try its preparation. And reduce it back to its natural shape in every way possible, which is possible for you.
Then place it on the millstone's floury place with egg white, and with wool, and place above it a thin layer of cloth doubled over. Then place on top of it a wide shallow dish from thin board according to the amount of the spoon all over, or a little larger than that.
But if indeed there is a hollow in any place of the spoon under the dish, then make it equal with soft wool until the dish goes down according to equality.
Then bind it above with strong adhesive tape, with a proper constriction and strength of the dish, until it is not moved from its place.
And consider the bandage on every day. Whenever the bandage is softened, bind it, and make the dish equal if it is moved from its place: and let the weak one lie on its healthy side.
And the spoon indeed will be restored in twenty days, or in twenty-five days.
Therefore when this number is completed, then dissolve the bandage: and you will be safe. For it is from the bones whose union is not to be feared, nor their dissolution.
If, however, it proceeds from the bone fragment and pierces under the skin: then cut above it, and remove it. And do what we said in the break of the collarbone from the suppression of abscesses with heat, if anything comes from it.
Concerning the restoration of a broken chest.
The chest sometimes breaks in the middle of itself, and that rarely happens. Its extremities indeed break very much, and are crushed from its accidents.
When its middle is broken, which inclines to the lower parts, and pain and difficulty in breathing, and coughing: and perhaps vomit blood, and the concavity in the bone fractured is not hidden from sensation, Its restoration is that it should bend itself weakly on its back: and place between its spatulas a pillow.
Then press its shoulders, and gather its ribs from both parts or sides with hands: and adjust in its balance, according to every mode as much as possible and it suits, until it returns the shape of the bone, according to what it should be.
Then place on it a plaster and bandage, and place above it a star from thin board of willow, or of cherry, and from them similar in lightness, after you have wrapped it in cloth. Then adjust in binding it above the broken bone, so that it is not removed: and go with the bandage according to its roundness several times, and bind it tightly with a suitable tension.
Then consider the bandage in every hour, and as often as it becomes soft, bind it: and if necessity of it provokes its solution at pruritus, or corrosion which happens in place, or pain, or abscess: then hurry, and solve it, and remove the plaster, and correct what happens with mode of cure of it.
Then reduce the plaster if you see that face: and attach it to a bandage until it heals.
On the Restoration of Noses, When They are Broken.
You know that the fracture of the noses does not occur except in places that follow the back, and from the ends of them from the front part. And it does not happen to them, except for that reason, because they are cartilaginous. And the knowledge of this is not hidden from the sense with the fingers in examination.
And its restoration is made so that the same fracture with fingers according to the possible mode, until it is equal to the figure, as it should be. Then plasters, and bandage the broken bone with a splint, if it needs that.
And if the fracture of the noses is inclined to the insides: then it happens to the weak pain, and puncture, as that puncture which happens to him who has pleurisy: because the bone pierces the membrane, and also to him it happens difficulty of breathing, and cough, and vomiting of blood: and this is difficult of cure.
And already the ancients have been skillful in that with many ingenuities: and from them are those who say, that you should place foods of the sick which generate inflammation and swelling, so that the belly is inflamed, and extended, and impelled the fracture to the outsides.
But we indeed abhor, that no cause quickly be made to do pus hot, if it does not happen. But if it has already happened, then you add in it.
And some of them said: it should be placed on the place ventosa, then it is sucked with strength, and it is similar to reasoning. However, it is feared that the roughness may draw excessive fluids to the site, due to its weak positioning.
And some of them said: it is necessary that the site be covered with wool that has already been immersed in warm oil; and they place cotton between the ribs, until it is filled: so that it may be a ligature equal when rolled according to its roundness.
Then the weak one is treated with the cure of pleurisy from food and medicine.
If the resistant thing hurts the weak one, whom he cannot bear, and the mouth presses the bandage with a puncture wounding, and we fear for the weak one: then it is necessary that we tear over the site, and remove from the broken rib. Then we place an instrument on it that preserves the siphon, of which the memory preceded: and we cut the bone with ease, and we cut it.
Then we gather two wound lips, if it is large with a stitch: and we treat it with plasters, until it is healed.
If an abscess occurs in the meantime, then hurry, and pour cotton in rose oil, and place it on the site: and the weak one is treated with what is appropriate for the abscess.
Meanwhile also it should be bandaged on the side over which he sleeps, until it is healed.
¶ On the restoration of the fracture of the spine of the back and neck.
Indeed, the bones of the neck sometimes suffer a fracture, and rarely they are worn out: and likewise the spines of the back also. When therefore it happens to someone, and you want to know whether he will be healed or not healed: then trust. If you see that his hands are already softened, stunned, and dead: and he cannot move them, nor extend them, nor contract them: and when you contract them with your fingers, and prick them with a needle, he does not feel it, and does not feel pain in them: then you know that he is not cured, and is in many cases mortal.
If he moves them, and feels contraction in his fingers and the prick: then you know that the neck of the bone is saved, and that the sick person will be cured with treatment.
If he has a similar softening of the spine like that, and you want to know if he will also be cured or not: then look at his feet: then if you see that they are softened, and that what happens in his hands also happens in them: then when he lies on his back, flatulence and excretion without volition come out: and when he lies on his stomach, excretion without volition comes out: and when he lies on his back and wants to defecate, but cannot: then you know that he is mortal. Therefore, do not labor in his treatment.
If indeed nothing happens to him from that, the condition is lighter.
And the cure for what happens from that is, to try to reduce the heat of the abscesses: so, to place on the worn spine only rose-colored oil: or with unguent saturated.
Place on it several times a day, until when the abscess of hot heat is sedated: then place on the one plaster strengthening, drying, and binding over it: and order the sick person to use rest and tranquility. And he should not sleep on the side where he found pain, until he is healed.
If it happens during the fracture of the scaphoid bone, or anything that is already separated from it: then it is necessary to withdraw from the skin and remove it. Then gather the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a stitch. Then care for it with some flesh, from the ointment, until it heals.
If indeed the last of the carpal bones is broken, and it is the end of the tail: then it is necessary to insert the thumb of your left hand into the anus, and equalize the fractured bone with your other hand, as much as possible, and with the second equality.
Then place it on top of it, and remove it: and care for the wound with the previous cure, until it heals.
¶ On the restoration of the ankle.
Chapter 11.
The bones of the ankle rarely break. If they break, then the fracture of them is not, except for the comminution at their extremities: and they are broken in length, and incline to the insides: and a painful point occurs in that place, and a pricking: and it amazes the leg that breaks.
And indeed, the restoration of it is, that you extend your hand over it, until you stand on the fracture as its figure is.
If the fracture is only at their extremities, then equalize that fracture, according to what is prepared for you from the equality, until it resembles its natural figure.
But if the fracture is in length, or it already inclines to the insides: then make the weak one lie on his belly, until preparation for the restoration of that fracture is made for you. When you have set the bone, apply a plaster to it: then place a splint on it, either of wood or of leather, and tie it up securely so that you do not fear the breaking of the fracture, nor the removal of the splint.
And when you have set the hollows of them with what will fill them, until the bandage covers them equally: and then command the sick person to lie on his back, or on his sound side.
But if an abscess should form on him, hot: then cease from extending it, and his restoration, until the abscess forms hot: and place on him what will sit on him, according to what preceded, then return to his restoration: and tie him as it is fitting.
But if indeed a splinter has entered into the bone, or it is broken, extract it.
Concerning the restoration of the fracture of the humerus.
The Adiutorium is that which is between the elbow and the head of the spatula.
If indeed it is broken, then its restoration is according to one of two methods.
One of which is: that you take a flat piece of wood of medium thickness, according to this form, which follows.
And two bandages are tied on both ends.
Then it is suspended from a raised place: and the sick person sits on a seat. Then he throws his broken arm on the wood, until it reaches the titillum of it, in which is attached the curve of the wood.
Then something heavy is hung over it, so that the servant extends it towards the lower parts. Then the physician equalizes the fracture with his hands at the same time, until the fracture returns, according to what is fitting.
Another method is to place the weak person in a supine position over their shoulder: and hang his hand from his neck with a bandage. Then instruct two assistants to hold one of them with the part above the fracture in their hands: and for the other to hold below it, and each of them to stretch towards their part.
And if you wish for a stronger extension, then bind under the fracture with a bandage, and above it with another bandage: and each of the two assistants will stretch towards their two parts.
If therefore the fracture is near the shoulder joint, then it is necessary to place one bandage under the armpit, and the other under the fracture towards the elbow.
And similarly if the fracture is near the elbow: then it is necessary to place the bandage on that spot, and on the elbow itself.
Then level the fracture with ease without labor, until when it is equal to the fracture according to what is necessary, and applies good application: then bind it, if no hot abscess occurs.
But indeed if a hot abscess occurs, then release the binding until the seventh day. And place over it wool soaked in sour wine and rose oil, until when the abscess is quiet: then bind it: and the method of binding it is to place a plaster on the fracture.
Then place an involution from new cloth over the plaster. Then attach the arm to the assistant himself, and place his hand open on his shoulder.
And place a cloth, and bind over the assistant's arm, so that the arm stands in the position of the stars: if nothing prevents you from him anything, nor anything is changed on you from the broken bone.
If you fear that something will be broken off from the bone and fall upon you, then use the stars (astrology): and it is that you place the broader and stronger star over the fracture itself. And place between every star's width the width of a finger, and let the length of the stars be according to the fracture with an addition of three fingers from all sides.
Then tie over the stars with the binding that I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
And it is that your binding should be over the place of the fracture tighter. And the more the fracture extends, the less the binding should be.
If therefore you see the position of the stars and the binding as we said, at the hour when you restore the limb, then do this: and if you fear a boil hot, then release the binding and the stars until the seventh day, as we said.
Then consider the bandage in all three days, so that it does not happen in the place of itching, or inflammation, or prevent the food to reach the limb, because of the excessive positioning of the binding. Correct therefore all that, according to what we said.
If indeed you are of trust, so that nothing happens from it: then do not release the bandage, except after three days or more.
And let the sleep of the sick person be on his back, and his hand on his stomach: and put under his support a cushion full of wool equally.
And consider in every hour of the night or day, so that the broken limb's figure is not released, or the bandage is softened. Correct therefore all that by your virtue.
And put the food of the sick person according to the order that we prescribed, so that the food is subtle in the first place, until he begins to close his mouth: then it is necessary, that you make his food thicker.
The custom for the knee and leg is to be bound for forty days. Therefore, it should then be dissolved, given a bath, and treated with ointments that heal it.
If the fracture is ugly and worn down, then do not dissolve the bandage and splints for fifty days and two months.
On the restoration of the arm fracture:
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the two forearms.
One of them is small and is that which follows the thumb. And the other is large and is that which is placed under the small part from below.
Perhaps only the larger forearm is broken, or the smaller one: and perhaps they are both broken at once.
When therefore the smaller forearm is broken above, then its restoration is easy, and its healing is easier.
And when the larger forearm is broken below, its fracture is bad, and its healing is difficult.
And worse it is, when both bones are broken at once.
If therefore the bone that is broken is the smaller forearm above, then it is fitting for the doctor at its restoration, to place a small extension with ease, until it becomes even.
But if the larger forearm is the one that is broken: then it is necessary to place a stronger bandage very much.
And it is necessary to place the shape of the hand at its restoration, and its extension extended over the sandbag. And the thumb of the hand should be higher than all the fingers: and the joint below all the fingers, or the rest, and the weak one sitting squarely on itself, and the sandbag in front of it, or directly against it, in height, so that the weak one does not suffer labor.
Then the assistant should extend his arm from the lower part, either with his own hand or with a ligament. And another assistant should extend from above in the same way.
Then the physician should equalize the jaw, until he reduces it to its best possible form.
If there are splinters in the fracture of the bone, then try to reduce all the fragments to their proper place by your strength.
But if it appears to be a separate splinter, and pierces the skin, and there is no hope of its restoration, then cover it over and remove it according to the method we mentioned for those things that were previously mentioned.
But if the fracture is with a wound, I have already treated that chapter, therefore take the treatment of that from there.
If a hot abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then make a linen cloth with a thick and thin layer of rose oil, and white chalk, and it should be medium between thickness and fineness: and bind the cloth over it with a fine binding, until when the abscess is calmed down: then remove the chalk, and place a prepared plaster made from flour millstone with egg white. Then place splints, and the splint that is placed on the fracture itself should be a little wider and stronger.
And you should know that the number of splints for the arm is six in many arrangements, whether it is a fracture in one fossa, or in two fossae at once.
Then place your binding over the stronger and more forceful place of the fracture, and a little more with the binding to the upper part of the fracture, or to its lower part: or place a softer binding for a short time, according to the previous mention in the beginning of the chapter.
And let there be cloths that are wrapped around the fracture, smooth, moist cloths: and not rough, harsh ones. And let there be a thread that is used to tie it from linen, a medium between thin and thick, as we have mentioned.
And consider the limb and the ligament after days. If something happens that requires correction, such as itching that occurs in the limb: then it is necessary to rub the limb with warm water until the itching subsides, and do not constrict the limb until it is calm, then repeat the bandaging.
If the bandage has already been made soft and the bone is already removed, and similar things have occurred: then correct that whole with your virtue, and consider again.
For if nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb because of the excess of bandaging, then it is necessary to make it soft for a short time, and leave it for several days until the nourishment reaches it, then bandage it again.
But if something does not happen to the sick person among those things that we have said, then it is not necessary to dissolve it, unless after twenty days, or about these.
Then hang the hand of the sick person around his neck. And let his neck be equal, and guard it with its own virtue from being moved. And make him sleep on his back.
And know that this fracture is restored in thirty days, or in thirty-two days: and perhaps it is restored in eighty days. All of that is according to the dispositions of the humors, and the dispositions of virtue.
¶ On the restoration of fractures Hand.
Know that it rarely occurs that the hand's blade and the fingers' knots break. And this does not happen to him unless by frequent rubbing.
Therefore, when the fracture of the foot or rubbing occurs, it is necessary for the invalid to sit in a chair: and there should be a seat in front of him according to equality. Then place his hand on it extended.
Then the servant extends the broken bones, and the physician adjusts them until they are united by a good union.
Then it is necessary to place a plaster and bandage, if there is no hot abscess. Then place a splint above according to the size of the wound, and you have already wrapped it in linen.
But if the fracture is towards the lower part of the plantar arch, then make a similar sphere from linen: and order the invalid to cover it with his own foot: then it is bound with a long cloth.
And let the splint be made of leather, in which there is softness, so that the leather may be applied to the body of the foot: and bind it according to what is necessary.
But if the fracture is towards the outside, then it is necessary: to place a splint above, and another from below in the foot: and let the hand be open straight. Then place a strap, as the hand is turned over: and extend it between the fingers with a ligament.
But if the fracture occurs to some of the finger's knots, then if it is the thumb, it will be adjusted according to what is necessary. Then it is bound with the foot: and if you wish, place a straight splint, small: so that the fracture may be raised, and not move.
If the fracture is in the remaining fingers, such as the middle, index, auricular, or anular, then it should be treated and bound with the healthy finger that follows it: or all should be bound according to continuity, and this is better. Or a small splint is placed over it, as we mentioned in the thumb.
And consider in your restoration, and after its arrangement with hot fomentations: and place it with what is necessary, when something happens from it, according to how its story repeats.
¶ On the Restoration of a Fractured Hip.
The hip bone often breaks, and is indicated by sensation: because it turns to the inner and posterior part.
And its restoration is done so that the ligament is bound above the fracture, and another ligament under the fracture. And the sick person lies face down.
Then the assistant stretches all the ligament to its part according to equality: and this, when there is a fracture in the middle of the bone.
If the fracture is near the root of the hip, then the ligament should be to the part of the comb, so that the extension falls upwards: and another ligament under the fracture.
And thus similarly if the fracture is near the knee, then the ligament near the knee should be, so that the extension is to the lower parts.
Then the physician equates the bone with both of his hands, until he reduces it according to the likeness of its natural shape: and joins the bone with a good connection.
Then you should place a plaster and bandage, if not an abscess happens to the member. If an abscess occurs in him: then let him be left for several days until the abscess becomes hot, and then return to your treatment.
However, its situation should be as follows. It is necessary to wrap the broken lower jawbone, that is, the bandage: and double it twice, or three times: and the excess should remain from it. Then wrap the leg until it reaches the heel at the base of the buttocks.
And insert a long rope between the hips and leg near the knee to the lower parts, and the ends of the rope come from the upper parts of the two parts. Then roll up the leg and hip that remains excessive from the bandage.
Then place on the hip in the place of the fracture itself small stars, and place an astella from them on the knee joint.
Then fill the spaces between the leg and hip with soft cloths, so that the bandage is equal.
Then begin with a strong bandage from the middle of the place of the fracture with three wraps, or four. And the more you extend from the place of the fracture with the rope, your bandage should be smaller and softer, and gentler.
Then tie to the two ends of the rope that you inserted between the hip and leg. Bind therefore with both three stars that are above. Then walk with the two ends of the rope to the lower parts, until it reaches the heel of the foot. And with both tie also the ends of the stars from the other side: so that the rope is not removed from its place.
Then let the bandage remain on it while it is there, so that corrosion does not occur to the member, nor abscess, nor inflammation, and similar things to them. If anything happens from that. Therefore, immediately with the solution of it, and correct that which has happened from it all, according to what we have said many times.
But if indeed a piece of bone is from a bone that pierces: then it is necessary for you to make it even, if it is possible for you. And if not, find over it, and remove it: and care for with him whose place it preceded, until he is healed.
And sometimes this hip fracture is bound, besides what is added to it, as we said in the support and arm.
However, in the restoration of a fracture thus broken, the lame does not occur. And if it is restored alone, besides what is applied to him the other leg, then it is necessary that he who owns it always limps.
And know that the hip is bound in fifty days, or a little is added to it, or a little is subtracted from it: all of this is according to the diversity of the constitutions, and the other arrangements.
Chapter on the restoration of the fracture of the knee joint.
Know that the knee joint rarely occurs fracture, but it often occurs to him wear.
But if indeed it happens to him fracture, then not unless either a crack, or a hole in his parts. And this is with wound, and without wound. And it stands over all of this with sense.
And its restoration is so, that it is made even what is broken from his parts with fingers, until it is gathered, and joined according to what is possible from the equality and facility, and the making.
Then place a plaster made from sisami flour or milled grain with white egg on it, and place a round star-shaped piece of cloth on top if you have it: and tie it above with a suitable binding.
Then consider all the arrangements that we have mentioned in the other fractures: as boils hot, and similar to them: thus, you should place everything that is appropriate for it with each accident until it heals.
Chapter on the Restoration of a Broken Leg
You should know that the leg has two bones, one of which is thick and called the leg bone: and the other is thin and called the tibia.
And it happens to both of these from the species of fractures that happen to two bones of the arm: and because of this, its restoration is like the restoration of the arm equally, and the operation is one.
If both bones are broken at once, the leg is turned in all directions.
And if the thin bone is broken, the leg is turned towards the front part.
And if the thick bone is broken, you will find it below: and it is among those that are not hidden from you.
Then administer extension, and equality, and tying of the stars equally according to that.
However, it is necessary, if the broken leg is a dirty fracture, having many splinters: that extension be less and gentler relief of yours.
And in the leg itself is something from the operation of the arm: and it is, that when you equalize the stars, and complete all your operation, then you should take two bands made of pine wood, which is used in the making of sunshades that are placed under tables: and they are made from the fingers of the hand: and choose from them those which have a small thickness, and are not from small pieces: and its length should be according to the length of the leg from the knee down to below.
Then, fold each piece of cloth twice along its length. And place one part of the leg bandage on one side and the other on the other side: let them extend from the knee down to the foot.
Then, tie two strips of cloth in three places from both ends and the middle. For when tightening is forbidden, the leg leans to the right and left, and remains in a good position.
Indeed, a support will be provided from the wood according to the length of the leg, and it will be placed in it, so that it will keep it still.
Indeed, it is especially important to do this in a fracture when there is a proper wound along with it.
Then, consider the leg every day, and work hard to prevent it from developing an abscess or swelling, or other things. If something happens from those, then apply to it what is necessary until it heals, if God wills.
Of the fracture of bones of the foot and fingers.
Indeed, a fracture does not occur completely in the heel.
However, a fracture does occur in the bones of the foot and fingers, and it does not occur to them unless there is wear in many positions.
If a fracture occurs in the bones of the foot and you see those bones rising above each other, then place the weak foot on prepared ground, as if walking.
Then stand up, and place your foot on that which is raised from those bones: then press it or step on it, and make it even again until it returns to its places.
Then place a plaster and a bandage on top: and place a small board under the sole of the foot, which has two flat heads.
Then tie it with a proper foot binding, after you have washed it with cloths and other necessary items.
Therefore, when three or four days have passed, then dissolve the ligature. For you will find the bones evened, whether they are broken or dislocated. The operation on them is as you see.
But if some fingers are broken, then restore them, and make them even as I have told you in the restoration of fingers by hand. Then place a sponge according to the length of the finger, and make it a little wider: then place under the foot this table which I have told you, and tie it with a proper foot binding.
But if what is broken is of the bone, two or three or more, then place over all the finger a sponge of its quantity, wrapped in linen cloth: and tie the table in the lower foot: and let it stand on one end of the table outside the belly of the foot, to hold it well.
And it is fitting for you, not to forget, but to consider all that I have told you in the other breaks from accidents which we have said: and apply each accident with what is necessary.
¶ On the break of the vulva of a woman, and the bone of the beak, and the virgin of the man.
When the vulva of a woman is broken, then make her sit in a square position. Then lean her slightly towards the back of her own body, and hold her back.
Then the midwife will fill her vulva with cotton, until she fills it: and let it be made into a sphere from that in the vulva.
Then the woman should be gently shaken, and her back slowly elevated. For that is how the child comes out, until it is born before the gate of the womb as a sphere, and the broken bone returns.
Then place a pillow on her back. When she wants to urinate, she should gently remove the child with ease, then urinate: and reduce it back to its original position, as you inserted it first: then return to her pillow first.
She should do this for seven days, or about, for the bone itself is restored.
And if you wish, take a catheter, and tie it over the opening of the bone, and insert the entire catheter into her womb. Then blow into the cannula with force, until the bladder is inflated inside the womb, for the broken bone returns.
Then it should be filled with the child, and she should stand for several days, as we have said, until it heals.
And when the bone of the penis, or woman, is broken, then administer in its restoration, and its equilibrium that we have said in the bone of the anchor.
And it should not be hidden in these fractures that are nearby, which barely touch, especially to him who has some study, or use.
And understand my book, for the fracture itself means to you in many arrangements the straight way in its restoration, and its tightness: therefore understand.
But in the penis of a man when it is broken, take the neck of a goose: and insert the penis into it. Then place a wrapping of cloth on it, and wrap it, and let it be released for three days, or about those, and it will heal, if God wishes.
On the restoration of a fractured bone when it is accompanied by a wound.
It is appropriate for the one who has suffered a fracture along with a wound, especially if it is a large one, such as the thigh bone, or a similar bone, to have the limb set and to undergo a bloodletting immediately: if the conditions for bloodletting are attested to you, as we have previously mentioned.
However, if the wound is bleeding, then you must hasten to remove it, so that you can sprinkle powdered zegium on it: if there is no other available powder.
Then begin to restore the fracture on that same day: and do not postpone it, unless an abscess does not occur.
However, if indeed an abscess occurs, then postpone the restoration of it until the ninth day, until the abscess has settled. And do not approach it on the third and fourth days at all, for you would be causing it to suffer bad accidents.
However, if the fractured bone is prominent above the skin and exposed: then you must attempt to reduce it, and equalize it with your hands with gentle extension and slight force.
However, if the extension of it is not prepared, and its equalization with your hands is not possible: then reduce it with this instrument. And there is an instrument that is made of iron, whose length is the quantity of seven fingers, or eight: and its width is according to the size of the wound. And for this reason it is necessary for the physician to take from them three, or four according to the quantity that he needs for that from the treatment in every kind of fracture.
And it should be round: and it should have a small bulge, so that it is not doubled upon itself in compression above it in the hour of the operation: and it should be sharp at its ends, with a margin on its ends. And it should be above it in thickness from its middle to the lower parts.
This is its shape.
In this operation, it should be placed with its sharp end curved over the projecting end of the bone: and it should be pushed with it with equal force until when the bone returns and is made even by some equality.
Therefore, try to make the ends of the fracture equal again.
If the ends of it are thin and do not receive the instrument well, then it is necessary, that I cut the end of that bone until the instrument has power over it.
But if you cannot reduce them with what we have said, then cut it with the instrument that suits it from the ones we mentioned: or with a saw in any possible way that is best for you.
Then smooth that which remains in the bone from roughness and small bone fragments.
When therefore the bone is reduced and finds a weak person after its reduction suffering severe pain, then you know that the bone has not returned to its natural place.
Do this. For you give a great support to the weak person, when your restoration is completed which you do for the bone.
Then immerse the cloth in cold, black wine. And if it is in summer, use warm wine. And do not place on the wound a poultice, nor anything in which there is oil: so that it does not cause rotting and corruption in it.
Then administer asthma remedies at the time of your completion of the restoration of the bone. And let the wound be healed: so that I cut with forceps a hole in the folds according to the size of the wound.
And beware with great caution, lest you tie a wound over a fracture. For many a time have these foolish physicians done this: and they caused harm to their sick patients, either death, or corrosion, or zuchum, that is, gangrene. And let your dressing be soft, gentle, different from the dressings of the remaining fractures.
But if the wound is an evil, or a large wound, and you fear some bad accidents which we have mentioned, and find pain in the hanging part: then it is not necessary to put stitches on it. And make them wrap-ups from hard cloth in the place of the stitches, and tie it with them.
But when it is after one day, or two days, and you see the wound beginning to generate pus: then remove the cloth which you placed on it with vinegar. Then apply lint, and ointments with which it is customary to heal wounds: such as tetrapharmacon ointment, and similar to it.
And it comes to you, that you loosen the ligature. And consider the wound every day morning and evening, until it becomes solid and heals.
And it is necessary to prepare the limb in such a way, that the pus flows down from it to the lower parts with ease.
But if many days pass by, and it does not solidify, nor the pus is not separated from it: then you know that there are small pieces of bone in it. Therefore it is necessary to examine the wound with a probe. How many of those small pieces of bone are separated, remove them, and extract them. And of those that are not separated, and which puncture the member, and cause pain, attempt to cut them off and remove them in any way possible for you to do so.
If it happens that a wound becomes infected, such as a fistula, or some other form of corruption and putrefaction: then you should apply to each of these, with what is appropriate for its cure, which was mentioned in its previous chapter.
And from that in which it is necessary for me to stand and which you should direct your present mind towards when a bone is broken and protrudes above the member, such as the thigh bone, and the hip, and similar bones from large members, it is, so that you do not presume to pull it out, for often death results from this, indeed let it alone until it rots.
Perhaps it will fall off by itself after twenty days, or thirty.
Then therefore cure the wound, if it seems to you: and otherwise, let it alone.
¶ On the Cure of Notching at the Stump of a Broken Bone.
This notching often occurs at the stump of a broken bone during healing. Especially, which is near the joints: and it defiles the form of the member. And perhaps it prevents the member from performing its natural function.
Therefore consider then, if the notching is recent: administer in it medicines which have astringency, such as aloe, and frankincense, and myrrh, and sarsaparilla, and acacia, and similar to them.
Thus, you will take some or all of these: and mix them with astringent wine, or with albumen, or with vinegar: and place them on the notching in cotton, and bind them over it with a good binding.
And release the constriction, and do not loosen it for many days. Then loosen it, and repeat another one, until the knot is removed.
Or tie a lead strip properly over it. For lead is the property of removing everything that is feared from the members.
But if the constriction has already turned into stone and is tight, and urgently calls for removal: then cut off the excess part from the top of it, and shave it with some razors until it is removed, and take care of it, until it heals.
¶ On the treatment when restored, and the member remains after that delicate, not according to its natural form.
When the bone fracture is restored, and the member remains after that delicate, weak: then it is not done except for many reasons. One of which is the excessive loosening and tightening of the ligaments and their binding, not according to what it should be: or because of the excess of the constriction of the ligaments, until the nutrition is prevented from flowing to the member: or because of the excess of unnecessary embrocation at an inappropriate time: or because of the lack of blood in the weak body, and its weakness.
And the treatment of that is to feed the weak person, and make their body tender, until the blood multiplies in it. And give a bath. And let joy and gladness be introduced to him.
Then place pitch on the member: so that the pitch attracts much nutrition to it. And it should frequently be embrocated with warm water, until the nutrition flows, and it returns to its natural form.
On the treatment of broken bones when they are being realigned crookedly.
When it happens that a member which has already been restored after its healing becomes crooked, and the bone is prominent where it was broken, or twisted: and it is disfigured by this, yet the member is not prevented from performing its natural function: then you should not listen to the opinion of someone who says that the member should be broken again.
And there have already been many foolish physicians and restorers who have done this in our land.
And indeed, this operation is very shameful, leading to death, or great fear, so that it may be mortal.
But if the limping and twisting are recent: then it is necessary to apply a warm water embrocation in which the soothing herbs have been decocted, such as high elder, and its root, and melilot, and similar ones. And let an ointment be made for it with a soothing plaster, such as dyachilon made properly.
Or the mucilage of the root of high elder is taken, and it is beaten with chicken fat, or with sesame oil: and it is made into an ointment with that.
Or ripe figs are taken, and they are pounded with the dust of dove's dung, and similar ones which are called from medicines decreasing consolidation.
And sometimes the twisting is solved with frequent and gentle rubbing, which is done with wet hands. And motion of the member is given to all parts at every hour.
But if the crookedness has already preceded, and it has become strong, and it has turned into a stone, and necessity has been provoked for its cure with iron: then it is necessary to follow above it, and to solve the continuity of the bone, and to cut off what superfluous is from the twisting or the bone with delicate knives: and ease is given in that with effort and study.
In the case of dislocation, the patient should be placed in a comfortable position and given some food and drink. After a short time, the surgeon should apply a bandage around the affected joint to provide support and prevent further movement. The patient should then be taken to the operating room for surgery.
Dislocation is the separation of a joint from its normal position. Therefore, it is forbidden to move the affected joint and the appearance of the limb may be deformed. And it causes severe pain and injuries to the weak.
Therefore, when dislocation occurs, one should act quickly to restore it: do not delay at all.
For if delayed, the affected area may become infected and possibly even the reduction of dislocation.
Therefore, it is not appropriate to move or extend the affected joint during the hour of its infection. Because it often causes spasms and painful injuries.
However, when this happens, one should act quickly to perform bloodletting for the weak patient. Then he should be dismissed until the abscess has healed.
Then the limb should be rubbed with warm water and oil. Then it should be reduced with ease.
And the entire limb should be cured when it returns to its proper place.
Indeed, I have already arranged the chapters of dislocation according to what preceded in fracture, from the upper part of the body to the lower part of it.
Chapter on the Care of Dislocation of the Lower Jaw:
The lower jaws are rarely dislocated.
And the dislocation of both occurs in one of two ways. Either they are moved slightly from their positions and become somewhat softened. If the dislocation is complete and whole, until it softens to the chest part, until the salt of the sick one passes, and he cannot hold it, nor can he close his mouth, and his tongue is covered with speech.
But when his dislocation is small, then it returns to many positions by itself with a little bit.
If indeed the dislocation is complete and whole: then it must be administered reduction of it quickly, and not to wait entirely: and it is, that the servant holds the head of the sick one: and the physician inserts his finger of his one hand in the root of the jaw dislocation between his mouth, if the dislocation is from one side. Or he inserts two fingers of his at once, if the dislocation is from two sides. And the remaining fingers of his hand are outside, which he balances.
And command the sick one, that he clean his jaws, and make them ready for eating at every part. And the physician balances the jaw, and pushes the jaw, until it returns to its place.
If the reduction of it is difficult, especially if both jaws are at once: then administer steam with hot water and oil, until it becomes easy reduction of both: nor delay entirely the reduction of both, as we said.
When therefore they return and balance, and the mouth of the sick one is closed, and they are not softened: then put on them bandages of cloth, with wax which is made from wax: and rose oil.
Then he will be bound with ease with soft ligatures.
And the sleep of the sick one is on his back: and his head is standing between two bandages, so that he does not move him to his right and left: nor will he attempt or be forced to chew anything: rather let his food be soft soup, until when the pains are removed, and the jaw is bound: then he eats what he wants, and it is administered to him with ease.
The patient should not exert himself over the operation of his own mouth during eating and drinking, and during yawning, until the jawbone is healed, and he is cured.
If the reduction of both jawbones is difficult when they are dislocated at any time and do not return to their original positions, then fevers and constant sweating often occur from this. And perhaps the belly of the sick person is solved, and perhaps he vomits pure bile.
Therefore, when you see this, then you will know that it is a loss, and often that person dies who experiences this within ten days.
Concerning the reduction of dislocation of the sternum, and the extremity of the arm.
The sternum is not dislocated from the inner side, because of its continuity with the chest. And it is sometimes dislocated to the outer side: and this is shown by sensation.
And its restoration is, that the sick person should lie on his back, and extend his arms. Then bind the place with your strong ligature, for it will return.
Then place on it a plaster, and poultices, and bandage it.
In fact, the extremities that follow the elbow, and are connected with it, do not dislocate, except rarely. If however it is dislocated on any day, then it must be reduced and adjusted according to what we said, and that which is prepared for you.
Then place on it a plaster, and poultices, and bandage it. And instruct the sick person to stick to calmness and quiet, until he is healed.
And when this same cure reduces the extremity of the arm, even when it is separated from its place.
¶ On the Reduction of Dislocations of the Humerus.
You should know that the humerus does not dislocate except in three ways.
One of these is that it dislocates towards the titillus, or lower part. The second is that it dislocates towards the chest. And perhaps it dislocates towards the upper part of the humerus, but this is rare.
It does not dislocate towards the back, because of the spatula (scapula). And it does not dislocate towards the front, because of the nerves.
And it is most commonly dislocated and displaced downwards towards the titillus: especially in those whose flesh is little. Since it exits them quickly, and enters them quickly.
But in those whose flesh is much, it is the opposite of that, namely that it exits with difficulty, and enters with difficulty.
And perhaps it happens to some men that the humerus becomes an abscess due to a blow or accident, and is filled with hot pus, and is thought to be because it has already been dislocated.
Therefore, you must first try this, until you are certain of it, and then proceed with its cure.
And the dislocation is known when it is towards the lower part of the titillus: and you distinguish between a dislocated humerus and a healthy one. For you will find among them a manifest difference, and you will find a concavity in the head of the humerus, and under the titillus, at the touch of the head of the humerus, as if it were an egg: and the weak one cannot reduce his hand to his ear, nor move it with all movements.
If it is dislocated towards the chest or upwards, then a clear touch is found, and it does not hide.
And indeed, the reduction of this dislocation is easy when it is recent or the child is weak.
And its reduction is, that he should raise his hand to the upper parts. Then place your thumbs under the handle of it, and raise the joint with strength upwards to its place: and the helper should raise his hand and extend it upwards. Then put it below, for it quickly returns.
But if it does not return by what we have said, and the days are many since the dislocation occurred: then it is necessary that the weak person be bathed in warm water, and an embrocation is given which softens and soothes, as if the roots of a tall fern, and foenugraecum, and melilot are boiled in water, and is given.
Then the weak person should lie on his back: and a sphere and wool are placed under the handle of it, which is equal between softness and constriction.
Then the doctor places his heel on the sphere, and raises the head of the arm with strength, and pulls the hand of the weak person to the lower parts.
And if you wish, reduce him according to this method: and it is, that you make there be a present man who is longer than the weak person, and stands on the side, and inserts his arm under the handle of the weak person: and raises the handle of it upwards, until the weak person is suspended in the air. And another helper pulls the hand of the weak person to the lower parts of his belly. If however the patient is light: then it is necessary to hang something else with him, which weighs, because the dislocation returns immediately.
And it is also reduced according to another method: and it is, that a long piece of wood be shaped on the ground, whose head is round in shape: like the arm of a mortar: which is not thick, nor fine. Then it is placed under the patient after they have been laid on top of the head of the wood: and the patient stands according to the length of the wood.
Then his hand is stretched out towards the lower parts on the other side, and his body is stretched out from the other part with strength: for the joint returns to its place with swiftness.
If however his reduction is difficult through all that we have said, then use this cure: and it is, that you take a piece of wood whose length is the quantity of two biceps, and its width is the quantity of four fingers, and its thickness is the quantity of two fingers: which has a round head, so that its entrance may be eased into the depth of the mortar, according to this form.
Then smooth cloths are laid on top of the round head, so that it may not harm the wood of the patient.
Then it is placed under the mortar of the patient, so that his hand, or arm may be stretched out over the wood up to the lower parts: and the wood is tied on top of the support and arm and end of the hand.
Then the arm is placed on the step of the ladder across its width, and the hand is stretched out towards the lower parts, and the rest of the body is hung from the other part. For the joint enters immediately.
When therefore its entrance is completed as much as possible in any way: then it is necessary to place under the mortar a ball of equal quantity made of wool. Then place the prepared plaster made from mill flour with benzoin, and egg white on the shoulder entirely, as it wraps around above.
Then tie under the tunic with a decent bandage: and wrap the tendon above the plaster: and attach his hand to the neck of himself, and let it be dismissed, and do not move his hand for seven days.
And it is necessary to place food for the weak person, until the member is strengthened: because it is faster for its healing.
Then it is placed larger after seven days or five, and exercised with movement. If therefore it is strengthened and not softened, then already healed.
But if the joint is dislocated many times, because of the moisture that happens to him, or for another cause: then it is necessary to administer a cauterizer with three holes in it, according to what was prescribed in the chapter on cauterization.
But if this is all done, and the tendon is dissolved after seven days, and the joint is not strengthened, and the plaster and bandage are placed on him again several times, and it is not strengthened, and he falls, and cannot raise himself to the superior: then know that his nerves which are to the head of the arm, are already cut, or extended, or softened: and know that the joint will never be in its place.
But of the dislocations which are made towards the chest and the mammillary glands, or to the backs, is made with impulse and extension with hands: until it returns, and the remaining bandage and care are administered to it, until it is healed.
But if it happens after healing that there is severity in the member, and slowness in its movement, then the weak person should use the bath many times, until that severity is alleviated, and it returns to its original nature.
Translation: On the Treatment of Dislocations of the Elbow.
You should know that the joint of the elbow is dislocated with difficulty and also returns to its place with difficulty. It can be dislocated in all directions, especially towards the front or back.
Its dislocation is not hidden from you, as it falls under the sight and touch, according to whatever shape it is dislocated in. And when you join the dislocated elbow with a healthy one, it is clearly shown to you. For the joint becomes concave and cannot double the arm, nor can he touch his own shoulder with it.
And you must act quickly to reduce the dislocation before heat abscess occurs.
For if it does occur, the reduction of the abscess becomes difficult and perhaps he will not be cured at all, especially when it is towards the back. For it is worse in all kinds of dislocations and more painful to them; and often death accompanies it.
And its restoration when it is from those that can be reduced, is to extend his hand with two hands; and the arm is stretched, and the hand of the doctor is above the elbow and below it, and he pushes the joint with his fingers or the root of his palm until it returns to its place.
Or truly the dislocation is towards the front: then it returns so that he doubles his hand with his own hand until he strikes the elbow which is dislocated with the root of his palm.
If the dislocation does not obey reduction, then apply strong and very powerful extension; and it is to have two assistants stretch the arm, and they also hold him so that he is not moved during extension.
Then, the arm is rolled over to every part after it has been covered by a long doubled cloth or broad bandage on his hand.
And when the physician touches the joint with his hand, he should anoint it with oil: so that it may be one of those things that help in the lubricity of the joint with ease. Then he should strike the joint with a strong blow, until it returns.
And after its reduction, it should be placed on it a plaster, in which there is astringency, and drying with albumen: and it should be bound with a proper bandage. And the arm should be suspended from the neck of the weak one: and let it be released for several days.
Then it should be dissolved. But if the joint is strengthened in its place, then loose the bandage from it, and let it be released.
And if you see the joint not well bound, then repeat the plaster, and the bandage, and let it be released for several days, until it is bound. Then loose it.
But if it happens to him gravity after the reduction of the joint, and its position is in motion: then administer humidification in the bath, and gentle friction, and compression, until it is bound, or put on the joint, that is, a fat tail of a lamb. Then it should be bound, and let it be released on it day and night. Then take it away, and introduce it into the bath. When therefore it sweats, then friction the joint with moderate friction. Then repeat on it the fat of a lamb once, and twice, and thrice with entering the bath, until it is made soft.
And if you wish, place wool soaked in warm, buttered vaccination on it, and bind it over the top.
Do this several times. Indeed, it is soothed, and returns to its original condition.
On the treatment of Almahassem's dislocation.
Almahassem's hand is often dislocated, that is, the joint that is between the arm and the hand.
And the reduction of its dislocation is easy. Unlike other joints. However, it is necessary that the reduction of its dislocation be quick in the hour in which it is dislocated, before the wound closes: or an abscess hot may occur in it.
And the reduction of its dislocation is that you place Almahassem's weak hand on a table, and extend his minister's hand: and the physician places his palm on the prominence of the joint, and pushes it until it returns.
However, it is necessary to consider if the palm has already retreated to the wrist: then place the weak back of his hand on the table at extension and reduction: and if the dislocation is proceeding to the back of the hand, then the position of his hand should be intrinsically on the table, that is, the inner part of his hand on the table should be placed, so that the doctor's hand falls on that prominence of the joint.
If therefore it returns immediately, good: and if not, then bind it with plaster to suppress the abscess: and let him go, and do not repeat that.
For if he does not tolerate it, and you cannot exceed the reduction of it, after the days have passed, indeed the joint remains according to its crookedness: and nothing harms the weak one, except that his hand is softened, and he cannot bind anything: then know that the nerves are cut, or worn.
Therefore, there is no skill in that, unless it is tied with a cauterizer near the wound. And perhaps it does not bring anything together.
Since then Albucasis does not return, then place a plaster on him that we have mentioned. Then it is tied up and let go for five days: afterwards it is dissolved and let go, and the hand is exercised.
But if the movement of it is lost, and something heavy happens to it: then soothe it with hot water and frequent friction, until it is soothed.
¶ On the treatment of dislocations of the fingers.
When a finger is dislocated from all of them, or a finger from the back of the palm, or its belly: then extend the finger, and push the dislocation with your fingers, until it returns.
Then support the head of the finger, and suspend it against the part to which it is dislocated, and let it go for two days.
Then suspend it, and extend it, until it is straight on its day.
Since then it is night, tie it according to the same story: and do not cease to dissolve it in the day: and exercise it with movement: and tie it at night.
Do that for several days, until it is tied.
And do the same with it, if it is dislocated to the belly of the hand: and tie it to the same part, and do your operation on it, until it is healed.
And do the same with it when it is dislocated to the other parts.
¶ On the treatment of dislocations of the spine.
When it happens to someone that the spine of the back or neck is completely dislocated, or when many spines are displaced from their places: then there is no cure for it, because death approaches the weak one.
And the sign of that is, that the discharge of the sick goes out without will, and he cannot hold it: and often some of his limbs are made soft from it, or both his legs, or both his arms, or one of them: or one spine is removed from its place.
For often it is removed, which often happens to be removal of them in four parts.
Therefore that which is removed to the back, is called Humpback.
But the cure for it is, that you consider then, if Humpback happens from childhood: then there is no cure for it, nor is there any healing at all from it.
But in that which happens by chance, or by blow, or by similar things, the ancients have already spoken of methods of cure in long speech. Of which very little returns with profit.
I myself have already abbreviated from that, of which little excuses it from much of its cause by my proximity: and from my explanation which I exposed it, and formed an instrument of it in a different way than they showed it, and exposed it.
I say therefore, that in Humpback which happens from the front part, there is no skill, nor healing from it.
And similarly in that which is made to both sides even.
And it is not cured from them, except that which happens in the back properly, with that which I tell: and it is, that the sick be stretched out on his face over an equal podium near the wall: and a wet cloth is spread under him, so that it does not hurt his chest.
Then place a straight, fixed wooden pole in the fork of a tree on the ground, near the top of the leg, around the head: and another piece of wood near the feet, at the other end of the leg: and the assistant should hold the wood, and it should not be firmly set in the fork. And the other assistant should hold the other.
Then roll over the head of the sick person, and under his tongue, a loose but strong ligament, and extend its end to the wood that is near his head: and tie it there.
Then tighten another ligament above his ankles, and above his knees, and at his calves. Then gather all the ligaments together, and tie them to the other wood that is near his feet.
Then all the assistants should extend to the part of the wood where the ligament is tied, and the two woods should not be moved from their places where they are fixed: but they should not be firmly set, as we said.
And the doctor should place his hands on the sacrum with force, until he returns: or place a board on it. Then he should connect his feet to the board, until he returns.
But if he does not return by this treatment, then take a board whose length is about three arms. And place it on the wall from which we said that it is near the sick person, the place where the end of the board should enter. Then place the middle of the board on the sacrum. And the doctor should place his feet on the other end. And he should tie it well, until the sacrum is compressed, and he returns to his place.
Then if you wish, operate with the chisel that is rolled up with your hand: and it is, so that you shape two pieces of wood near the head of the sick person at the end of his leg, whose length is the arm of one person: and near the head of the sick person at the end of his leg.
And let the length be such that it is between every wooden palm one: and already made is in every place a hole, through which runs the tongue: and all the wood is secured firmly on the ground much, so that it does not move at all.
And let the round wood be inserted: and it is the tongue in which the ligament is rolled up in two holes of two woods.
And at its end is a hole, in which the wood is secured, whose length is a palm with that which is rolled up: and in two other woods there is similarly of it.
Then tie the ligaments that you tied in the chest of the weak one, which is at his head: and the ligaments that you tied in his legs in the tongue which is at his feet.
Then stand at every tongue, the one who turns his hand with the ligament, with which the tongue is rolled up: and the doctor adjusts the Spondyle, as we said.
This is the form of the tongue that follows.
Then when the Spondyle returns, and the place is adjusted, then it is necessary to put on a drying plaster with egg white. Then bandage. Then put above the plaster a star from the board, whose width is three fingers, or about them. And its length is the amount that will take the place of the Gibbus, and on the side of the healthy Spondyle.
Then it is tied with the ligament that we said. And he should use the weak nourishing food until he is healed.
If something remains of the prominence in the place at the end of healing: then it is necessary to give medicines that soften and ease, with the administration of the board that we mentioned for a long time. And now a piece of lead is administered on that plate.
Sometimes there is a prominence in the last spine of the back: and it is thought to be a dislocation, and that is the bone that now protrudes. Therefore it is not appropriate to make an assumption with this remedy: perhaps it will cause death.
¶ On the treatment of a dislocated ankle.
You know that the joints of the ankle and the elbow do not occur except for dislocation alone: nor does it happen to them that what happens to the other joints from a slight removal and concavity.
And indeed the ankle joint is dislocated in four parts. That is, because it is dislocated towards the front and the back.
And indeed it is most dislocated towards the inside: and a little dislocated towards the front and the back.
And the treatment of dislocation towards the inside is because when you join the injured leg with the injured one, it is longer: and its knee is higher than that of the healthy person, and the injured person cannot double their foot near the groin: and there is a location following the groin which is suppurating with heat, therefore, because the hip joint has already reached there.
And the sign that it happens to the outside is that its accidents are contrary to these accidents.
And the sign that it happens towards the front is because it stretches the healthy leg according to its complement: however, it does not double itself without pain in the knee: and if it tries to walk, it cannot step on that towards the front: and it retains its urine, and the groin of it suppurates, and at walking it is calloused on the heel.
And the sign of this dislocation is that it does not extend the knee, and cannot double before doubling the inguinal region: and its thigh is also shorter on the other side: and the inguinal region is softened, and there is a hip joint at the place of that.
However, the reduction of this dislocation is a matter of considering whether the dislocation is old and has already existed for a long time in the person having it. Then, if you administer reduction to it, and it remains in its original position, then there is no cure at all in it. Therefore, one should not make a complete assumption about it.
However, in the case of a recent dislocation that is one of the four types of dislocations, then act quickly to roll it back into place, extend it both internally and externally, and move it with your right and left hand: perhaps it will return to its original position, and will not require any other treatment.
But if it does not return to its original position in this way, then you must prepare a strong assistant and extend the thigh from the lower part: either with his hands or with a bandage that is tied above the thigh over the knee: and another assistant extends his hand above, so that his hands can be inserted under the tissues. Then he should tie a loose bandage over the root of the hip, and hold the end of the other bandage.
And there should be extension from either the front part of the inguinal region to the back of the ribs, or from the back to the back.
And there should be extension of all of them at the same time, until the weak one is raised up with his body from the ground, and remains hanging.
For this is the common type of extension among the four types.
If, however, the dislocation returns with what we have said, it is good; but if not, then it is necessary to use any kind of the treatment that I will mention for proper cure.
Indeed, in its own reduction when the dislocation is to the insides, it is necessary for the sick person to lean over their healthy side. Then place the ligament on the root of the thigh, in that which is between the hip joint and the groin. Then extend the ligament upwards from the groin to the higher part of the body, to the part of the ribs.
Then another strong-armed assistant should take his arms, and reduce the large space of the sick thigh, and extend it to the outside with forceful extension. Now it is returning to its place.
And this kind of treatment is easier than other kinds of cure for reducing this limb.
If, however, it excuses you and does not obey you at all with this kind of treatment for cure: then it is necessary to bind two sick feet together with a strong ligament, gently, over the two heels, and over the two knees: and let the length of each be equal to four fingers from its companion in quantity: and let the sick leg be extended more than the other by the quantity of two fingers.
Then hang the sick person over the top of the beam, which is in the house: and let its length be from the ground equal to the quantity of two biceps.
Then order the young and strong one to protect the hip joint: and hang the sick person with another young one: and push the other young one, protecting the thigh with strength, for the joint returns to its place with speed.
But in its own reduction when the dislocation is to the outsides, it is necessary for the sick person to lie on a footstool, as we have mentioned for one having stiffness. And a ligament is tied across his leg, properly weak, and across his chest.
Then two wooden splints will be placed, one by his feet, and the other by his head. Then a wooden splint will be placed in the middle of his foot, firmly fixed: above which they will be wrapped in moist cloths, so as not to hurt the weak one: and it should be a splint between his thighs, so that it does not pull towards the lower parts during extension.
Then every assistant will extend to his own part, and the doctor will equal the reduction with his hand.
If therefore he obeys the return, it will be good.
And if not, place on top of him the board, and press him as we said in stiffness, equally. However, it is necessary that the sick one lies on his healthy side.
And when the dislocation is to the front, then it is necessary that the sick leg be extended quickly: and it is according to this same narrative on the foot: and the doctor places his right hand palm down on the weak groin. Then he encloses him with the other hand, and with this enclosure places him extended towards the lower parts to the knee part.
And if the dislocation is to the back: then it is not necessary that the sick one be extended towards the lower parts, and be raised on the ground: but it is necessary that he be placed on something hard, as it should also be if his ankle is dislocated to the outside, according to what we said about his lying on two ankles: and it is on his face, and the ligaments are stretched: according to what we said recently.
And it is necessary that compression be given with the board also on the place from which he exited the joint, when the reduction is completed according to what should be.
And the sign of its return is not hidden from you: and it is, that you extend two legs of the infirm one: and when you see them equal, and the infirm one stretches his leg, and expands it without excuse: then you know that the member has returned, according to what is necessary: then join two coxas, and put on a plaster, and bind with an imemati, that is, wheel: thus, so that it does not move towards any part of the wound: and let the infirm one stick to it for three days, or four.
Then dissolve the ligament, and the plaster, and compare the leg with the other one: then if you see them equal in state, then you know that the dislocation is already fixed: therefore complete the infirm one for walking.
And if you see anything of softening: then return, and plaster it, and bind it according to your first binding: and let it go for three days also.
Then dissolve it and make it slow in walking on both sides for several days, until it is well strengthened.
¶ Of the Dislocation of the Knee.
The knee is dislocated in three ways. It is dislocated to the outsides, to the insides, and to the lower parts, that is, to the posteriors.
And it does not dislocate to the fronts.
And the sign of its dislocation is, that you order the infirm one, that he apply his leg to his hip. But if it does not stick to the hip: then you know that the knee is dislocated.
And the restoration of all its dislocations is, that you make the infirm one sit straight, so that he can extend his leg on it if he can, and stick his back to his face: and put his foot between your feet.
Then press your knees together with your hands, and place them straight between your fingers on the knee. Then apply your palm to both sides of the knee with force. And another assistant will extend his foot until the knee returns to its place.
And the sign of return is when the leg sticks to the hip in comfort, not with effort.
Then apply the plaster to him, and press the leg against the hip. Then tie it together with a bandage for three days, or four. Then untie it.
And the sick person should not use walking for several days until he is healed.
But if he refuses to return it to you, then apply strong extension with the ligatures, of which the previous description was given in the cure of the ankle, until it returns.
¶ On the cure of the dislocation of the heel bone.
The heel bone sometimes moves slightly away, and sometimes dislocates completely. And its dislocation occurs either to the inside or to the outside.
And the sign of its dislocation is that you see the heel bone inflated, protruding to the part to which it dislocates.
But its cure of removal is easy return: and it is that it is extended with ease with the hands, and adjusted, until it returns.
In its cure however when it dislocates completely, it is necessary to do that the sick person sits upright: and the strong assistant holds him from the back part of his back, in the middle of himself.
Then hold you with your right hand the foot of him from the upper part of his leg, and with your left hand the place of the ankle from the lower part of the foot.
Then draw the patient's foot towards you with your right hand. Then with your left hand, using two fingers.
Then extend it with your left hand, and push the sole of the foot towards the leg with your right hand without effort.
Do this twice, as we have described.
Then push the sole of the foot towards the leg in the third finger, and you pull the tendon.
If therefore it returns to the first or second finger in this manner, and you see the foot even, it is good; but if not, then repeat the operation on it, for it does return.
But if it is prohibited to you to reduce it with what we have described, then make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and fix a firm staff on the ground so that he falls between his buttocks; and you have already uncovered him above it, so that he does not hurt the patient.
Then let the assistant take his thigh: afterwards he extends the assistant's foot, or with his hands, or with a bandage that ties around the neck of the foot. Then let every assistant extend against the extension of his companion: and the staff should be standing between the two thighs of the patient, holding him, so that his body is not drawn to the lower parts during extension.
Then the doctor equalizes the dislocation with his hands, and the assistant holds the healthy leg to the lower parts. For the dislocation returns with speed.
Therefore when the dislocation returns, and its health of the return is declared to you: then place a plaster and bandage, and bind it firmly with bands, and tie the foot with a bandage to the leg.
And it is necessary that you guard or fear the hollows, which are above the heel posterior, so that there is not a strong bandage over them, and they do not hurt them.
Then let him rest for two days, or three. If the tendon becomes softened, bind it up; then dissolve it on the third or fourth day, and forbid the weak person from walking for forty days. But if he tries to walk before that time, there is no safety that the joint will not be dislocated on him, and corrupted, and not receive after that cure.
But if he gets a hot abscess: then it is necessary that the caregiver in the sedation of which our previous narrative was in another place from the cure and ointment, until it is removed.
Concerning the dislocation of the toes of the foot, and the cure.
It is necessary that the dislocated one be put back in place with extension a few without labor: and this indeed is not difficult, indeed it is easy.
But if the dislocation is in certain bends of the back of the foot: then it is necessary that he make the weak person sit with his foot on an equal level with the earth, or on a board: and he stands as if walking.
Then you stand, and put your foot on that which projects from those joints. Then you tread on it with your foot with force, until it returns, and you see that it is now equal, and does not appear in the elevated place.
Then put under his foot a board which catches the whole of his foot, which has two heads. Then bind it with a decent bandage for three days. Then dissolve it, and make him rest from walking for many days, until it is bound up and secured from the reduction.
Concerning the kinds of dislocation with a wound or fracture.
When something happens to someone and you try to cure it and restore them, death often follows: and because of this, one should not presume over their cure, which is such as this, unless they are wise in the art with long experience, merciful, pious, slow, not rash, nor presumptuous: and that they use hot medicines which settle ulcers in the beginning of treatment, and let the sick person go by divine judgment for a long time. Unless you see, or hope for health from deliverance with the mitigation of pain, and in which something appears to be a sign of hope. Therefore, try to reduce it immediately at the beginning of the matter, before an ulcer hot occurs.
If therefore the limb returns as we wish, then administer the regimen which settles the ulcer: and care for the wound with it which suits him from drying ointments.
If however the dislocation is with fracture, and they occur in the separated bones of the shoulder, then try to remove them, and do in it what we said in simple pains from that which preceded in those places.
And beware according to your skill, and guard yourself from entering the way of fear: as it preceded my preaching to you.
For that is better for you with your Creator, and more enduring to your glory, and more saving to your body among them in your time.
