"Oh, sons, since I have fulfilled for you this book, which is the last of the science of medicine, to complete it and its consequences, and by its explanations and declarations, it seems to me that I accomplish that for you with this treatise, which deals with the operation by hand, that is surgery."
For the operation by hand is greatly hindered in our region and time, so that few know its science, and its traces are almost lost; indeed, there remain only a few descriptions of it in the books of the Ancients, which have been obscured over time, their meanings changed, and they have fallen into error and obscurity, such that their intentions are hidden and their strength is weakened."
"And it seems to me that I revive this with the ordering of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and also adding illustrations of the shapes of the instruments for cauterization and other tools necessary for the work, and preparing them, which is necessary."
"For the reason why there are not many good practitioners of this craft in our time is because the art of medicine requires that its practitioner be skilled in anatomy beforehand, knowing the arrangement of limbs and their forms, connections and separations; and having knowledge of bones, nerves and ligaments – their number and function; also of the pulsating veins and quiet ones, and the places where they discharge."
"And therefore said Hippocrates with his name, but in practice little, and especially in the art of surgery."
"But we have already said at the beginning of this book that whoever does not know what we have said about anatomy will surely fall into error and cause many deaths of men, as I have seen too often."
"For I saw a foolish and inexperienced surgeon open an escrofulous swelling on the neck of a woman, and cut some arteries in the neck so that much blood flowed out, causing the woman to die immediately."
"And I saw another surgeon who took it upon himself to remove a stone from the bladder of a man who had fallen into that state, and the stone was large; he came near him and removed that stone with a piece of the bladder, so that the man died on the third day."
"And I had already foreseen that outcome and saw that because of the size of the stone and the condition of the patient's illness, he would surely die."
"And I saw another surgeon who was paid a fee of one ducat by our lord to perform surgery, and he undertook the case of a black man who had a fracture of his thighbone; preparing himself with great ignorance, he reduced the fracture without leaving any space, with pillows and stones under strong pressure, and did not allow space for respiration."
"Then he bound him up according to his desires, then released him and let him lie down again for some days, commanding that they release the bandage; and so it happened that the thighbone became inflamed and putrefied, and he came to destruction."
"And I was called to him, and prepared to remove the bandage; but as soon as it was removed, calmness returned, and his pain ceased immediately."
"But nevertheless the corruption was already confirmed in the limb, so that I could not prevent it, and the corruption did not cease to wander throughout the limb until the patient perished."
"And I saw another surgeon who perforated a cancerous swelling, and it became ulcerated in a few days, so that the evil was increased by its lord."
"The reason for this is because the cancerous ulcer is full of melancholic humor, therefore it should not be cauterized with iron on all sides, but only on the part that suffers from inflammation."
"And therefore, children, it is necessary for you that the operation with the hand be divided into two parts: on the one hand is the operation associated with health, and on the other hand is the work where there is danger in the greatest dispositions."
"And I have already spoken about this throughout the whole of this book where operation is associated with error and fear; therefore it is necessary for you to keep this in mind and leave that alone, so that foolish men may not find an opportunity to speak and dishonor you."
"Therefore take up your arms with diligence and protection from God, and treat your illnesses with skillfulness and firmness."
"And use the best way through the grace of God to obtain health and praiseworthy success, leave behind terrible illnesses of difficult healing, show your arms against what makes you fearful, so that steadfastness in your faith and in your name does not desert you: for greater is remaining in your glory, and then in the world and finally in your sanctity."
"Since I have already spoken in some of my books:" "No medical illness, so that bad doctors are not appointed."
"And I have already divided this book according to three chapters."
"Here begins the division of the book, first of the first part." "The first chapter ordered concerning the head, in the forms of instruments and irons for cauterization, and what is necessary in the operation."
"Here begins the second part." "The second chapter concerning cautery and perforation, and cupping glasses, compresses, and extraction of arrows and similar things, all ordered according to the forms of instruments."
"The third chapter concerning reduction and dislocation, and the cure of torticollis and similar things; this chapter is ordered according to the head, in the forms of instruments."
"It is necessary for me to speak about the qualities of those caustics and their effects, and in what complexion cautery is prohibited."
"Therefore I say that the discussion about the quality of cautery and its effects is long and prolix, subtle in science, and secretly hidden; many wise men have already spoken about it, and they disagree among themselves, but for me it suffices to touch upon some of their discussions briefly, fearing prolivity."
"And therefore I say that cautery agrees with every universal complexion, whether it has matter or not, except for two complexions, which are dry without matter."
"In the case of a dry and hot complexion that is out of balance; some say that cautery is beneficial for this, while others say the opposite, that cautery is not suitable for an illness that is due to heat and dryness, as fire itself is hot and dry, and it is inappropriate to use something hot and dry to treat a condition that is already hot and dry."
"And he who says the opposite, that cautery is beneficial in all hot and dry illnesses that occur in men's bodies, argues that when you compare the body of man and its humidity to the nature of fire, you find them alike."
"And I say, based on what that person says, that I have already experienced this many times."
"But it is not necessary for me to repeat what has already been said and practiced in the chapter on cautery through recent exercises, having learned about the diversity of men's complexions and the disposition of illnesses in their bodies, as well as their causes, accidents, and duration."
"But in other complexions, there is less fear for you, especially in hot and humid illnesses, because all physicians agree on these matters and are not disagreed on the use of cautery in them."
"And know, son, that the secret of cure by cautery with fire and its benefit is about cautery in medicine that burns, because fire is simple, whose action only extends to the member being cauterized, and it does not extend to another adjacent member except with some damage."
"But the action of burning medicine extends to those who are near it and often causes difficult-to-heal illnesses in nearby members."
"But fire, due to its sublimity and good substance, only serves to superfluously remove excesses. And we are already familiar with this through experimentation and the length of our service studying this art, which reveals the truth of these causes. Therefore, I am excused from speaking at length on this topic. But if it were not forbidden to me by law in this passage to reveal this secret about fire, and its qualities and operation within bodies and its expulsion of illnesses through philosophical demonstration, which would illuminate your minds."
"And know, son, that they disagree about the time when it is convenient to perform cautery and prefer the best time of spring."
"I say that cautery is convenient at all times, because the damage caused by accidental timing is submerged in the benefit of what is drawn out by cautery. And especially if the cautery is performed for pains or necessary remedies for severe and persistent pains, which cannot tolerate delay, because it is feared that something worse will come about, which is greater than the small damage caused by time."
"And do not think this in your minds, children, for only the common people and foolish doctors estimate that those illnesses cured by cautery are completely incurable at all times, and they put up with that consequence."
"And the reason is not as they think for this, because cautery is only a substitute for medicine that alters complexion and dries out the moistures which are the cause of pains."
"But cautery is superfluous in addition to medicine due to the willingness of its value and virtue of its operation, as well as the greatness of its power."
"But it is possible that its illness will return at some time due to the complexion of the sick person and the location of their illness, as well as the virtue of cautery and what has been prepared in the body from the aggregation of excesses within it, and what was acquired by it in nutrition and similar causes. But the illness in which cautery is administered is one that is subtle in a member with few superfluities and moistures, such as toothache for pain and similar things, it is possible that this pain will not return, but this happens rarely."
"And the common saying is that cautery is the last resort of medicine, and this saying is quite true, because they believe that there is nothing beneficial in it beyond cautery itself."
"And the reason is quite contrary to this; and the intention that cautery is the last resort of medicine means only when one uses the methods of treatment in certain illnesses, and those medicines do not help. And therefore, cautery is administered at the end of the disease, and it proves beneficial." "And hereafter let it be understood that cautery is the last resort of medicine, but not in the sense that vulgar people and many foolish doctors understand it."
"And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they said this not because of any other reason than the equality of gold and the sublimity of its substance."
"And they said that the location of cautery does not make a scar, which is not absolutely true, because I have already seen and proven that this is only the case in certain bodies without others, and cautery with gold is good and better than with iron as they said; but however when you perform cautery with fire using gold, it is not declared to you, because it depends on the quantity of gold you want due to its luster, and because it prepares to receive friction. And if you adjust the ignition above it, the gold will melt from the fire, and some sheets may fall into the fire due to the occupation of that."
"And for this reason, cautery should be performed with iron more lightly and more carefully in terms of the correctness of its operation."
"And I have already ordered this chapter on cautery according to chapters, and I have ordered those of the head among them for now. So that later when someone asks about something related to it, they may find what they want."
The first chapter
This cauterization confers upon the humid and cold nature of the servant's accident. Its two causes are coldness and great quantity of fluxes from the head to the parts of the eyes and ears, flowing abundantly, causing much sleepiness, toothache, and headache; universally it causes all illnesses that come from coldness, such as paralysis, sodden feet, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
The manner of this cauterization is as follows: firstly, you shall command the patient to be evacuated with a laxative medicine for three or four nights, according to what you judge necessary based on the strength of the illness and the age and habits of the patient.
And then command him to shave his head with a razor, and then have him sit on a smooth bench, placing his feet upon the stones of the floor.
Then place your palm close to his nose between his eyes. "But when the illness reaches its peak, mark that spot with a tent, and immediately light the olive-oil cautery of which this is the shape:"
"And then gently place that [cautery] on the marked spot so that it descends gradually, allowing your hand to be scorched little by little, and you turn it."
"And then lift your hand gently and look at the spot. If you see that some of the bone has been exposed, about as much as a grain of barley, then lift your hand; but if it does not return to its former state, replace it with another one until you see what I told you."
"And then take a little salt and dissolve it on that spot and let it sit for three days."
"And then place [a bandage] around the wound and leave it until the fire's scar is destroyed." "And then heal the wound with tetrapharmacon until it is healed."
"And they said that when the wound remains open, it's better to tie the arm, as this is more beneficial."
"And some of them said that the tendon should be cauterized within the bone, and hold the cautery there until it burns a part of the bone's surface."
"Then scrape away what has adhered to the bone, then apply treatment."
"And others said that when the cautery reaches the bone, it should press down strongly until the bone cracks; this is the way to perform a small trepanation." "The vapor of the head escapes from this place."
The wound should be kept open for a long time, and then it should be treated until it has healed.
But I have not seen this type of cauterization in all cases, only in some men due to fear; and that one, it seems to me, is better with regard to health when it happens, because the head is uncovered by solution of continuity from it just as we have testified in other members, and even more so when the head of the patient is naturally bald.
And that first type of cauterization is safer and better in my opinion, and with that one and with that operation there is health.
Chapter Two
Of the cauterization of the head.
When there is chronic and long-lasting pain in the whole head and this is prolonged illness, and it is treated with plasters and ointments and poultices and emplasters and warm water and cabbage leaves and linseed poultices and similar remedies, especially if it has already been cauterized once without benefit from any of those causes, then consider whether the patient's head has a strong constitution by nature; if it is not thin or weak in any way, then cauterize it again with another cautery near that first one. And cautionarily cauterize that over the horn of his head with a cautery within which the chain is broken. Break the chain and uncover the bone as much as we have indicated and cauterize it with a cautery in the last part of the head where it is called "the fontanelle" - that is the place where cupping glasses are applied. And soften your hand in this, and do not uncover the bone because the illness suffers great pain different from all other cauteries of the head.
And I say this cautery in its place because it is necessary to cauterize with the same cautery with which you cauterize the horns of the head and the occiput, for that cautery is more subtle than that with which you cauterize the middle part of the head; and this is the form of it.
Chapter Three
Of cautery treatment for non-acute migraine.
When sudden pain occurs in the part of the head or when there is continuous pain inside the brain, let it be evacuated with medicines that cleanse the head and let the other treatment which I have described in previous sections be administered. And if none of this helps, then cautery treatment may be done in two ways: either cautery with an acutely burning medicine, or with iron.
The cautery with a burning medicine is as follows: take a dish of salt and dissolve it in vinegar and then separate the extremities from both ends. And then make an incision with a sharp lancet in the location of the pain on the temple within the area where the chain lies beneath the skin without exposing it.
"Then press upon them with a firm grasp for a descending constriction, and leave them thus for the space of three hours; then untie them and draw them out, and leave the plaster on for two or three days, then pause over the submerged area with a wet cloth until the place becomes warm."
"And then treat that wound until it is healed."
"If you wish, perform some warming medicines which I have written about in the second book of warming remedies."
"However, the cautery with iron is done in this manner; heat the cauterizing iron until it glows red-hot:"
"and is called nail clamps because its head resembles the shape of a nail with some curvature, and in its middle there is a small prominence."
"And then press the cauterizing iron onto the area of pain, keeping your hand steady so that the heat is not scattered, and slowly move the iron back and forth with speed."
"And if the quantity of the cauterization is as great as the size of the wound itself, lift your hand away quickly so that the artery that remains open does not become cauterized, for fear that blood flow ceases."
"And then soak a piece of cotton in saltwater and apply it to the area, leaving it there for three days. Then rinse off with warm water, and then treat the wound until it is healed."
"If you wish, cauterize with the tip of a knife according to cautery, and be careful not to cut an artery in this migraine specifically."
"Chapter Four."
"Regarding the cautery of an ancient headache."
"When you treat a headache with the methods we have mentioned previously and in the divisions of illnesses, but find that it is not effective, then it is necessary to heat the cauterizing knife until it glows red-hot. Then apply your hand to the location of the pain for a moment and press down firmly until you cut through the skin and reach the bone."
"But it is necessary for you to guard against the continuation of the jawbone, which is moved by chewing, and ensure that the nerve is not cauterized or burned, and that there is no spasm."
"And concerning the care and caution regarding blood flow from the artery that is opened, for there is fear in such an opening, especially for one who does not know what they are doing and is untrained or inexperienced. Leave the operation to someone experienced at the beginning."
"And here we come back with a reminder of the method for controlling accidental bleeding from an artery according to its manner in the place where this book is located."
"And if you see this illness not helped by the cautery and that the patient can tolerate it, then cauterize in the middle of the head as we have described, and treat the wound until it is healed."
"And if you wish, administer the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter on ligation of an artery with cautery using two knives, for this is a better and more certain cauterization."
"Chapter Five."
"Regarding cautery for ear pain."
"When there is pain in the ear due to friction and it has been treated with laxatives and other methods mentioned earlier but the pain persists, then heat the cautery instrument called 'punctum,' which has this form:"
"And then apply the cautery to the ignition point, and move it around the entire ear like a wheel, or in circles around each part if the pain is in one specific area." "Gradually apply heat with the cautery to the opening of the ear, little by little, until you feel the location with your hand."
"And if you apply cautery at several points around the entire ear and it relieves the pain, then treat those locations until they are healed."
"Chapter Six."
"Regarding cautery for strangulation."
"Strangulation that is cured with cautery only refers to those types that come on suddenly due to blood clots, as we have mentioned in the divisions of illnesses."
"Avoid cautery for the type that comes on due to dryness or spasm of a nerve."
"When you treat that type of strangulation with remedies and expectorants but find that your treatment is not effective, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient at three locations: first, at the opening of the ear; second, a little below the temple; and third, at the junction of the two lips."
"And pause your cautery on the side opposite to the affected area, for softening occurs only in the part that appears healed."
"The method of cautery is to cauterize with the cautery instrument on the right side of the ear's tip slightly above the horn of the head, and also on the temple on the other side, the length of which should be according to the length of a finger. Then pause your hand with the cautery until it burns as much as half of its circumference."
"This is the form of the cautery instrument, and it is specifically for use by surgeons. Its form is shown in front of this table." "Nevertheless, even more subtle and precise than this one is the one you see here. It is necessary to use a knife instead of excessive coarseness."
"And then treat the location with what is described as the process until it is healed."
"Chapter Seven."
"Regarding cautery for ancient apoplexy."
"When apoplexy has become chronic and you treat it with the methods we have described but find that your treatment is not effective and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize them at four locations: on all of their cranial bones; in the middle of the head as we have mentioned; and on the nape of the neck." "The method of cautery is done according to what has been described above."
"And it is also cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; this is the last step. And then treat with what you process."
"Chapter Eight."
"Regarding cautery for fainting caused by blood clots."
"It is necessary to give the patient large diuretics and pills made of blessed thistle at the beginning."
"And then shave the head completely for the patient, and pause on their nape where the plaster of lead is placed, as described in the treatise on plasters."
"And pause there several times, for this is the method of cautery." "Do what you have been told according to that order I have mentioned."
"And then if the patient is healed well with that, do so. But if not, then apply three cauteries on the last part of their head, which should be descending from the highest point of the head down to the lowest point of the neck." "Pause between each cautery for the thickness of a finger, and then treat the cautery with what is processed."
"But if you make an addition and the patient is tolerant of it, then apply cautery in the middle. And if you wish to make an additional addition, then apply cautery on both cranial bones."
"And then treat until healed. And let the cauteries be olive-shaped according to the form shown above."
"Chapter Nine."
"Regarding cautery for paralysis and softening of the entire body."
"It is necessary that you process in clarification of the head with diuretics and what we have said. And then shave the head of the patient, and apply cautery to them on the middle of their head, on all of their cranial bones, on the last part of it, and apply three cauteries on the spinal bones of the neck."
If it is necessary in the illness of body softening due to too much coldness and tolerances, and the illness is severe, then cauterize with four cauteries on the shoulders of the back, and afterward apply a cautery entering near the base of the neck of him, and raise your hand. Afterward, heal him until he is healed, then cauterize with olive oil cautery.
Chapter X.
Of cautery for epilepsy.
The epileptic is not cauterized unless the epilepsy is due to phlegm.
Therefore, first cleanse the brain of him with hellebore at the beginning and also use the other treatment that we have mentioned in the division when the illness is great and does not respond to medicines.
And if it is a child who does not tolerate medicines, then administer purgatives and chew hellebore for him, before that for several days, with proper diet of foods.
And afterward shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize him with one cautery in the middle of the head according to the previous manner, and with another cautery on the back of his head, and cauterize each of his horns. And if the patient is strong and does not respond to medicines, then cauterize him with the cauteries mentioned above, having paralytically softened and mollified his body over the vertebrae of the neck and back.
And let the cautery be olive oil according to what is preceding.
But if the patient is a child, then pause cauterizing with subtle cauteries in this manner:
Chapter XI
Of cautery for melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupt humidity and thick phlegm, then cauterize him with the cauteries that we have mentioned previously, having paralyzed him.
And if the cause of melancholy is excessive matter that declines to melancholy and the body of the patient is moist, then he should drink hellebore to cleanse his brain according to what has been mentioned in the division.
And afterward shave the head of the patient, and then place a well-prepared plaster made from dove's dung on his head in a circle, and afterward remove it from the middle of the head.
And let the patient be kept quiet and restrained from all parts.
And afterward apply a liniment; and afterwards it is fitting to apply powder of ram's testicles. And heat him over the fire with moderate warmth according to his endurance when placed upon him. And afterward place him on the middle of the head in a circle and let him remain until he is warmed up.
And do this with the patient once each week until he is healed; or if you wish, cauterize him with small points according to his strength, but hold your hand thus with a cautery arranged in this manner: This is the type of cautery that moistens the brain evenly.
And afterward apply powder made from the ashes of wool or flaxseed.
Chapter XII
"For burning off descending water from the head."
"When you have declared the beginning of water in the head by its signs that I mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient something to drink that cleanses their head, and guard them from all humidity."
"And let them take a bath with warm water for several days."
Approximately command him to raise his head, and cauterize it with a cautery in the middle of the head; then cauterize it with two cauteries on both temples if it is the beginning of an epilepsy attack with water in both ears, or on one side if it begins only in one ear.
Make incisions with cauteries on all the veins and arteries that are located near the neck; the cauteries should be of such a length as to reach the level of the temples.
And be careful about blood flow when cauterizing; and if you see any blood flowing, remove the cautery with some medicine that you have available.
And bring along knowledge about extraction of arteries and ablation of those, as well as caution regarding blood flow.
Sometimes it is cauterized in the back of the neck near two bones with two cauteries perpendicularly applied.
Capitol 13
Regarding the cauterization of old tears (i.e., treatment of chronic blepharitis or conjunctivitis).
When tears from the eyes are excessive and continuous due to veins and arteries in the visible area of the head being obstructed by a superfluous flow of serous fluid, then cauterize as follows: with the cautery mentioned at the beginning for watery discharge in the ears, and with another cautery in the middle of the head, and with two cauteries on either side of the temples, and with two cauteries on either side of the two bones in the neck. And if you need to add more, then cauterize also on both sides of the cheekbone above the outer corner of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Capitol 14
Regarding cauterization for foul-smelling breath (i.e., treatment of halitosis).
When you treat someone with the remedy mentioned earlier and it does not prove effective, then prepare and give them to drink the decoction for three nights. Afterwards, shave their head and cauterize it as follows: first with a cautery in the middle and then with an olive-shaped cautery. And also cauterize with a clove-shaped cautery on both eyebrows above the hairline using two cauteries.
And be careful not to burn the artery (i.e., avoid damaging blood vessels).
This is the shape of the clove-shaped cautery:
Capitol 15
Burns for softening eyelids
When the eyelid is softened by illness or humidity, cauterize that eyelid with this lunar cautery; and this is how it is done:
"If you wish, cauterize that area on both eyebrows with two small cauteries, separated from the temples." "And let the length of each cautery be according to the amount of eyebrow present."
"Press the cautery gently onto the skin, so that only a third of the eyelid's thickness is burned."
Chapter XVI
"Regarding cauterization of the eyelids when the hairs inside become inflamed and pierce the eye."
"When the hairs of the eyelid become inflamed and penetrate the eye so that it is pierced, there are two ways to cauterize them: either by burning or using medicinal remedies."
"If cauterizing with fire, command the patient beforehand that they pull out their hairs like those who are plucked for depilation, ensuring they are lengthened and hardened; and if one of them pierces near its origin, then immediately stretch the eyelids using a bandage so that it is not bothered until the hairs have grown back."
"When the hairs have grown back and hardened, then pause the patient's head against a wall, and holding the eyelids open with one hand using a tent-like device made of linen cloth, bring the cautery close to the base of the hairs."
"And hold the cautery wrapped in wax or pitch-plaster over the eyelid."
"And then ignite the cautery of which this is the shape."
"And then cauterize over the figure that you have traced, little by little in many places until the surface of the skin appears like a boxwood leaf."
"A sign that your work is complete is when you see the eyelid of the eye begin to contract and its hairs rise up from the puncture wound."
"And then raise your hand [from the cauterization] and leave it for three days. After that, touch the area gently around the scar until it has healed." "And then dress it with gauze until it is healed."
"But if the hairs return for some reason and the eyelid becomes softened again, then perform the cautery once more just as you had done initially."
"But if the hairs remain on the eyelid and it droops downwards, then cauterize that area until it is raised to its natural position, closed, and the hairs do not obstruct the eye."
"But during cauterization with a burning medicine, you should command the patient to raise their eyebrows until they are fully extended and closed. Then, make a template of boxwood leaf shape from card or cloth."
"And then take some known soap and live coals and mix them well together quickly so that it does not cool down. Then spread this mixture onto the card template shaped like a boxwood leaf, and place it over one or both eyes. The patient should keep their eye covered with a damp cloth while keeping their head still."
"And then place your finger on the medicine and press it gently without moving until the patient feels the bite of the medicine, for the bite is like that of fire."
"And when the patient feels that sensation of being bitten, then lift off the medicine and move it with your fingertip; once the biting sensation ceases, remove the medicine and rinse the eye with water. Then observe whether the eyelid has risen as it should be when lifted by the restriction with fire or incision, for sometimes it is necessary to repeat the operation until the eye is completely closed."
"And then place a border around it so that the edge of the wound is properly sealed. Then dress it with deaffection or another suitable dressing until it heals."
"And you must be very diligent to ensure that no particles of the medicine fall into the eye during your operation. And if the eyelid becomes inflamed after several days and some cause of hairs obstruction occurs in the eye, then repeat your application of the medicine on that area which is inflamed, just as you did at the beginning. And then surround it until it heals."
"And this is the shape of a boxwood leaf template:"
"And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and smallness, and thus your cauterization should be adjusted accordingly."
"And it shall not be hidden from those who wish to learn this art correctly."
"Chapter XVII."
"Of the cautery of a fistula that is in the tear duct of the eye."
"When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases and your treatment does not improve, then you should cauterize it in this manner: Have the patient hold their head still with their chin on their chest, and have someone else hold the patient's head firmly between their thighs so that it is not moved or shaken by the patient's own head."
"And then place a hot iron in a boxwood leaf template or in pitch on the eye of the patient."
"And then heat the cautery, which has this shape:"
"which is heated, so that it resembles the shape of a reed or a vulture's feather at its tip where the cautery is made."
"If you wish, let it penetrate slightly into the other extremity." "And if you want, let it come out like this:"
"But rather use the one that is heated for better results."
"And then press on the fistula if it is open, and draw out its humor and dry it." "But if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus from it."
"And then take the cautery which is well heated and place it near the eye but not too close to the cautery of the eye at the opening of the nose, so that you do not err with your hand or cause discomfort to the patient. Then place the cautery on the granuloma and burn it."
"And thus if at the beginning of your cautery it enters the bone, that is good. But if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice if necessary, and leave it alone for three days. Then dress it with a dry dressing until it heals."
"But if after eleven days it has not healed, then apply a caustic medicine until the bone is exposed and scrape it according to what you consider necessary in this chapter."
"And there is another method of cautery for fistulas which some first said: Take a narrow knife and cut into the location of the fistula. Then place in that fissure a subtle thread of lead, about one inch long. Then take it up with tweezers while holding it firmly so that the molten lead does not fall into the eye of the patient. And then place this on the eye of the patient covered with a boxwood leaf template or water, for lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it wonderfully."
"And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cautery and treatment, that is good. But if not, then it is necessary to administer a traction of the nose and reduce the fistula into the nasal cavity according to what will be written in its proper place."
"Chapter XVIII."
"Of the cautery of the fissure of the eyelids."
"Fissures occur frequently in the eyelids, and more so in children's eyelids."
"So when you treat those fissures as we have said in the divisions and your treatment is not beneficial, then heat a small cutting cautery of this shape:"
"And let it be heated according to the sharpness of a needle."
"Then carefully place that heated cautery in those fissures until it reaches the edge of the fissure."
"And then dress it with wax until it heals."
"Chapter XIX."
"Of the cautery of a fistula in the mouth."
"When an abscess forms on the uvula or palate or at the roots of the teeth and it bursts and becomes chronic, forming a fistula which you treat without success, then you should heat a cautery according to the size received in the fistula. Then insert that heated cautery into the tract of the fistula until the hot iron reaches the edge of it. And repeat this once or twice. Then dress it with what we have said about treatment until it heals."
"And if the healing is separated and healed, that is good. But if not, then it is necessary to expose the location and scrape out the rotten bone according to what will be written in its chapter."
"Chapter XX."
"The cauterization of teeth and the softening of vessels."
"When vessels are softened by moisture and teeth are moistened, and you treat them with medications but they do not improve, then place the head of the patient on a cloth, and quickly bring the cautery iron, as shown here. Thus, hold the jawula over the tooth and insert the cautery iron into it quickly, taking care that your hand does not come too close so that the patient feels the heat of the fire reaching the root of the tooth."
"And then remove your hand, and repeat the cautery several times according to what you desire."
"Then the patient should rinse their mouth with salt water and hold it for an hour, and then spit it out, because the moist tooth is solidified and the softened gum is strengthened and the corrupted moisture is dried."
Here is a translation of Chapter XXI:
"Of cauterization for tooth pain."
"When toothache is caused by coldness, or there is heat or worm in it, and the cure does not work with medicine, then cauterize it in that place in two ways: either cauterize it with a red-hot iron or cauteri with fire."
"To cauterize with a red-hot iron: you take a piece of red-hot iron and place it on the coal fire, then take cotton and wrap it around the tip of the toothpick, and quickly immerse that in boiling water. Then apply that to the painful tooth immediately before it cools."
"And repeat this several times until the power of the heat reaches the root of the teeth."
"Now if you wish, immerse wool or cotton in the aforementioned boiling water, place it on the painful tooth, and then apply that hot iron to the groove of the tooth until the iron reaches its point."
"But however the cauterization with fire is done: you wait until the coal or iron is red-hot, and it should be in the middle of the fire some distance away so that the heat does not reach the mouth of the sick person."
"And then ignite the cautery in whatever shape it may be, place it on the tooth and press it there with your hand until the cautery cools. And do this several times, either that day or the next, until the pain is removed."
"And it should be noted that after this cautery, the patient should rinse their mouth with good water and hold it there for an hour, and then spit it out. And this is the form of the cautery."
"And cauterize with whatever you wish according to what is possible for you."
"And this is the form of the canal:"
Chapter XXII
Of the cauterization of external haemorrhoids.
When external haemorrhoids are composed of fatty matter and humors that are resistant to digestion by medications and you wish to digest them thus, then you ignite the cautery that has two ends closed so that yes smoke goes through one end, and place it on that pile once or twice until it reaches its point."
"And if the pile is small, then place the cautery according to its quantity, and then leave it for three days and apply it to the cotton immersed in boiling water until what the fire has burnt is removed."
"And then treat it with ointments and bandages until it is healed."
De cauterizacio de internas haemorrhoidas.
"For cauterization of a sore throat and constriction of the breath."
"When humidity comes over the canal of the lung, especially when it is with coldness of complexion, then it is necessary for the patient to be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and also cauterize that place on the root of the uvula in the depressed area."
"And make sure not to burn the uvula with the cautery nor burn too much of its base."
"And cauterize that place with another cautery on the junction of the neck in the last vertebra of it." "And the cautery of it should be done in such a way as described before."
"Moreover, treat that with what is prescribed until it is healed."
"Chapter XXIV"
"For cauterization of lung disease and cough."
"When cough and lung disease are from moist coldness, and the disease does not have fever nor spitting, and it is an old disease, then cauterize that place with two cauteries over the furcula in the depressed areas of the lungs and breasts; and with another cautery in the middle of the pit between two nipples; and the cauteries should be done firmly according to the previous method."
"And if you wish, your cautery can also be punctured with the cautery called 'puncta', whose form is described in the punctuation of ear pain."
"And make several punctures there, and afterwards treat that place with what you have prescribed until it is healed."
"Already the cautery has three branches, therefore cauterization is done with that; in one session you can perform three cauteries according to this method:"
"Chapter XXV."
"The cauterization of the little one that is the head of the helper."
"When the head of the helper is dislocated due to slippery humidity and is not fixed at the time of its return, you must reduce its dislocation before it returns to its usual position. First, reduce the dislocation, and then place the patient on their back or side. Next, lift the shoulder that is located beneath the little one's neck up towards the upper parts with your left hand if the joint is dislocated below."
"And also ignite the cautery, which has two heads; this is its form:"
"And then cauterize the shoulder until it enters that of the other side. Now comes the figure for cauterizing with four cautery heads."
"And sometimes it is adjusted in this manner, and therefore there are eight cautery heads."
"And then pause over the cautery with cotton dipped in salt, and make sure the patient is at rest, so that the limb is not moved for some time until it is consoled."
"And if the dislocation is above and it has been done this way, then cauterize over the muscle with a claw-shaped cautery or pointed cauteries, for the joint is strengthened, moisture is reduced, and the patient is healed."
"Chapter 26."
"Of cautery of the stomach."
"When the stomach is hot and moist with many humors which that part has extracted from its complexion and multiplied, and if you continue your usual methods of treatment without considering the cause, it will happen that the patient will become worse, so extend their arms and legs, place them on a table, and cauterize this area with three cauteries: one on the lower side of the sternum about the size of a fingertip, one on each side of the sternum like the points of a triangle; take care that those which are not adjacent do not cause blisters."
"The depth of the cautery should be equal to the thickness of two thirds of the diameter of a finger."
"And if you want to use a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form, this is a cautery in the shape of a circle with this form:"
"And the stomach is punctured with that which frightens him from this cautery: and if you see on the stomach a point according to how much you want, cauterize it with tentativeness using the cautery; and also cure it with the treatment that has been previously mentioned until it is healed."
"Chapter XXVII."
"On cauterizing a fatty liver."
"When there is pain in the liver due to coldness or humidity or excessive windiness such that its normal complexion has been altered by superfluous egression, and if the illness is treated with what we have said and it does not improve, then you should raise the illness above its usual place and cautiously cauterize three points according to this form and quantity evenly on the liver near the hypochondrium, where a man lies on his back."
"And the space between each cautery should be equal to the thickness of the finger, and the cauteries should be as long as the right hand."
"Don't press too hard with the cautery handle."
"And if the amount of that which is adhered is equal to the thickness of a finger's joint, do not adjust it further; and if the illness is standing on the lungs; and if it is not standing, then let him be seated with his legs extended and raise his arms."
"And it may be possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a scalpel cautery if you have subtlety and prudence in the art."
"But be careful not to proceed too far in the cautery, and adhere the entire spinal cord so that the whole body is adhered and enters into the intestines, for here the spine is delicate. Know this."
"Chapter XXVIII."
"On puncturing an abscess of the liver with a cautery."
When an abscess or boil appears on the liver and you want to know if that boil is in the flesh of the liver or in its covering, then if it is in the flesh of the liver, the patient feels heavy and sharp pain.
And if it is in the covering of the liver, then the pain is very acute and sometimes even discourages physicians from treating it.
Therefore, make the patient turn onto their back; then find the location of the boil with your touch and burn it using an iron that resembles wool, whose shape has been described on the previous page. And cauterize with that cautery until all the chain is burned, until it reaches the nipple, until in ash it remains.
And then treat that one according to how you would treat other boils until it is healed.
And do not use this cautery technique unless you are someone who has studied medicine extensively and has treated many illnesses. Although some people have tried it several times with success, it is still better to leave such operations to those who deserve them and know how to perform them best.
Capítulo XXIX.
Of cautery for pleurisy.
It is said by ancient authors that cautery for pleurisy should be done in this manner: take a dry and hard splinter of aristologist wood (a type of oak), make it into a sharp point as thick as your finger.
And then immerse that splinter in oil and heat it over the fire. Then cauterize with it at a point between the continuation of the furcula and the collarbone; and with two small diagonal cauteries below the jaw on either side, inclining slightly towards the back of the neck; and with two cauteries between the fifth rib and the armpit, inclining slightly backwards; and with another cautery in the middle of the chest; and one on the stomach; and three cauteries on the back; and one cautery between the two shoulder blades; and two cauteries on either side of the chest.
And do not hold the cautery with your hand but place it in a suitable holder for the purpose of cauterizing.
And they also said that some people use a cautery made of iron like a rod and heated it until it glows red-hot, placing it between the shoulder blades until it reaches the boil and makes it suppurate in order to heal it, as we have mentioned for the boil on the liver.
But in this operation with cautery there is danger, because many people die immediately if it happens in the location of a fistula that does not heal.
Capítulo XXX.
Of cautery for the spleen.
When you treat the illness of the spleen with what we have said about division and curing, if your treatment does not succeed, then cauterize it in one of three acceptable ways:
"The thickness between each cautery should be that of a finger or slightly more, and the manner of the cautery should be as we have described for the burning of the liver equally."
"Do not press your hand on the cauteries; let the patient lie on their side."
"And another method of cautery is that you should light the cauteries having two vents, which we have mentioned in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and raise the collarbone which is situated towards the left side where the patient's chest lies."
"And your elevation should be such that you raise the collarbone along the length of the body, so that cauteries may be applied according to the width of the chest."
"And then introduce both vents promptly and simultaneously into that opening where the collarbone enters from the other side."
"Then extract the cautery, making four cauteries in total."
"If you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three vents."
"Then remove the cautery because it has been applied for too many days, since this is more harmful than all other causes preceding in treatment."
Chapter LXXI.
Of cauterization of dropsical patients.
"Cauterize hydrocele only, not scrotum improperly."
"When you treat the hydrocele with the methods of treatment that we have mentioned in this division and you do not succeed, then it is necessary to cauterize with four cauteries around the navel, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the spleen, two between the vertebrae of the back, one on the right side of the foot, and another on the stomach." "The depth of the cautery should be proportional to the thickness of the cord."
"And do not leave the cautery burning for too long, so that it grabs and stays on for a long time."
"And do not evacuate the patient from treatment until after the cautery has been applied, so that two intentions are added to it, and it will be hastened with the help of healing."
"The shape of the cautery with which the belly is cauterized should be like a key, according to the shape that is described above, and the one with which the back is cauterized should be olive-shaped, as it is described beforehand in its shape."
Chapter .xxxii
"Of cauterization of hair and skin."
"When the hair becomes infected with hydrops and is filled with yellow water, it is necessary to cauterize the hair on the back of the head, near where the ear joins the neck, raising your hand with the cautery and not turning it; and as soon as you raise your hand, do not return immediately, so that the yellow water does not ooze."
"The cautery should be done in this way: And afterwards make two cauteries on both sides of the skin, and each side should be cauterized with the tip of the cautery spoon." "And let the cauteries be done according to the length of the skin, one near the denuded area and the other near the middle of the skin, and make two cauteries on each side."
"And do not leave the dressing untreated for too long so that no water oozes from it."
"And then treat it with those causes that we have mentioned."
Chapter .xxxiii
"Regarding the cauterization of the abdominal body."
"When the abdominal body is affected by heat and humidity, it weakens the strength. This is the digestive and retentive virtue located in the stomach and intestines. It is treated with this method of treatment without any contradictions, sometimes the patient suffers from cauterization of virtues being exhibited, therefore cauterize it with a large cautery on its stomach as previously described for the cauterization of the stomach, with a circular cautery and four subtle cauteries around the navel, using a pointed cautery; or apply cauteries to the bladder and kidneys."
"However, if the humidity is excessive and the patient cannot tolerate it, then cauterize them on the pubis and intestines, placing two cauteries firmly on the stomach near the groin. This will achieve a perfect cure without error."
Chapter xxxiv
"On the cauterization of old hemorrhoids."
When the derriere is covered in ancient eruptions or one of thick humors or corrupted humidities, and they are cured with what we have said in this division without conferring your cure, then cauterize with three cauteries on the left side of the lower spine and a cautery above the navel, placed like this:
If you find that the stomach is chilled and its food not digested, and the face becomes pale, then cauterize it on the stomach with a large cautery as described; and with one cautery on the liver, and another on the spleen with a pointed cautery, leaving the cautery there for some time, and afterwards cure the inside when it is healed.
Chapter XXXV
Concerning cautery after excision of tumors.
When you cut arteries, then ignite the cautery that resembles a ray. Apply the cauterizing iron to the cut artery and push it in until it reaches the opening of the vein from which blood flows.
And do this once or twice, because if there are too many [arteries], then cauterize each one individually according to what has been said earlier, and then dress those wounds until they are healed.
And if you use a large cautery on some [arteries], it is more likely to cause injury.
Chapter XXXVI
Of the cauterization of fistulas made by nature in the region around the anus.
If nature does not obey the operation recommended in its place and the patient becomes frightened by this, then it should be treated with cautery.
Therefore, when there is some fistulous opening in the anus region and it is old, corrupted by bad humor and moisture, then it is more appropriate to probe that with a subtle tent and thus determine the quantity of its depth using the aforementioned tent.
Then apply the cautery that resembles a ray. And then insert that cautery while lit into this fistula, according to how deep the tent entered it.
And repeat applying the cautery until those corrupted tissues are completely burned once or twice or three times, according to how much it is necessary for you.
And be careful not to burn nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes into the body of the bladder or the body of the gut, then be careful about all those places. And do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshy location and you think that it is not penetrating.
"And next, heal the wound within until it is healed."
"And if the wound is sealed and its matter has been removed, and no new signs appear for some time, then you will know that it has entirely healed."
"And if the matter was not all removed from it, then you will know that it is penetrating or spreading into the surrounding flesh, or corrupted due to one of those causes which we will mention later."
Chapter XXXVII
Of cauterization of warts.
When warts cause pain by friction or are very rough, and the heat of the illness is increased because of this, then you should cauterize them with a cautery iron on each wart, pressing down firmly on each one, as mentioned in the memorandum.
And if you cauterize strongly with the second one for a short while, so that three cauteries are made in a row, then apply more cauteries afterwards as needed.
Chapter XXXVIII
"On cauterizing the bladder."
"When the bladder suffers from weakening and softening due to friction and moisture such that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize this in the part where the public hair begins above the bladder, cauterizing on the right side with one cautery iron and on the left side with another."
"And the length of each cautery iron should be according to the amount of hair in the pubic area. And cauterize this on the lower part of the back, using one cautery iron or two if necessary."
"And use a pointed cautery iron as needed."
"Chapter XXXIX."
"On cauterizing the uterus."
"When friction and moisture occur in the uterus, causing it to be closed off from pregnancy, and its menstrual flow is corrupted, delayed, or accompanied by pain during its occurrence, then that place should be cauterized with three cautery irons around the navel area as we have described for bladder cauterization; and also cauterize on the spot where the buttocks begin on the back, using one pointed cautery iron or two if necessary."
"Chapter XL."
"On cauterizing for dislocation of the urine."
"When moist and mucous urine flows from the urinary opening, and this is the cause of its inflammation, a sign of which is that one side protrudes more than the other when compared." "And the location of the dislocation can be found in the scrotum."
"Therefore you should cauterize the diseased area around the urinary opening with an annular cautery iron, and first mark it with your finger by tracing its circumference as it is rounded out, so that the opening falls into the middle of the circle."
"And the cautery previously described should be used in this form for cauterizing the stomach."
"And if that cautery is not available to you, then cauterize it with three olive-shaped cautery irons."
"And the cautery should be applied according to the amount of inflammation along the entire length of the penis; and afterwards carefully dress the wound so that it heals."
"Chapter XLI."
"On cauterizing the sciatic vein."
"When pain occurs at the urinary opening due to friction and moisture, that condition is treated as we have described earlier but without good results, then you should evacuate the excess humors with pills made from fetid substances or artificial ones of a similar nature; and afterwards cauterize it."
"And there are two methods of cautery for that condition: either cauterizing with burning medications or cauterizing with fire."
"According to two known methods, one of which is to cauterize it around the urinary opening with three triangular cautery irons in this shape, applying them deeply." "And let the space between each cautery be equal to the thickness of the finger, if using an olive-shaped or large cautery iron."
"But sometimes it is better to place the cautery in the middle above the head of the penis so that there are four cauteries."
"And if you wish to do so, cauterize with the circular cautery iron described in the form used for cauterizing dislocation of the penis, ensuring that it encircles and burns off all the inflammation along its length."
"And this is the method of cautery for sciatica when the pain is attached to the penis and not extended throughout the whole area."
"But if it extends throughout the area, then cauterize it with two cauteries on the thigh at the location where you feel the pain, and one cautery on the knee joint a little below the right side of the kneecap."
"And if using the knife-shaped cautery iron, its depth should be determined according to the amount of inflammation along the penis."
"And if you feel that the pain extends to the area around these three points, then cauterize there with a cautery iron having three or four or more points according as it is needed."
"And if you feel pain below the thigh, then cauterize there with a knife-shaped cautery iron."
"And be careful in all cauteries that you do not burn any large nerve or artery with the cautery iron, lest you harm the patient or cause a contraction."
"And I have seen some of those who have cauterized on the knee joint and burned too deeply in doing so, causing the thigh to become swollen, with a tumor reaching the foot, and resulting in gangrene and corruption of the entire limb." "And accordingly, a strong solution of vinegar should be applied locally, and if necessary, used as a drink to prevent death."
"And if the pain is in two places at once, cauterize each according to this method."
"And some authorities on cauterizing the penis describe the following method: Make it resemble an iron hoop, with its circumference about the size of a man's palm; and let its opening be on its convex side, according to the thickness of a date bone or somewhat less."
"And within that circle there should be another third one; and the space between them should be equal to the thickness of a finger joint; and these circles should have two openings on opposite sides; and their length should be about one or two finger joints, with the edges well sharpened with iron in the form shown below:"
"And appropriate it should be heated in the fire until it becomes red-hot and throws off sparks, then place it on the urinary opening with the diseased side towards you." "And then cauterize it with three applications of the hot iron at once."
"And afterward leave it alone for three days, then apply a plaster with honey and let the wound remain open too long, and cure it with ointments until it is healed."
"Albucasis says: 'O son, we have used this kind of cautery little because of the fear of injury to it, and therefore few are those who regard it.'"
"But among good cauteries there is one that suffers most, yet finds its proper place."
"But cautery with adherent medicines is done by making two circles having an opening bored in each, through which you insert the blade of a knife made of iron; let their length be about the thickness of two fingers or somewhat less."
"And if the space between each is equal to the thickness of a finger, and they are open below and above, let them contain within themselves according to this form:"
"And appropriate it should be placed on the urinary opening with the diseased part lying upon your left side, and press your hand over the urinary opening; then take some boiling water and pour it between two circles, letting its heat be gradually increased by the fire until it becomes as hot as possible, keeping it so for about an hour while enduring the biting and adhering of the iron — for that will bite like fire — until the biting ceases."
"And then raise your hand along with the instrument, and wash off all the boiling water from the penis with fresh water."
"And then leave it for three days, and apply honey plaster over it until the blackness of adhesion disappears, leaving it thus for some days until suppuration begins; this is the last stage in treatment."
"And finally cure it with ointments until it is healed."
"If the pain extends into the scrotum or thigh, make a similar cautery on those parts containing water as was done for the penis."
"And this is the manner of boiling water, which I have already written about in my treatise on the correction of medicines." Guessed translation: Take equal parts of alkali and unquenched lime, grind them together into a paste, sieve it through a new earthenware pot that has been pierced with a small hole on one side according to the amount needed for the mixture.
Guessed translation: Then place the bottom of one earthenware pot over another inverted one, and pour onto it a solution of water and quicklime, catching it with your fingertips. Once you have collected enough, press it gently but firmly with your fist, ensuring that no sharp water escapes from between the two pots.
Guessed translation: Next, gather all that water and pour it onto more fresh slaked lime and alkali, as at this point the solution will be very caustic. This mixture is used in many medical operations and for cautery of other limbs, as it has fire-like properties.
Guessed translation: And among these remedies is one used for cauterization of large wounds, such as pitch, honey, and soap mixed with slaked lime.
Guessed translation: And Galen recounts an operation and cure for the pain of arthritis and sciatica, greatly praising it and saying that no other treatment is necessary. For he was cured in a single application, as he himself reports, because he bathed in this mixture and became free of that affliction.
Guessed translation: And it is said that green celery should be taken, and if none is available, then fresh figs should be used. These should be finely chopped with a little salt and placed on the water where there is pain, or on the thing itself, or in a vessel, and bound up.
Guessed translation: And it should be left for three hours or for as long as the patient feels relief from the adhesion.
Guessed translation: And then put that [mixture] on a bath and once the body is warmed up, rub it into the skin. For the pain will cease and it will be healed.
Guessed translation: And know that these remedies should not be used for cautery, but rather for evacuation of the body.
Guessed translation: But Dioscorides says that when the streaked vein is cauterized with goat's beard, it is beneficial to apply this [mixture]; and the cautery should be done in this manner: wool should be dipped in old oil and placed between the thumb and forefinger.
Guessed translation: And then take dry goat's beard, inflame it with fire until it becomes carbonized. Then place it on the wool and apply it while it is still hot. Guessed translation: And repeat this [procedure], not ceasing until the sensation of biting pain has penetrated into the water and the pain has subsided.
Guessed translation: And this manner of cautery is called cautery with bellows.
Chapter XLII
Of cauterizing pain in the teeth.
Some pains in the back arise from several causes, such as from cold or from a blow or from excessive evacuation, and from similar causes due to the infusion of moist and warm matter.
Cautery is only used in this one condition which occurs due to an effusion of hot matter.
Therefore, it is necessary to evacuate the pain with pills made of dried figs and similar ones. These should be placed on the back where there is pain in three lines according to its length, because as many cauteries as there are fingers should be done in each line, depending on the amount of tolerance for the pain and the strength of it.
And cauterization should be done with a pointed cautery.
And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cauteries using a triangular cautery in this manner:
De ventositat de la cossella e de lo cor.
Cauterization at the beginning of swelling.
Many times this disease is seen in young children, and one of the signs that indicates its beginning in children is when it occurs above their anus, accompanied by swelling and redness.
And if it appears on the last vertebra of the back or neck, and begins to rise above the other vertebrae
And therefore, when you see this [swelling], in order to prevent it from spreading further, cauterize around it with a hot iron that is circular in shape so that the cautery covers the entire inflamed part of the spine.
And if you wish, cauterize around the spine with a cautery rod two or three lines thick So that the points are close together.
And afterwards, treat the affected area with what has been said [about cauterization].
But be sure not to administer cautery to swelling that is caused by spasm of nerves.
Chapter XLIV
Of the cauterization of podagra and pain in joints.
When pain in the joints is caused by cold humors that have infiltrated each member of the body, thus when pains occur in the feet, it is customary for doctors to call this gout properly.
And therefore, since gout caused by cold humors cannot be cured and the pains are not removed, cautery is resorted to.
You cauterize that area appropriately with several cauteries in the circuit of the ankle joint using moxa cauteries.
And this is the form of olive oil cautery:
If it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. If pains push inside the joints or other connections, and this happens often, then cauterize each painful point with three cauteries or four in total using this olive-oil cautery.
If more cauteries are needed than these, then cauterie each one and do not press too hard with the cautery beforehand, only enough to heat the surface of the skin.
If pains push inside both knees, then administer the cautery that we have described in this chapter.
If pains are only on one side and are called cramps, then prick around the belly button in this way: prick along these two lines.
If pains remain on them, then prick around the belly button above each knot and also on the palm of the hand.
If pains push near the joints or muscles of the thighs, then cauterize each of all the helpers (i.e., the points around the knee).
Do not rely solely on this cautery to treat illness without good regimen and receipt of medicines, for if a good regimen is followed and the disease is evacuated with this cautery alone, God willing, it will heal.
Chapter XLVI
**On Cauterization of Fractures**
When rupture occurs in the groin and intestines protrude before the hernia, and this is how it begins, then you should order the patient to abstain from his usual diet on that day and to use gentle laxatives so that the protruding opening of his belly may subside.
Then approach the patient between your thighs and press firmly on their buttocks, commanding them to hold their breath until the tumor or protruding intestines appear clearly.
Then return with your hands and press the rupture onto the bone of the pelvis, indicating the extremity that is like half a circle among the upper ribs.
And then apply the cautery in this form:
until it becomes very red and sparks are emitted. Then reduce the intestines or tumor to its natural position, and press your hand firmly over the spot so that the intestines do not escape.
And you have now put your hands between the patient's thighs and allowed him to rest on one elbow, and others support his shoulders and hips, while he holds his own buttocks with his hands.
Then place the cautery on that spot with your left hand holding the cautery, and press firmly until you reach the bone of the pelvis in the middle of the thigh; repeat this procedure with another burn if you have not succeeded in the first attempt.
Be sure to observe carefully the condition of the intestines during your cautery, and do not burn them accidentally lest the patient suffer death or some other great harm.
Know that if you do not reach the bone with the cautery, you have not completed your operation.
And it is necessary that the cautery used for children be small according to their size and proportion.
Then cleanse the spot of the cautery for three days with warm water so that the scar may heal properly.
Then dress him with other remedies until he is healed.
And the patient should lie on his back for forty days so that the wound may be sealed and healed properly.
It is necessary that the patient's diet be regulated according to the length of time for his healing, so that his belly may not be disturbed by excessive effort during recovery and intestines do not protrude.
And when he wants to get up after forty days, gradually administer solid food, and keep him in bed for another forty days.
And he should refrain from work, overindulgence in food and drink, and violent coughing or vomiting, for if he uses this regimen of healing entirely as prescribed, he will be completely healed.
And I have given you the treatment for ruptures in other parts of the belly, and if it is at the beginning and does not proceed, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size, and let the water that has been expelled from the intestine be as large as the third part of it; then dress him with what I have said, but do not use this remedy.
And some authors have previously stated that a rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery in the shape of an inverted triangle, as indicated by this diagram:
"And a line is placed that goes along the latitude in the side where the rupture occurs, and another line above it; then place your hand on a pointed cautery, but the first cautery should be lighter and better."
Here's the translation of "Capitol XLVI":
"For cauterization of a twisted [organ]."
"When pain occurs in certain members due to contusion or percussion and persists for a long time without improvement despite treatment with medicine, it is necessary to cauterize using a pointed cautery."
"And the cautery should be chosen according to the magnitude and smallness of the member, its strength and weakness, the location of the twist and the pain."
"If the first cautery does not heal it, then repeat the cautery; for such pains are often caused by a member adjacent to it being punctured, so that one should continue with cauteries until the ailment is healed."
"Chapter XLVI."
"For cauterization of leprosy."
"Some cases of leprosy are sometimes cauterized with little benefit, and especially if the type of leprosy is made by putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy."
"And therefore, when you wish to cauterize that person, consider whether the leprosy is dry and hardened as described in our division above. Do not give it, nor is it, if it has already begun to corrupt the whole body and all its completeness. Therefore, cauterize him on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and another a little further from it towards the forehead; at both horns; and one behind on the nape or neck."
"Lastly, press the cautery a little deeper until it impresses on the bone with a small impression, and thus loosen the scales so that the expiration of thick vapors may be alleviated from him. And cauterize the chest according to what is necessary."
"And if the leprosy has already spread over the person and appears manifestly, then you should cauterize him with those cauteries which we have mentioned above in the head; and cauterize also on the tip of the nose, and with two cauteries on each cheekbone, and two cauteries on the two shoulder blades, and six cauteries on the spine of the back, and one large one over the spine near the buttocks, and one on the buttock itself, and two on the ankles, and one on each ankle, and two on the toes and one on each toe, and two on the knees, and two on the muscles, and two on the tendons of his feet. And cauterize him on all the joints of these members and feet, and on each heel of his feet."
"And beware of burning the nerves which are over the heel lest thou burn them."
"Sometimes it is necessary to cauterize with one cautery on the bone of the breastbone, and another over the mouth of the stomach, and yet another over the liver."
"And know that the more closely you apply the cauteries, the greater is the benefit and the more helpful it is. And know that the person does not feel pain from the cautery as others do, because his body has become numb."
"And it is necessary that the cauteries be large or small according to the members and joints as prescribed by the species of instruments used."
"Next, care for the cautery with bran meal mixed with honey, and with other remedies until it is healed."
Capítulo XLVIII.
Chapter XLVIII. On cauterization for numbness
"When any member is paralyzed or numbed and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, but is not healed, then you should cauterize that paralyzed member with cauteries according to the size of the member or its smallness."
"And let your cautery enter the thickness of the skin a little." "Then treat it with ointment until it is healed."
"Sometimes some numbness which affects the hands and feet, and the spine of the back and elsewhere is cauterized, and by removing the impediment of the nerves which cause that member, the numbness is removed."
"But do not presume to do this except one who is knowledgeable in the anatomy of the members and the exit of the nerves throughout the whole body."
Capítulo XLIX.
Chapter XLIX. On cauterization for moles that are raised
"When moles are old and do not respond to any of the ointments of medicine, then cauterize over that with a preheated cautery a little according to the quantity of the thickness of the skin until its whiteness and color are removed and its color is changed."
"Then treat it with bran meal and lentil flour mixed with rose oil and with leaves of arnagosa, and with dove's blood or hen's blood, giving each one part and mixing them all together, and then wrap it with a cloth and place it on the spot until it is healed."
Capítulo L. De cauterizacio de cecas e catarros que son en les oeus.
"Regarding cauterization of cancer."
"If cancer begins and you want to remove it, then cauterize the affected area with a round cautery tool in a circular motion around its perimeter."
"And the learned say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle of the wound; but I have not seen this, because I fear that it might ulcerate, and I have seen this happen on several occasions."
"And it is then more appropriate to cauterize the perimeter with circles as we have said before, or with many cauteries."
"Chapter fifty-two."
"Regarding the cauterization of hemorrhoids."
"When some hemorrhoids are delayed in maturation, and this is due to the superfluity causing them or the state of the illness, because it is old and decrepit with little blood or due to time, and you want to hasten the maturation of hemorrhoids; then cauterize around them with many small puncturing cauteries; and leave those alone that have already matured."
"But if you want the perforation to be made with a cautery, then heat that cautery of which this is the shape: and pause it in the middle of the hemorrhoid until it penetrates the cord."
"And if you heat that cautery on that spot which is a little higher up, so that the vein of the arm may be relieved; and then dress it until it heals."
"Chapter fifty-three."
"Regarding the cauterization of eroding wounds."
"Erosion is wandering corruption in the member, which erodes it just as dry wood is consumed by fire."
"Therefore, if that erosion is in a place where it suffers cautery with fire, then heat small and large cautery nails according to what is convenient for that place where there is erosion."
"And then cauterize it throughout its entire extent until you have eradicated all the corrosion and nothing of it remains."
"And then leave it alone for three days, and apply over the cauterized places a plaster mixed with oil until all the scabs are eradicated and all the corruption."
"And then dress it with flesh-producing ointment."
"But if three days after that wound has healed with flesh without corruption, good. But if not, then repeat the cautery over what remains in the corrupted places."
"And erosion is sometimes treated with an acute medicine because it takes the place of cautery." "But however, cautery with fire is easier to judge well."
"And I have already spoken about the treatment of it with an acute medicine in its division, and therefore take that when you begin with it."
"Chapter fifty-four."
"Regarding the cautery of warts and similar conditions."
"Many times warts develop in the skin of the sick person that is called a 'claw,' which is a thick, penetrating cause that harms the skin. And there are two ways to cauterize them: with fire and with boiling water."
"But cautery with fire is done by heating the cautery cone-shaped like aulture's feather, which should be made of iron according to the size that corresponds to the wart throughout its entire extent, and it should be made of fine margins."
"And then pause that heated cautery on the wart, and then revolve your hand with the cautery around the circumference of the wart until it penetrates to the depth of the wart." "Leave it alone for three days until it begins to suppurate." "And then plaster that with wild mallows mixed with salt and leave the plaster on it for one night because it will eradicate its roots."
"And then dress the place with flesh-producing ointment until it is healed."
"And if it is not converted, and many times this happens on the surface of the body, more often in the breasts and thighs, then you must administer cautery with water there, which is done by taking a quill of bronze or iron orulture's feather and pausing that on the wart. And then pour some boiling water into the quill and keep your hand still, and revolve it with pressure from your whole hand so that the margin of the quill is pressed against the root of the wart, and allow the boiling water to pass through the front of the root of the wart. And wait for the sickness a little while for the biting of the boiling water for one hour, and then remove it because the wart with its roots will be eradicated."
"And do this to those and also do the other thing until you come upon all of those that are on their body."
"And then dress them afterwards, once the roots of the warts have been eradicated, with those ointments that cause flesh to grow."
"Chapter fifty-five."
"Regarding cautery for trembling (tremor)."
"When trembling occurs due to heat in the nerve or from a fever caused by heat, or from another similar cause, then you must cauterize it with four cauteries or five on the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra with one cautery; and also cauterize the sole of its foot and on its stomach with an olive-sized cautery."
"And trembling will subside and recovery from the feverish illness will be hastened."
"Chapter fifty-six."
"Regarding cautery for accidental blotches on the skin."
"When blotches appear on the skin, and they are pustules filled with thick corrupted matter, then at the beginning when it appears, it should be cauterized over all the head of the fistula with a subtle cautery with a myrtle wood tip that has been extended with fire; or with long roasting tongs; or with a lenticular cautery."
"And sometimes it is cauterized with a similar method at the beginning of its expulsion; and they are not believed, and the superficiality is disrupted doing this, and they heal from them."
"But nevertheless it should be done especially after evacuation with phlebotomy."
"Chapter fifty-seven."
"Regarding cautery for accidental flows of blood by means of arterial incision."
"Many times there are flows of arterial blood that are cut off by the plague that happens there, or by incision of ulcers or cauteries of the member, and then similar ones appear, which are difficult to stop."
"Therefore, when this happens to someone, then you must quickly press with your hand over the orifice of the artery and pause there with your little finger and squeeze that flow until the flow of blood from under your little finger is stopped so that it does not ooze."
"And then pause in the fire some small and large olive-sized cauteries for many more, and blow on them until they are very hot."
"And then take one of those small or large ones according to the place and size where the artery has been broken, and quickly press that cautery onto that vein once you have removed your little finger, so that it is applied and restricts that blood flow."
"And if blood is expelled from the orifice of the artery when you remove your little finger and press the cautery, then take another cautery quickly from those that are prepared in the fire, and do not cease doing this until the blood flow has been restricted."
"And be careful not to burn the nerve that is nearby, because it may come upon another mischief."
"And know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to restrict it in those except by one of four methods: either with cautery as mentioned earlier, or with extraction when it is not extracted because when it is extracted the ends of the muscle are burned and the blood flow is restricted, or it should be tied with felt or linen with strong tension, or paused upon medicines whose virtue is to restrict blood flow; and they should be strained with a poultice with moderate pressure."
"He who administers restriction to him with lamentation and with binding, and with cloth or by position of causes burning and similar, does not confirm but prepares."
"If indeed he does this without the presence of any other person and without medicine, let him then work with caution on the said vein above its opening as we have said, and consider how great is the contraction within that the blood is retained from the superior part of the ulcer; and over the artery let nothing be removed; and over the artery let water cold enough to coagulate the blood be sprinkled so that it may congeal and thicken; and let him afterwards see whether cautery or medicine is necessary."
"Regarding incisions and piercings, suction cups, phlebotomy, ulcers, and similar afflictions."
"We have spoken in the first chapter about every illness in which a cautery with fire is appropriate and with medicine burns, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for those with the forms of cauteries; and we have arranged the chapters from the head to the feet."
"And you shall proceed in this chapter with that same method, so as to relieve the one who desires it immediately about what they have asked."
"And before you begin this, know that in this chapter is included what is in the first chapter about cautery."
"And for that reason, great caution is necessary in the operation which is in this chapter, because many times an evacuation occurs with blood, with which life departs, due to the aspiration of the vein or incision over the abscess or opening of fistulas or purification of gangrene or extraction of arrows or incision of stones and their likeness." "And from all those, fear and trembling accompanies, and in the most of them death often occurs."
"And I advise you not to fall into that which is in danger, because sometimes it happens that you are handled by people with many ways of causing illnesses." "And some of them become angry with their illness and are light about death, and this is because of the severity of what they find in their illness, and the duration of it, and fear for the illness which signifies death."
"And there are those who give you their wealth and promises, you expecting them with health, but their illness is harmful."
"And therefore do not consent to that person who comes to you with this manner, and let your caution be greater than greed, and let your appetite not presume any cause without proper certain knowledge which verifies it, and for which there is commendable success."
"And use in the cure of all your illnesses prognosis and indication of that to which health is converted, because in that there is help for you in acquiring fame and memory, praise and glory."
"O, children, God breathes His understanding upon you and does not take away direction and protection from you, because that is in His hand."
"And I have ordered this chapter distinctly into chapters according to what has been written in the chapter on cautery, concerning the cure of the head down to the feet, so that it may be easier for you to find what you seek and of which you have need."
"Chapter one."
"Of the cure of water which is contained in the head of children."
You know that this disease often happens in children during childbirth, and when the midwife pulls out the head of the child without its life.
And sometimes it also happens for unknown reasons which are not known.
But you did not see this disease except in children; and of all those whom you saw, they were taken by death, and thus it seems to me that it is a very sad sight.
And you have seen that the head of one child was so full of water that it could not cease to swell because of the greatness of its head, and more that the moisture increased until it died.
And this moisture is either gathered between the neck and the skull, or it is gathered behind the skull on top of the brain.
For the operation in that case if the moisture is between the neck and the skull and the abscess is small, it is necessary for you to make an incision in the middle of the head with a scalpel in the width, and let its length be two fingers so that the moisture may flow out, and this is the form of the opening:
"And if moisture increases greatly and the boil becomes larger, then two incisions are made in this manner:"
"And if moisture is decreased, this indicates that the patient's commissures are fully opened and water cannot be squeezed out when you press on them with your thumb inside the mouth and it does not accumulate." "Now you must make three incisions in the middle of the head in this manner:"
"And drain out all the moisture near the incision;
This is another method of incision, where you consider the size of the abscess and collection of water. Sometimes it is greater in the occiput or in front of the partition, or on the right side or left side; thus proceed with the incision where the abscess appears and the accumulation of water is evident, and then do as much as possible for yourself.
And observe that you should not cut into the artery nor cause bleeding. Keep the disease from worsening through this flow of blood, with evacuation of humidity.
Chapter Two
When there occurs some cataract or wound in the eye or foot, and it becomes chronic and does not respond to medication treatment, then the last resort is the incision of those two arteries.
And therefore when you want to incise those arteries where the disease reaches its head, and close by rub the place with rough cloth so that the arteries appear, then press the neck of the disease with some cloth; and consider where the vein is located. And the places where each artery pulsates are hidden unless they appear in certain men.
And then place your index finger on the artery and incise each one with the sharp point of each scalpel entering into the bone, and this should be done across the width of the head.
And if you wish, insert the scalpel between the artery and cut it crosswise at its divisions above mentioned.
And let the length of the incision be two fingers wide, for when any vein is cut open blood gushes out with pulsating exit, which flows forth frequently.
But if the artery does not appear to your sight, then you should measure from the ear the quantity of space equal to three fingers' width, place your index finger on it, and make the incision into the bone.
And know that the amount of blood to be let is about one vein's worth. A robust man lets more or less than this amount, and all depends on the quantity which appears of the strength of the disease and the fullness of the artery.
And also consider the plague, for if some cause of headache remains on the bone, then incise there to prevent an aposteme from forming.
And also strengthen the wound with lint and cloth strips, and cure it with ointment until it is healed.
Chapter III
Of the Extraction of Arteries Which Are in the Temples
When there occurs an ancient migraine or sharp headache due to moist humors and bad qualities in the temples' nerves, or if it is ancient and vehement and seems like these, and it is treated with medicinal remedies but does not improve, then we have found useful in such diseases extraction of the arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those as we have shown.
And the manner of the operation and extraction of these is that the patient shaves the hair which is on the temples; and understand where the artery appears in the temple, for it will be shown to you by its pulsation, and is hidden unless in a few men due to great friction.
And if it is hidden from you, then let the patient's head be strengthened with some cloth; and also rub the place with a rough cloth or evaporate the place with hot water until the artery appears manifestly to you. And then take the scalpel of which this is the shape: And then carefully cut along the artery with it until you reach the artery; and also cut onto it and extract that from above until you extract it from the artery and discover those tunics which are beside it, on all sides.
But if the artery is small, then wrap that end of the needle around it, and cut a lengthwise slit in it according to how much its ends are stretched out and contracted, and there will be no flow of blood, for otherwise it would not rise up at all.
And then evacuate three or four veins' worth of blood from it.
And if the artery is large, then you should tie it in two places with strong double thread of cotton or long strings, so that it does not suffer putrefaction before the wound is consolidated and there is no flow of blood.
And then incise the excess which is between two ligatures; and do this at that time or some other time.
And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery at the bone or with a needle cautery until its ends are incised, and this will be in place of that operation.
And it is better to do this if the patient has a fever or is of warm complexion; for cautery is among those causes which help fine humors, and therefore it is better in such cases.
And also after the extraction of the arteries, you should cover the place with cotton wool, well-powdered; and then it should be cured with dry medications which cause flesh to grow, and with bandages until it is healed.
And if during the operation there occurs a flow of blood from the artery again, then stop that blood either with a cautery or by covering the place with cotton wool and pressing your hand until the bleeding stops. And if none of those causes is present to you, then press your finger on the place until the bleeding stops, and bore the place with water of great coldness until the sharpness subsides, and strengthen it as is necessary.
And that which is easiest in extraction of an artery is to cauterize the vein with this cautery having two points, for after you have indicated both places with a tent, and then ignited each one separately, they will reach the bone and incise the vein in two places, so that what is between its ends may be elongated, for it will not be completely consolidated by this cautery.
And this is the shape of the cautery:
And let the sharpness of both points be equal. But if they are not too sharp then two points are better; for if they are very sharp they come together closely with each other, and thus do not incise the flesh quickly.
Therefore because there is some thickness in them, the heat of the fire is retained within them and the flesh is incised gently.
This work is best among all works and very light.
Between two ribs, the space should be as thick as a finger.
The fourth chapter
Of the treatment of acute and chronic eye inflammation
When there are acid tears, it is the course of those veins that are above the head's test that are affected, and no medical cause for its cure is found, sometimes the patient's face becomes reddened and they feel ants crawling on their forehead, and their eyes become weakened, humid enough so that their eyelashes are stuck together, and the skin around them is scratched by the sharpness of the tears. The ancient remedy for this condition is as follows, but do not use it alone.
"It is commanded that the patient remove the hairs which are on their forehead, and then three incisions should be made in the forehead equally distant according to its length." "And if the length of the incision is too short: one incision should be equidistant from the length of the nose at the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length a little below the movement of the eyelids which are in the lacrimal area, and the third on the other side."
"And be careful not to injure the arteries which are on both sides, and extend your hand from the continuation of both jawbones." "And if the space of each incision is three finger widths wide."
"If you have a dry sponge or piece of cloth soaked in warm water to dry the blood."
"And precisely now insert the scissors with two sharp points into it; this is its cutting form:" "which is from the temple part between the second incision." "Excorciate with it all the skin that is between two incisions above the hip bone, and then do this from the middle incision up to the second incision." "And now place this scissor inside and insert another tool called a 'cutellar' into the first incision; it is sharp on one side and not sharp on the other."
"And pause the sharp edge of that against the attached flesh near the skin, and place it inside the bone cavity, and use it to reach the middle furrow, cutting off all the vessels descending from the head to the heels with it."
"However, make sure that the incision continues until it reaches the skin, and then do this in the middle furrow up to the other furrow."
"And once enough blood has flowed out, squeeze the places where the clots of blood have formed together."
"And then pause in each furrow where the old skin is, and place on it powders mixed with wine and oil and vinegar, making sure not to cause a burn wound."
"And on the third day, remove the sutures and administer a large infusion of cold water or tea, and then cure it with basilicon salve mixed with rose oil and other remedies so that the wounds heal well."
"Chapter 5."
"Regarding the treatment of lacerations by cauterization and the heels descending from the parts inside the head."
"When there is continuous cauterization with sharp and spreading veins, and the eyes of the sick person are inflamed and reddened, and their function is weakened, and the eyelids are ulcerated and their hair falls out, and there is acute painful sensation in the forehead with subsequent severe headache, you should know that these materials and cauterizations come from tiny veins originating inside."
"And the best treatment for this is to have the patient shave their forehead, and then make an incision in it at the middle point of the forehead, a little one across its width (starting from the left temple reaching the right temple; and the incision should be between the bone; and remove your hand from the ligaments of the temples which are attached near the jaw), until the bone is exposed."
"Dry all the blood with a sponge or dry cloth, and then fill in between the two lips of the incision with boiled wax or hot cloth." "And then place powder mixed with wine and oil on top to prevent burning wound formation."
"And when you remove that and see that the burn wound has diminished, then you should scrape the bone where it begins to have flesh, and then treat it with a drying regimen which makes the flesh dry out, like this: take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mix them together, and make an plaster from them and apply it to these wounds so that the flesh grows fresh again."
"Chapter 6."
"Regarding the treatment of what happens in the ears."
"There are four kinds of causes that can happen in the ears: either it is mineral or similar to stone, like iron and copper; or it is from a plant, like chickpeas or broad beans; or it is caused by liquid, like water and vinegar and their similars; or some kind of animal."
"And therefore when a stone or other similar cause falls into the ear and does not fit nor cross inside it, place the ear in the sun, and if the stone is visible, then distill onto that some cause of violet oil or sesame, and then administer the extraction of it, and make him sneeze with condition, and plug the nostrils during the arrival of sneezing." "And then place some pieces of cloth or wool around the ear, and stretch the ear upwards at its parts, because many times it happens that these causes are forgotten with these treatments."
"And if it is not removed, then administer extraction of it with the instrument called the 'subtle epicicarious gesture', whose shape is as follows:"
"And if it cannot be removed with the gesture, then it is good; and if not, then administer extraction of it with a subtle hook made of little doubling."
"And if it cannot be removed by that, then make a cannula of brass and insert the tip of the cannula into the opening of the ear and close around the cannula with wax and softened oil so that only the cannula enters." "And then extract it with a strong attraction using the narrow wind, because many times with this what we have described happens."
"But if it cannot be removed in this manner, then take some heated salt or sometimes prepared with which chickens are seized by the foot in a moderate amount, and place that on the tip of the ear, and then wrap over that carefully placed." "And then insert that into the opening of the ear with ease, and then dry out the ear from its moisture."
"And therefore if it cannot be removed with all the causes which we have described, then cut into that before it becomes a burn wound or spasm."
"The manner of cutting that is: first sanctify the illness of the vein called the 'sephasic' and extract its blood according to the manner of its virtue, and then press that between your palms and turn the ear upwards at its parts, and end with a small incision in the root of the ear where it has been pressed." "And let the incision be moon-shaped so that it reaches to the stone, and once the stone is captured, remove it if you can with appropriate instruments; and then sew up the incision at that time with speed, and treat it until it is healed."
"And if the cause that falls into the ear is one of those fats which cross and swell up, then administer treatment and extraction of it; but if it does not obey your efforts, then take a fine subtle spatula according to this shape:" "and use that for the excision of that fat which has fallen into the ear."
"Do not do this when you think that it has already been moistened by the vapor of the ear, and place some pieces around it, and then extract those with hooks or with subtle gestures, or with incision as we have said, because extraction of it is eased."
"But when water enters the ear, the illness should use sneezing with condition at the beginning, and fill its ear with some warm cotton, and press over that ear in which there is water, and if it cannot be removed by this, then take many small stones and lions according to the length of the finger, heat those on the fire a little, and have the patient insert one of those into the opening of his ear and sit on one side of that part and strike with another stone over the stone which is inside the ear." "Therefore do not cease this until all the water has been removed."
"Therefore do not cease this until all the water has been removed." "And if the water is not removed in this way, then take some paper or cotton, and put one end of it into the ear and extend the other end with fire until most of it has been burned."
"Next, take another vessel and perform this procedure so many times that all the water is removed. Then, straiten it with a cannula as previously mentioned regarding stone extraction."
"If a small animal enters that ear, press it down gently and remove it similarly. If it's a large one causing pain in the head, administer the extraction with gestures and ointment, making sure to remove all of it; its removal will be easier than removing any other cause present in the ear."
"If, when treating an ear worm as previously mentioned in this division and the treatise on distillations, you find that your treatment is ineffective, then you should examine the ear in sunlight."
"And if you find any cause of worms here, then remove them with gestures or subtle ointments. But if you find no cause, then take a cannula that is narrow at one end and wider at the other, shaped like this:" "Its introduction of the thin extremity into the ear according to the amount that the patient can tolerate; and then suck with it strongly, doing this many times until all the worms are expelled."
"If you do not comply with the aforementioned prescription, then fill and seal the opening of the cannula with wax as mentioned earlier. Then administer distillations which have already been used in the past for treating worms, which you can find in the treatise on distillations."
"And this is the shape of the instrument with which to pour medicinal oils into the ear:" "And it should be made of silver or brass, slender, with a small hole at one end and flat on top."
"So that it fits tightly into the concavity of the cannula as needed." "And if you wish, take the wand and wrap it decently around the end of it. Then pour oil into the concavity of the instrument, or juice of some herb, or whatever medicine you choose into the cannula — with that being in the ear — then insert the wand gently on top and squeeze it with gentle pressure until the oil is expelled into the concavity of the instrument and the disease feels the oil inside."
"And whatever is poured into the ear should be heated gently over fire." "And make sure that the cause which you are distilling into the ear is not too hot, for medicines for the ear cannot tolerate this."
"Chapter VII."
"On the treatment of earache."
Some children sometimes exit from the wombs of their mothers unperforated, and this has happened to some men, deafness in the ear due to plague or meat not cooked well at that time; and this deafness sometimes occurs in the front of the Eustachian tube of the ear which does not consent hearing, and sometimes it is in the parts outside.
This one that happens at the front of him, which does not comprehend hearing, is in the most serious conditions for difficult recovery.
And in that one where it succeeds to hear, you should put your ear near the patient's mouth and listen carefully. And then if there is obvious deafness, open that with a probe of subtle spatula whose shape it has.
If the tip of it where it should be inserted is small, one part being sharp and the other blunt, then the probe should be doubled on two sides so that it does not harm the ear.
And then if the deafness is due to flesh grown in the ear or in its membrane, immediately use those with fine forceps and cut that violently obstructing part inside where all the flesh has remained.
And if deafness is at the front of the ear, then take a fine wire and heat it gently on fire, and carefully put it in the membrane of the ear.
And then if you have felt great deafness with what the patient feels easily, due to heaviness of hearing, relieve that pressure gently without hurting the nerves of the ear.
And then put a bandage around the ear according to its size of circumference that you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; and do this for some days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound. Or else take wax and pour it into boiling water, grind it thoroughly and use it, and if sometimes the ear is already inflamed then you should remove that wax and replace it with other wax that you have prepared with rose oil until the inflammation ceases; and then cure it until it heals.
But if bleeding occurs, then soak a sponge or cloth in cold water and apply it to the ear, and use other treatment that stops the flow of blood, which is mentioned in the treatise on distillation.
Chapter VIII
Of the cure for inflammation that occurs in the eyelids.
"Dry out the moisture that occasionally appears on the eyelids of the eyes; sometimes they are dry."
Therefore you must have those tweezers or pincers ready, and quickly spread the edges of the wound apart, and then carefully pause over the locations described.
But if pain comes with bleeding, you should cauterize it immediately with a fine-pointed cautery needle.
The best cauterization is near the incisions and wounds that return when there remains some cause of their occurrence. When they are cauterized with fire, those wounds are burned and do not return.
Chapter IX
Treatment for swelling that comes to the eyelids of the eyes
Sometimes it happens that in the eyelids of the eyes there appears some cause which resembles swelling in its hardness and toughness, and for this reason it is called swelling.
And it is an accumulation of thick moisture in the lower eyelid above.
Therefore, their operation is to examine whether the size of it appears from beneath the eyelid and is enlarged in all parts. The cause of this is lightness.
Therefore make an incision over that with a scalpel for the width, and promptly examine it throughout its extent with ease so that it may be evacuated, then suspend it with hooks and cut it.
And if the wound is large, then adjust it with a suture; and care for it until it has healed.
But if it is small, do not worry about that because the ointment of it restores it and covers it over.
And if the size is decreasing within the partitions inside the eyelid, then you must evacuate the eyelid and suspend the size with hooks, another one that you will need for incision, and press it throughout its extent, and if the eyelid through incision has extended, do not worry about anything.
And moreover concerning the incision, wash the wound with salt water; and treat the place with something that covers it within until it has healed.
Chapter X
Concerning the treatment of a boil on the upper eyelid.
A boil is a growth that arises in the tissues of the upper eyelid, and it commonly occurs in children. It aggravates wounds of those who suffer from them and affects their sight much; they cannot look at the brightness of the sun because tears flow from their eyes.
"You therefore have them lie on their backs all the time, and even during sleep; and if you see moisture on their eyelids, which have already been covered by swelling, then encroachment of inflammation is apparent in the eye. And when you press that area with your fingers, you feel pulsation within it."
"There is a certain way of operating which the patient places their head on the pillow and props up drapes on both sides, and makes a circle according to the quantity that contains earthenware of all parts. Then they place that over that and press with their fingers all around so that arcernac may be aggregated in the middle of the circle. And then they finish by striking in the middle of that humidity with spatula incidentally through the latitude, and the fissure should not be greater than the fissure made in trepanation."
"But first of all you should cut the entire chain until you reach arcernac, for in most cases it proceeds through a fissure according to the form of grayish-white matter."
"Then remove that with drapes which you have wrapped between your fingers to the parts outside and roll it between your right hand and left hand until it is gone."
"And be sure not to adjust in the fissure lest with the spatula you reach the humor and damage that."
"But if your arcernac does not appear at the beginning of the fissure, then adjust in the fissure a little with ease until arcernac proceeds. And then remove it as we have said. And then soak drapes in water and wine and apply them on that place and wipe those with powders."
"And so some take salt and sprinkle it on the concavity of the fissure to prevent that which remains of that humor."
"And then dress that until it is healed."
"But if you happen to cut in the place of an aposteme cautery, then dress that with cataplasms of cedditis until it is healed."
Chapter XI
Of methods for touching the humor.
When the eyelids of the eyes are opened by adjusting the natural lashes and they are hardened, then those touch the eye and cause ways of illnesses such as constant tears and softening of eyelids and tissue which might be caused by destruction of the eye that is called tactinim of the eye, and it is cured in four methods: either by cautery with fire; or with sharp medicine according to what has been said earlier in the chapter on cautery; or it is done by incision and suturing; or by cannulae according to what I will say.
And therefore you should first examine the head of the illness in its place; also turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it is turned, well then. And if not, insert a needle into that where there is flesh thicker than the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate through that flesh above, and close to — but not on — the edge of the eyelid where the lashes grow, and pull the thread upwards with the eyelid, and turn it with the ray.
And then make an incision in the thicker part of the eyelid below the adjusted lashes with a spatula incidentally opening from the larger lacrimal to the smaller lacrimal; and then remove the thread and press gently on the eyelid with small powders of cotton or cloth, and then sew over the eyelid with silk, and it should be like the figure of a bay leaf.
But nevertheless the figure should be according to the amount of elevation of the eyelid, because this is varied among people, for some need that a great quantity of the eyelid should be incised according to the amount by which the eyelid is softened.
And then make an incision with the spatula over the two lines that you have sewn and begin from the larger lacrimal towards the smaller lacrimal. And if your fissure is close to the natural lashes, as thick as a king's ring.
And then place the onion in one of the two angles of the corner of the eye and then excoriate that entirely and then adjust the two lips with silk or thin wool thread, and wipe away the blood, and make what is superfluous of the threads adhere to both eyebrows with some viscid causes, if you wish to do so, otherwise do not bother.
And then leave the stitches alone for three or four days, and then dress it.
And if you wish, leave the plaster without stitching and dress it with something that dries and constrains, for the eyelid is raised by the sealing of the plaster and the adhesion of the lute; but stitching is better. And therefore this is what the ancients said about tactinim.
But nevertheless if there is anxiety about the illness and it has a good outcome, then fear should not be in him.
And there is another method of tactinim, which is to sew on the eyelid in the shape of a bay leaf and then lift up the eyelid with three onions separated and gathered together in this way:
But if that is not possible, then hold the onions and whatever is not swallowed. Then take an needle with thread and put it in the middle of the figure and insert the other thread near the larger lacrimal, and the second one near the smaller lacrimal, and adjust the threads between your fingers evenly, and then with those lift up your hand gently and elevate the entire corner on which is sewn as we have recommended.
And then adjust the two lips of the plaster with stitching and dress it when it has healed.
But if an abscess occurs over your incision or fissure, cut that abscess with a cautery and its surroundings, and dress it with egg.
And sometimes it happens that the eyelid itself turns over its lashes. Therefore you should use what has been said about incision in that case; but stitching is more artificial.
Tactinim with cannulae is done in this way: And it is that you turn the eyelid and cut the figure underneath as has been said; and then by art make two cannulae or two thin rods, of which the length should be according to the length of the eyelid and the breadth of them should be less than the breadth of the spatula. And you have already incised at both ends where you hold the threads
Then attach each one with subtlety above what is superfluous of the eyelid of wool, and press the cannulae at both ends with great force, and leave them like that for a few days, because the corner will die and become necrotic and will fall in as you put it.
But if it is delayed, then break it with tweezers, and dress the plaster when it has healed
Therefore when it is solidified, the eyelid is elevated and the lashes do not prick.
And this is the shape of two cannulae which you will make like this: And it should have the quantity of length and breadth neither more nor less.
Chapter XII
Of elevating pricking lashes in wool with a needle when the hair is hard
When the hairs are not natural, hard and rough and prickling the wool, therefore the operation in that case is that you take a thin needle and put it in that thread of cedar wood and lion's hair, and then adjust its ends and knot each one very subtly. And let the length of the threads be as much as a palm.
"And immediately you should prepare another subtle phlebotomy instrument to use on them if you wish."
"And promptly cover the patient's head with a cloth, and be careful about the sun for your work to remain clear, because this is a subtle and delicate operation."
"And quickly insert the needle into the vein under the skin that requires bleeding and make it penetrate the eyelid promptly before pulling it out above the natural skin."
"And then pull out the skin and insert this into the wound, using one or two or three skins, but not more."
"And then remove your hand from there so that the skin may be removed with the wound in the eyelid along with the natural skin."
"But if it is pulled out and the skin is not removed, you will pull it out from the sides along with that instrument which you have placed there, until the eyelid is completely removed."
"And then dress that with the vision of wool, because at that time you will remove the instrument and the needle, and bandage carefully the wound so it may heal well, leaving the bandages on for two or three days until the skin adheres to its place and grows over it good flesh."
"And if the skin is too short, then you will attach a long skin from those natural skins and elevate it with that one, or leave it there until it lengthens somewhat, and then you will elevate it."
"Chapter XIII."
"On the treatment of eachcretation that occurs in the eyelid."
When there is swelling in the eye socket and contraction of the eyelid when it is constricted either on the right or left side due to poor consolidation of plague or section or cautery, this is called leporina. This herniation can be natural or accidental, caused by consolidation of plague or section or cautery, or similar to those afflicted with evil.
The manner of performing the operation is as follows: first, you should remove that consolidation and separate the eyelids. Then insert a wick of cloth into the space between them and bind it tightly so that they may heal.
You should not use remedies for the eye which cause dryness and constriction. For if you do so, it will return to its previous state of herniation and never be truly healed.
Use remedies which soften the eye, such as fenugreek and the decoction of rose leaves. Also use eyewash made with water in which alta has been cooked and strained, or diacilicon, which is softened with a little oil. Immerse the wick in these preparations and cure with them.
And the treasure of your cure will be to persist diligently without allowing any consolidation to form, following the method that was used at the beginning.
This operation that we have described is nothing more than a correction of herniation which does not allow the eyelids to return to their previous state.
Chapter XIV
Of the cure for herniation that occurs in the left eyelid
This herniation which occurs in the left eyelid is called true herniation and it can be either congenital or acquired.
Acquired herniation occurs due to injury, cut, burn, or other similar causes.
The procedure for operating on acquired herniation is to take a needle with a double thread and insert it into the flesh. Then pass it from the left lacrimal duct to the right one, ensuring that both ends of the thread are in the flesh.
"And then stretch the skin over the parts above with forceps, hold it with forceps, and cut it with a broad scalpel." "And then return the eyelid to its proper position, if possible; otherwise, take a needle and sew that one into the cut eyelid, and with it turn the eyelid back in place, closing both incisions on either side of the eyelid."
"And if the ends of both incisions are at two angles of the incision that you have made, let them meet and form a single angle when they come together."
"And this figure is called the Greek letter lambda."
"And then take some skin from that side of the acute angle on the left side of it, as much as necessary to close the eyelid."
"And then join together the separated parts and sew them with wool thread; and then dress it with whatever we have said about softening medicines and bandages until it is healed."
"And if there should be any discharge through the incision or suture or cautery, it is necessary that you make a flat incision over the skin of the eyelid as described above." "And then separate with gauze between two lips as we have said."
"And in summary of the discourse on the treatment of inflammation when it is above or below, that which runs through the operation, according to how it has been prepared, is like this: it is variously shaped."
"And the skilled artisan always prepares in advance every possible means within his power to bring back the figure as close as possible to its natural form, according to what is appropriate for the operation and the instruments, especially in major procedures."
"Chapter XV"
"About adhesion of the eyelid with the conjunctiva or the cornea."
"When this adhesion occurs in many people, so that the eyelid is stuck firmly upwards with the pus above it, and is hindered from its natural movement and functions, then you should insert the tip of a probe between the eyelid and elevate it upwards, or else extend it using a hook."
"And then you should cut the adhesion with a fine spatula that is not sharp for incisions, having it obtuse at one end so that the patient is not disturbed during the operation, and remove the spatula without letting it scratch the eye with its sharpness."
"And your incision should be such that it easily removes that adhesion so that the eyelid may return to its natural form and all of the adhesion is healed."
"And then you should put into the eye saltwater with which you wash it; or else distill in it a solution of juniper dissolved in water."
"And then separate between the eyelid and the eye with gauze from it, and place over the eye a compress of wool infused in egg white, and then on the third day apply healing remedies so that it may be healed."
"Chapter XVI"
"The cutting of a nail and the prominence of flesh around the lachrymals."
"Know that a nail can be in two ways: either it is nervous, and is like hard bone that is subtle; or it is non-nervous, like congealed white humidity, which when iron touches it, if it is forced to take it, it is cut off and the iron does not go into it."
"And both species do not begin except from the larger lacrimal, which goes little by little to cover the eye and prohibit light and its movement."
"But the manner of operating in the cutting of it is that the patient should hold his head steady with his own hands, and he opens the eyelids of it, and lifts up the eyelid with your hand, and then carefully takes hold of the nail with a pair of forceps with little duplication, and stretches it upwards." "And then take an awl and insert it into that a little bit of horse or cow or ox or similar hair, or strong silk thread, duplicate the tip of the needle little by little and put it in the middle of the nail, and penetrate it with the needle, and tie the nail with the thread; and stretch it upwards, and strip off from the side of the nail with the hair what was covering the pupil." "And thus you should follow that one with the hair behind it."
"And then you incise the remnant in the root of the lacrimal with a fine spatula or small forceps, and lift up the skin of the natural lacrimal to ensure that by cutting it there will be no continuous flow of tears."
"And sometimes the nail with its sole extended upwards or tied as we have said, and then strip off with this spoon which is its shape:"
"And take care that with the spoon you do not touch the corneal tunic and that there should be a rupture in it, and that the pupil is pierced."
"And then place in the wound a little bit of salted tincture or clean cheese rennet, and leave it overnight; and then cure it with water that is necessary until it heals."
"And if the nail is not nerve-rich and you cannot insert the needle nor can it be attached with the hook, then in many cases this type of nail is cured with medicines, and is healed as you have seen and is described in the division."
"And if you wish to incise it, then open the wound of the ailment and take a fine spoon with sharp edges shaped like this:" "with fineness." "And if sometimes that is rarefied and contracted and pressed against the root, then distill from your ear into the wound of clean cheese rennet or clean rose oil or salted tincture, and fill the wound overnight."
"And then repeat the operation over it until everything that is of it is removed, except for the contrary aposteme which should remain in the wound, because when you leave it, and cure the aposteme at the beginning so that it heals."
"And then repeat your operation over it with reason until it is healed."
"The prominence of the lacrimal caruncle, if it is noticed in the wound due to great harm, should be suspended with a hook; and cut off its tip with one stroke without extending the incision lest tears flow."
"And then distill into the lacrimal clean rose oil and cheese rennet until it heals."
"Chapter XVII."
"Of incision of a pimple and of what is born of skin adhered in the wound."
"Sometimes in the wounds of some eyes, rough skin is born which covers the pupil or comes close to it and sticks out over the eyelids, and presses them together tightly at their edges like a ballast stone."
"But the operation in this case is that the ailment stops the head of the thread from going out; and then open the wounds of that one and collect all that skin with appropriate hooks according to what you have, and take it with a forceps or tweezers; and then incise the skin at the beginning until everything is finished with the scissors, taking care not to damage the wound during your operation."
"And let your incision be with the one with which you cut those or with the spoon that we have described in the incision of the nail, or with small forceps with which ascites is collected according to what will come up in this chapter."
"Therefore when your incision is completed and all that skin is removed, then fill the wound with salted tincture or distill into it rough powder similar to that of corrosive medicines, and cover it from outside with egg white until it is assured against a dry aposteme."
"And if some cause of a pimple remains and is severely inflamed with cauterization dryness, and you fear a dry aposteme, then leave the wound and cure that aposteme with what will heal it; and then repeat the operation over it until it heals, and do likewise for adhered skin which occurs in this type of wound."
"But however you must avoid all cure of the wound by natural means or by chance operation with iron, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that that member can withstand this operation."
"Chapter XVIII."
"Of collection of pus in the wound."
"Pus is rough matter that is thickened over the wound and prevents its operation from being seen, making it difficult for many days."
"Therefore at the beginning you must consider whether the wound in which pus is present is strong and does not have another ailment besides pus; then collect that pus."
"And when you command the ailment to stop its head from going out, then suspend those veins with one hook or two according to your judgment; and let that hook be of subtle duplication in this form:"
"or thus two hooks graduated in one body in this form:"
"And then let those veins be collected with subtle forceps subtly and remove the blood little by little until you see that those veins are removed from the wound and turned over."
"And take care not to damage the wound with the ends of the spoon; and if your operation is done in midday before the sun, be very careful in your operation so that you do not cut anything but those veins."
"And when you have completed it, then distill into the wound chief wine or rough to help dissolve what has been removed from the pus."
"But if that is not possible for you to collect everything at once, then plaster it all with what relieves its pain, and leave it for a few days until the pain of it has subsided and it is assured against a dry aposteme."
"And then repeat over it according to what the most expert manner requires until it heals."
"And this is the form of the forceps:"
"Chapter XIX."
"Of reduction of nasal bleeding."
"When you treat nasal bleeding with cautery or sharp burning medicine according to what is precedented in it and it does not heal, then do not rely on it but cut over the aposteme where it has reached maturity and extract all the moisture that is in it and the bone until it becomes visible."
"And then when the bone has been discovered and you see corruption or blackness in it, then scrape it with an instrument of which this is the form:"
"And it is called the sharp point and it should be made of iron, and its head should be round thus that you can grasp it like this which has been pierced by the piercing of a file or delicately by subtle piercing (as in the following form)."
Place that over the corrupt spot on the bone, then rotate it between your fingers and press gently until you know that corruption is scraped away.
After doing this several times, then restore the location with drying and astringent agents.
And if the location is consolidated and has good new flesh growing, and there is no infection or suppuration, nor any signs of relapse after 40 days, then you will know that it is healed.
And if it is not, then it should be reduced to the shape of the nose using this method: first, expose the bone with a saw or sharp medicine, and once exposed, take a chisel...
The outer part of the chisel should be triangular, and its handle thinly tapered towards the tip.
Place the chisel on the bone near the lacrimal duct; then hold your hand a little above it and rotate the chisel with your hand until it penetrates all the way through the bone, and you feel that air can pass through when you remove your hand.
Then restore the area with astringent drying medicines as before.
And when the flesh has grown and the area is hardened, then the material that previously flowed out will return to the nose, which makes the condition easier to bear.
Chapter XX.
On the reduction of a nasal hump
When the nose is entirely humped and there are no signs of damage or reduction, then it is necessary to relieve the condition by following these steps:
"The manner of powders is that you should take linen cloths cut in four folds."
"And then place those on top of each other according to the quantity that you may need." "And then place a hard cloth with strong binding on top of them; and apply the cupping glasses with suction without scarification; and then remove the cupping glasses, leaving him/her tight for the day and night."
"But if during this time the binding becomes loose, it should be tightened immediately."
"And then remove the bandage in the morning and night as we have said."
"And if sometimes he/she is reduced, that's good; but if not, then apply the plaster with powders and binding and cupping glasses until healed."
"Chapter XXI"
"Of the incision of the prominence of the uveal tunic."
"When there is a rupture in the uveal tunic and it protrudes from the eyelids like a grain of wheat, and you want to incise that prominence, then the operation is as follows: insert the needle into the groove of the uvea where it enters above, and also insert another needle through which a doubled thread has been passed on the side of the lacrimal duct. Make the first needle penetrate and leave the first needle according to its position; then incise the location of the doubled thread and pull with that the prominence of the uvea along the circumference of the needle, and tighten it well."
"And then remove the needle and apply over the wound a bandage infused in egg white; leave it until the thread is absorbed with the uvea."
"And then heal the wound with whatever comforts it until the inflammation has healed."
"And sometimes it happens that the entire prominence is gathered together with a circle of cloth around the wound; then it should be punctured with a fine spatula that comes to the front of the wound, and let the mucoid humor flow out, and lower the eyelid promptly."
"And then tighten until healed."
"Chapter XXII"
"Of the treatment of ophthalmia."
"This condition called ophthalmia is nothing but sanies, which adheres to the eyelid like descending water, and it is not that."
"The manner of treating it is that you should make the person sit on an equipped and straight chair; then take their head in your hands with two fingers and press until you see the sanies coming out from the corners of the eyes. Then dry it up so that it does not descend, and cover the light, and the cause of the illness will be seen as follows:"
"And if it does not descend downwards, know that it is water."
"But if the descent of the sanies is not prepared as we have said, then make the person sit between your palms and take a fine spatula and pass it over the surrounding panicle slightly beyond the continuation of the conjunctiva with the tunic of the cornea at the limbus (that is to say), until the sanies has been evacuated."
"Then once it has been evacuated, you should distill onto the eye cold water in which honey has been mixed or boiled water with ground fenugreek and honey."
"And then treat them according to the other causes until healed."
"Chapter XXII"
"Of the treatment of descending water from the belly."
"We have already spoken about the types of water in the division and which is suitable for perforating according to what we declared earlier, now that one according to health."
"You should now make the patient lie on their back on a bed and tie their belly with a string tightly."
"And place your left hand near the eyelid of their left belly if the water is in the left side of the belly; or with your right hand if it is on the right side."
"And with your right hand take a magnet if the belly is left [sided]; or with your left hand if it is on the right side."
"And place the tip of the magnet near the crown of the head according to the thickness of the ray in the belly from the side of the tear duct, and quickly attract the magnet with force while turning your hand towards it."
"And enter into the belly through the tear duct and make sure that the magnet has reached its target."
"And ensure that the length of the magnet's path is equal to the distance from the pupil to the end of the darkness, which is the crown of the belly; because you will see the pupil through the clarity of the cornea with your vision."
"And then place the magnet into the location where there is water, and quickly pull it down once or twice, and if the water goes down immediately, then at that moment the patient's sight will be restored, and the magnet will remain in its belly."
"And then pause for a moment; if the water has gone down, then quickly pull it back again before the magnet is thrown out."
"And then when it has gone down and no longer descends, carefully extract the magnet, turning your hand slowly, and dissolve a little bit of clear gemstone salt in water and wash the belly inside with that; then cover the belly outside with cotton or stop it with wool infused in rose oil and album of hen's egg, and tie it with that."
"But those who are of our time pause over this remedy with the albumen of a hen."
"And if the magnet does not obey you when entering the belly due to its hardness — because some men have very hard bellies — then you should take the spatula which is called an albarello, the shape of which is as follows:"
"And then pierce with it that junction, and do not bring your hand out of the track, and if you cannot find a way to lead the magnet to its subtle place."
"And then introduce the magnet as we have said."
"And you must complete your work by having the patient lie down to sleep in a room that is dark and quiet, where he should lie on his back without moving at all."
"And pause for a moment to observe the nature of the water so that its nature is clarified, and do not move his head to either the right or left at all."
"And apply the remedy according to the patient's condition on the third day."
"And then remove him from that dark room and expose him to bright light, show him various things, and then return the remedy on the seventh day."
"And you should not do this at the time of bleeding or immediately after an infusion." "Take care to keep this secret because water can easily take on great and violent properties due to its nature."
"But if an abscess forms, then you should remove the bandage from the belly on the seventh day, and correct it with something that will draw out the abscess."
"And then uncover his eyes and observe his facial expression to see how well he is recovering from his illness by keeping him in the dark room for a few days."
"And then gradually take him out of that darkness and have him discuss various things with you."
"And know that in Alchemy, the disciple of vision sometimes sees certain visions, and therefore be prepared for this operation."
"And it has been brought to our attention that some of those who practice Alchemy have said that fire is made in the magnet, which is pierced with a tube through which water is sucked up."
"But we have not seen anything like this in our land nor is it written about in any of the ancient books that we know of. Therefore, this may be a novelty."
"And these are the forms of the species of magnet which we have mentioned above for those who do not know them:"
"And they are made of iron or proper steel, and their extremities are made with this triangular subtlety, the pointed extremity being like this:"
"Chapter XXIV."
"Of the treatment of flesh torn in the nose."
When flesh of diverse colors grows in the nose, which some say is due to a heavy scorpion or a large polyp, and this illness is called polyps because it resembles that fish. And its flesh is cancerous, ulcerated, dark-colored; and the flesh of the lion is not of dark color.
Therefore, in that which is not fraudulent nor cancerous lion flesh, you should place the sick person's hands between your breasts and put them in the sun, and cover their nose and ears with that flesh. And properly extract that from the external parts, and properly cut with a sharp, subtle knife what you have grasped of those parts when you know that all the flesh is removed; for if anything remains there due to some cause which makes excision possible, then quickly remove it with one of the subtle instruments with ease where nothing remains. But if there is an ulcer with sanguineous matter or an aposteme that is cauterized, then you should do what is necessary; but if it is of malignant ulcers, then you should cut and cauterize until the sanguineous matter is removed and all the cavities are opened.
And properly apply to the wound a dressing with wine and honey or wine. But if the wound is open and there proceeds from it humidity towards the palate, then you should know that it has already healed.
But if the humidity does not penetrate as it should, then you know that within it there is flesh still adhering to the overlying bones of the nostrils where excision has not reached.
Therefore, you should insert a thread of sufficient thickness into it and twine it with numerous knots, leaving between each knot the quantity of a finger or less, and then apply it to the patient's nostril with a hook or any other means which is possible for him.
And after this is done, have him inhale the odor of something pleasant until it reaches the canals of the nostrils, and let him blow his nose into his garment, for many people commonly do this action in schools, and it will be easier for him who wishes to do so.
And properly tie the two extremities of the thread, one extremity which comes out over the nose and the other which remains inside the nose, and apply a suture of flesh with the knots that are on the thread, and do this until you know that the flesh is attached to the knots of the thread.
And then remove the thread and apply to the nose a bandage with honey, and do this for three days or more until the dressing has eaten away all that is left of the flesh.
And finally, apply to the nose a lead cannula for several days until it is healed.
But if you wish for a drying cure, use that one.
"And this is how the purge maker instrument works, with which oils and medicines are distilled into the nose:"
"And make of silver or copper, resembling a small lantern opened like this, similarly to a small shell, with the mouth likewise."
"And if you wish, make a closed cannula like this, and the cannula of the purge maker instrument should be flat and open; hold it at the end with your hand when you pour oil or water into it from the succulent causes."
Here is Chapter XXV
On the holes made in the outer parts of the nose.
Frequently it is necessary to make holes in the outer parts of the nose, and it is greatly praised and commended in those days when much care is taken for its regard.
And therefore you should insert that at the beginning of the appearance of that, and remove all of it. And afterwards apply a poultice or cautery or burning medicine to the place where it is located.
But if its incision is delayed until it becomes magnified, then consider whether it is blackish, hard, of dark color and of little sensation; then do not touch it with iron because it is a malignant abscess. For often that which you cut into this abscess will bring great mischief to him upon whom it was.
And if the abscess is of light touch and not of dark color, and sometimes incision is possible in all of it, then evacuate the patient and cut into it without fear, and cure the place with that which dries and constrains until it is healed.
Here is Chapter XXVI:
On the suture of the nose, lips, and ear when continuity is dissolved by wound or ulcer.
Know that when you encounter dissolution of continuity in one of these cartilage, pay little attention to this operation unless you are among certain men.
Therefore, when you find some cause of these, such as a fresh wound with its blood, then join the two lips of the wound with suture and apply cure until it is healed.
And if the lips of dissolved continuity are already separated and each is quite healthy, then you must excise each part from its visible root until there comes forth no blood. And then join the two lips with suture and strengthen them, and over them sprinkle dragon's blood powder and some rue powder, and apply a piece of diaphoretic plaster or some other consolidating plaster upon the powder, and let it lie for two or three days. Then remove it, change the plaster, and allow the wounds to close by themselves. Afterwards cure with ointment until they are healed.
But the manner of suture is that you should join the dissolution of continuity with needles as we have described in the suture of the belly, or join it with a thread as you know how to do.
Here is Chapter XXVII:
Of extraction of those causes that appear in the two lips inside
Often seen in some men inside the parts of their lips certain hard tumors resembling grains of barley, and some are smaller and others larger.
Therefore you should turn back the lips and split each of those hardnesses on all sides, and afterwards perform the excision by filling up the place with saffron thoroughly ground until it is tightened, and then wash it with vinegar and dress the wound with astringent water, until it is healed.
Capítulo XXVIII
Of the incision of attached flesh in the gums
Often when there is a swelling above the attached gum which the ancients called albus, then you should suspend that with a ligature or hold it with forceps and incise it along its length, and let the sanies flow out and the blood.
And afterwards apply saffron thoroughly ground or other astringent or excitative powders.
And if that flesh returns again, incise it once more and cauterize it, because then it will not return.
Capítulo XXIX
"Due to iron teeth."
"If on the surface of the teeth in dental sockets and those of the foreskin, between the gums are rough, hard, sometimes blackened and are made yellow or greenish that goes through the gum for this corruption and the teeth are loose."
"And therefore you should seize the patient between your hands and place their head on the towel, and remove those teeth in which such escarps appear and cause similar sand within them from which no cause would remain, and this is due to blackness and yellowness and other colors that are changed."
"So if that is what you want to achieve at the beginning of the reason, good. But if not, then repeat the reason over those on another day and the second and third until it comes to the final statement in what you want."
"And know that teeth require many different types of files with various shapes and figures, according to how your operation is prepared." "And therefore choose the file with which the tooth is filed from the inside of the socket is different from the file with which it is filed between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of files are those that you should prepare, which you will see soon:"
"Chapter XXX."
"Of tooth extraction."
"So that you cure the tooth of its pain with all care and diligence in every extraction of it, for there is no cause that should hinder the view of it when it is extracted, for it is a sublime substance that is exposed during the extraction of it."
"But when it is necessary to extract that tooth, firmly you must be certain what the painful tooth is, for many times the pain deceives and seems to be in a healthy tooth, and you extract that one but the pain does not cease until the diseased and painful tooth is extracted, for we have already seen this through the operation of barbers."
"So when you are certain what the painful tooth is and know it well, then it is necessary that you scarify around the tooth with a spatula in which there is some virtue, until it is dissolved from the gum of the entire socket, and then slowly with your tweezers or with subtle forceps little by little until that concavity is reached."
"And then apply strong forceps for good grasp or sturdy pressure and place the head of the diseased tooth between your fingers that you hold it well so that it does not move, and pull the tooth straight in such a way that you do not break it, nor cause greater pain to the sick."
"And therefore if it is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments and place it on that side of all the parts with ease and effort, causing the removal of it as was done at the beginning."
"But if the tooth is loose or decayed, then it is necessary that you fill that cavity with cloth and strengthen it with the end of a thin needle so that it is not broken at the time of your traction on it with forceps."
"And it is necessary that you work carefully with scarification around the entire gum and guard well your force so that you do not break it and leave a part of it behind, and return on the diseased one for the malice that may be greater than the first pain of it."
"And beware that you do not do what many ignorant and arrogant barbers do in their haste and boldness over the extraction of teeth, without administering what we have recommended; for many times they bring upon men great diseases which are more difficult to treat than if they had been broken, and the roots of them completely removed or some of those, or that they extract it with some bones of the jaw as we have often witnessed."
"And after the extraction of it, let the mouth be washed with warm wine or vinegar mixed with salt."
"And if there is flow of blood from it, as often happens, then sprinkle some quantity of sage and pour it on the wound, and if that sage does not suffice, cauterize."
"The shape of the strong and subtle forceps with which the tooth is grasped at the beginning should be of long extremity, short handle, and thick, so that they do not bend when you use them."
"And let them be such that when stretched with those, they are not bent, being short at the ends."
"And let them be made of India steel, well-made with straight extremities, and at the ends of those have teeth which fit into each other and stretch by compression descent forcefully, and sometimes the extremities of those are like the shape of a bird's beak called 'ciconia', that is to say, they are strong in constriction."
"Chapter xxxi."
"Of the extraction of teeth and removal of the locked jawbones."
When tooth extraction is necessary due to some cause, then you should place your finger on the spot with pressure for one day or two until that area becomes softened; and then insert cloves or tweezers whose ends are shaped like those of a bird called the ciconia or owl, in the form of forceps.
The ends of them [the tweezers] should be made inside thus like a file or rasp.
And if you do not succeed with this extraction using these forceps or tweezers, then you should cut around the root and strip off all the flesh and insert the instrument called "atali," which is a small lever whose shape is like this:
And it should have a short, thick end that is not bent back, lest it be injured.
If the root is not removed by this means, then it is good; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments whose shapes are as follows:
"The second tool should be triangular in shape with a very fine tip."
"And this is how you use this instrument, which has two branches whose shape is roughly as follows:" "And with other instruments that resemble a pair of large scissors, this is their shape:"
"of the triangular tip twisted or shortened, which should have some thickness and not be too sharp so as not to be easily bent."
"And you should know that instruments for extracting teeth are similar in shape to other instruments."
"But skilled and subtle artisans in this art find for themselves according to what they understand the operation and various diseases. For there are diseases that ancient authors did not give or appoint any specific instruments for their varied forms."
"But if the jawbone or other bones of the mouth are broken or fractured, then one should carefully operate on that area with whatever is convenient among the instruments and forceps mentioned earlier in the extraction of teeth roots, using this gesture whose shape is as follows:"
"And one should gently and gradually widen it with some thickness, holding or squeezing it with the mouth so that it does not escape or slip until all of the bone is removed. Then apply medicine suitable to the area."
"But if there is a small fracture in the bone, then remove that part of the fracture and its darkness, and treat it until it heals."
"Chapter XXXII."
"Of the treatment of prominent teeth compared to others."
When teeth protrude beyond their natural course due to form being distorted, especially in women and venerable elders; therefore you should consider: if the tooth is not adjacent to another tooth, and there is no possibility of extraction or splinting, then it must be removed. But if it is attached to another tooth, then you should cut it with this instrument whose shape resembles a pig's bristle made from Indian steel with an extremely sharp tip.
And may your incision be such that you cut through the tooth in three days due to its hardness, without harming any other teeth.
And if it is an erupted tooth exposed to attrition, then grind that one with this Indian steel file whose shape is as follows:
And let it be made entirely of Indian steel and sharp-pointed; and let it have many fine points like those on a file used to grind the tooth little by little over several days with ease, so that no other teeth are harmed or injured. And when you have finished lining it up, straighten it with rubbing stones.
And if it is a tooth where one portion is broken off and causes the tongue to lisp, then you should grind away that part until its sharpness is completely smoothed over and flattened out so that the tongue does not stumble nor speech become impaired.
Chapter XXXIII
Concerning the restoration of damaged teeth with gold or silver foil.
When teeth are damaged due to concussion and removal by percussion or falling, and the patient cannot chew properly even after treatment with medicinal astringents, then you should fill those that are stricken with gold foil and not silver, because silver turns green over time and can tarnish in just a few days, whereas gold never changes.
And let the foil be in such fineness and thinness according to the amount that can fit between the teeth. And the method of placement is as follows: take the foil and fold it in half lengthwise between two healthy teeth, and then wrap it around with two twists between the damaged teeth or just one if there are fewer, until the tissue reaches the sound part of the other tooth. And then press down firmly on that side where you began, using your hand with ease and skill so as not to damage the tooth.
And let your pressure be such that you secure the foil tightly between the roots of the teeth so that it does not become loose or dislodged.
And then trim the excess edges of the foil with forceps or scissors, and gather them up in each place with plaster, covering them up between the sound tooth and the damaged one so that they do not cause injury to the tongue. And then let it remain thus for three days.
But if it becomes loose or broken, reinforce it with more foil in this same manner whenever necessary.
And this is the method of preparing teeth and the technique for restoring two sound teeth and two damaged ones, as shown in these illustrations:
And when it happens that a tooth or two are displaced by their own falling into their proper places, and have been restored as we have described, but still remain loose,
Then only does this happen to skilled and knowledgeable artisans.
Sometimes it happens that some of the bones of cattle are apt for this purpose, and they are fashioned into the shape of teeth and placed in the location where the tooth is missing, and secured as we have described, remaining in place and serving well for a long time.
Chapter XXXIV
Concerning the incision of the frenulum which causes difficulty in speech.
This frenum, which attaches the tongue either naturally or accidentally due to scar tissue that has formed, may sometimes obstruct speech.
The operation is as follows: have the patient open their mouth while they are sitting upright with their head held still. Then lift up their tongue and cut that nerve frenum according to its width until the tongue is completely freed from its attachment.
But if there is hardness or firmness in that place due to scar tissue from an injury, then use tweezers and cut through it lengthwise until you have completely severed the frenum and dissolved the adhesion.
Be sure not to make a fissure in the front of the flesh, and avoid cutting too deeply or causing bleeding.
Then rinse the wound with water or vinegar or warm water, and apply a bandage to the tongue. Tell the patient to keep their tongue away from that side for several days so that it does not heal again in that place.
But if bleeding occurs, apply a lint bandage soaked in nitric acid to the area. If the bleeding continues, then cauterize the location with a silver nitrate cautery as appropriate for this situation. And then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
Chapter XXXV
Concerning the removal of a ranula from under the tongue.
Sometimes, a tumor resembling a small mollusk develops under the tongue and interferes with its normal function. This can grow large enough to fill the entire mouth.
The procedure is as follows: have the patient open their mouth facing the sun, then examine the tumor.
If you find it to be of dark or black color, hard, and insentient to the patient, then do not touch it as it is a cancer.
But if it is fluctuant and white, then use tweezers to compress it and cut through it with a fine scalpel, making sure to cut all the way around. If bleeding occurs during the procedure, apply a lint bandage soaked in nitric acid to restrict the flow of blood.
Then return to your work until you have completed it with care, rinsing the area with vinegar and salt. Then treat it with other appropriate remedies until it is healed.
Chapter XXXVI
"Of removing an abscess from both ears and that which is located in the navel, as well as other abscesses."
"When an abscess occurs in the navel, it is called a gland that forms sometimes there. It happens externally and is named 'both ears'. If you cure it with what we have said in the division and it does not heal, then consider if the abscess is hard, dark-colored, and insensitive to touch; do not touch it with iron."
"If it is of red color and the root is large, then do not touch it with iron due to the flow of blood. Rather let it ripen inside, and then you will draw it out or else it will break open by itself."
"If it is white in color, hard, and its root is thin, then it should be incised."
"And the operation in this case is to consider first whether the abscess has already ruptured and healed completely with rest or if it has decreased somewhat. Then make the incision before sunrise, with the patient's head towards the east and their mouth open. The assistant should take a clean cloth and press the tongue of the patient gently with an instrument called the 'mouth holder,' which is shaped like this:"
"And it should be made of silver or brass, and it should be sharp with a knife."
"Then when you press the patient's tongue with that instrument and expose the abscess, cut it with your knife very gently. Then take a forceps and grasp it and put it in the wound, and pull it outwards as much as possible." "After that, if you pull out some of its tunics, then immediately cut them with this instrument whose shape is like this:"
"After that, if you pull out some of its tunics, then immediately cut them with this instrument whose shape is like this:" "It resembles a forceps, but its extremities are curved so that the points of each one face towards the other, very sharp. It should be made of iron carefully engraved."
"But if this instrument is not available, then incise it with a scalpel whose shape is like this: It should be sharp on one side and not sharp on the other."
"And after you have made one incision, make another according to this same manner of incision. Then wash the wound with clean water."
"But if there is bleeding from the wound, wash it with water decocted from oak bark or myrtle leaves and other astringent substances to stop the flow of blood. Then treat it until it heals."
"And sometimes other abscesses appear near those two ears, and you should incise them according to what I have said about the incision of two equal wounds."
"And I already treated a woman who had an abscess that appeared on her throat, which was dark in color with little sensation. She had closed the wound herself and was breathing with great difficulty, and she had been prohibited from eating or drinking water for several days. She was already near death if not treated within one or two days."
"And the abscess had swollen so much that it had formed two large lumps, which discharged through two holes."
"So I opened it with forceps and gripped one of them, and pulled it out. A large portion of the abscess came out, and then I made an incision where I understood the other hole was, and I opened her mouth and pressed down her tongue, and then I put a forceps in that abscess."
"And then you should cut off a large part of it, and if there is not much bleeding from it." "Therefore the woman's throat was completely healed, and she immediately began to drink water and eat food. However, I continued to incise that abscess many times over a long period of time, and it succeeded in forming another abscess in its place, which elongated that incision."
"So I took hot water and cauterized her throat, therefore stopping the addition of new flesh. And then she walked around, and I did not know what God had done through me."
"Chapter XXXVII."
"When the navel becomes inflamed."
"When catarr descends to the navel and it becomes inflamed and elongated, at times it is called perpendicular; but if it is thick and round at its base, at times it is called 'bubble'."
"If the inflammation is cured with what we have said in this division and your treatment does not confirm it, and especially if an abscess has already burst open and become thin, then you should incise the one that is aggregated roundly. And if it is as long as that, and there is bleeding of dark or black color, without any sensation at all, then you should beware of this incision, for in such cases there is fear about the patient's condition."
"And when you find that according to the manner I have described of its whiteness and length, you should make the patient lie down and press the tongue of it with an instrument which has been prepared for that purpose, and hold the onyx in the new wound, and pull it downward and incise it with one of two instruments which are mentioned in the incision of double mellas."
"And you should not incise it unless what is appropriate to its natural term without addition, for if you incise more than that, you will harm the patient."
"And after the incision, use what has been recommended in the incision of double mellas, and care for it until it is healed."
"But if the patient is frightened by the incision of it, you should use a hot iron in its cauterization without fear, and the manner of cautery in it is only with sharp water, which is that you hold the head of the patient on his right side, and then press the tongue of it with the instrument which has been mentioned, and take some of the water which has been mentioned in the chapter of cautery, and apply it with a live coal, pausing it neither thick nor thin, and from it fill the cavity of the instrument of which this is the shape:"
"So that the extremity of the cavity in which the medicine is placed is like the cavity of a spoon of ray, and pause the instrument with the medicine over the ulcer, and the patient should lie on his side so that saliva or mucus from the mouth does not fall into the interior of it through the intrusive medicine, lest it cause any harm to him."
"And then you place your hand on the medicine and squeeze it over the ulcer for about half an hour until you see that it has become blackened and dried by the biting of the medicine."
"And if you wish, take some cotton and wrap it around the extremity of the ray, and immerse the cotton in the medicine, and insert the ray with the cotton into a cannula from above until the cotton adheres to that cannula, and do this several times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the ulcer, and then leave it alone for it to dry and fall off after about three or four days."
"And if you need to repeat the medicine, repeat it, and after cauterization cleanse around the ulcer with cotton soaked in honey, and remove what is on the circuit of it from the medicine, rinse it with warm water, and then treat it externally with embrocation, and afterwards wrap it up until it has healed."
"And this type of treatment should be used with caution, incision and cautery should not be feared."
"Sometimes the uvula is cured with something more subtle than cautery and incision, for it is treated by suffumigation in this manner: take calamint, hyssop, origanum, rue, scabious arabic, chamomile, broad-leaved plantain and similar herbs of that kind, and adjust all those herbs, or some of them, in a pot, and immerse them in sour wine, and boil it; and the pot should be well covered with decent lutum, and in the middle of the pot there should be a tripod on which is placed a concave instrument made of silver or brass."
"And insert the extremity into the mouth of the patient so that the vapor can reach the uvula above it until the uvula is well suffused."
"And repeat this several times until it is dry, and be sure not to perform this treatment at the beginning of an eruption of abscesses, for that would stimulate the abscess too much, and you should not do that, but rather perform the treatment for the declaration of the abscess of it."
"But if you do not have this instrument at hand, then take a reed and make a closure of wax at the extremity of it, so that the mouth of the patient may be covered, for the closure of wax prevents the vapor from burning the mouth."
"And this treatment is good for health."
"Chapter XXXVI"
"Of the extraction of thorns and of what adheres in the throat, and of other causes."
"Often adhesions are found in the groin or spine of the foot due to some other cause."
Then you must remove what is apparent of it, upon which the sight falls, because when you press with the tongue on an instrument before the sun, it will be declared to you what is in the groove.
And what is not apparent and is hidden in the groove, you must make the patient vomit before the food has digested in the stomach, because very easily the cause attached to the groove will be forgotten by vomiting; or have the patient swallow a piece of bread dipped in oil or lettuce juice, or give them some dry breadcrumbs mixed with honey and salt; or take a piece of dried sea sponge, squeeze it well with wine, and have the patient swallow that, because when it gets to the place where its spines are extracted, they will be remembered then. And if you take an eel and beat it well in wine, and place it within the table and suddenly extract it; or take a pot and suddenly put it in and suddenly remove it.
But if those causes which we have mentioned are not forgotten, then do this with a lead instrument in the following way:
And let it be thicker than a little finger, and at its end make a cavity which you will insert into the groove with ease.
And have the patient raise their head upwards, and make sure that your touch does not reach the bone of the throat, because if it did it would go into the body and with that which removes the bone or the spine, or what the physician touches with his hand.
But nevertheless the patient should insert it themselves, by their knowledge of the place where the cause is attached and removed downwards, and they should pull their hand with the instrument upwards, all this according to the amount that has been prepared before it is forgotten.
**Chapter XXXIX.**
Of the Extraction of Sanguisuga Attached to the Throat.
When sanguisuga is applied with what we have mentioned in the division of cure with medicines and it does not adhere, consider then at the throat of the patient in the sunlight, because you have prepared the tongue of it with the instrument which we have recommended.
Then if you see the sanguisuga, extract it with a small hook or with a gentle subtle movement accordingly.
And if it is not possible for you to extract it with that, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the throat of the patient, and carefully place within the concavity of the cannula an ignited iron brand, and do this several times (until the sanguisuga is dead and removed from the throat) and have the patient abstain from water all day.
And then take a vessel full of water, wet, and place the mouth of it upon that (the throat), and wash the mouth with it; and do not allow any cause to remain in it, and hold the water for an hour again with your hand, because the sanguisuga quickly feels the water.
But if it is not forgotten with what we have mentioned, then fumigate the patient with incense or with asafetida through the instrument which we have recommended in the fumigation of the uvula.
Do this, so that they may recover.
And here is another way of operation in fumigation of that: Take an earthenware pot with burning coals inside it, and cover the pot with a lid which has a hole in its center, through which insert the end of the instrument; then begin the fumigation above; place the patient's mouth on the end of the cannula, close their mouth so that the fumigation is not wasted until you know that the fumigation has reached the sanguisuga, because the sanguisuga will soon fall.
And if it does not fall, then repeat the fumigation many times, and have the patient abstain from drinking, eat salty foods and drink water, and do not drink water; and thus it is necessary that with this regimen it should be forgotten.
And this is the form of the instrument with which sanguisuga is extracted from the throat when it is seen: It resembles forceps thus, except that there is some curvature in it: "The one placed on the pestle has an extremity like the beak of a stork, which is called a glove, sharpened with a file."
"The last chapter."
"In this one, the sum of the sermon regarding the opening and closing of apostemes is given."
"Apostemes are many species with many forms, according to what has been remembered about them, each one in this book."
"And thus they differ in perforation and section through two ways: one is by the means of gangrene, inserted within; and thereby we comprehend from moistures."
"And the second way is near the places where they occur, for gangrene occurring in the head is different from that in the buttocks; and gangrene in fatty tissue differs from that at joints; each has its own treatment through operation."
"And with regard to some gangrenes, it is necessary not to pierce them but rather wait for their maturation or completion of healing."
"And there are other gangrenes that must be pierced when they are hard and not ripe according to their completion, such as those near joints, for when gangrene comes near a joint, its nature is prolonged within what is in its circuit, and quickly the ligaments or nerves of that joint are corrupted, causing contraction of that limb. Or it may be near a main member, and if you delay piercing until it is ripe, there will be no harm to the main member. Or it may be near the anus, which should not be pierced unless it is hard and unripe, so that its opening does not extend into the inner parts of the anus and make a fistula." "But you must know the time for piercing gangrene, which is when it is ripe."
"And you should know that gangrene is ripe when there is cessation of pain and fever, and around the time of decrease in redness and pulse, and when the head of the gangrene becomes sharp, and other signs."
"And it is necessary that you know that the piercing should be made near to the gangrene, at a place where there is little pus coming from the swelling."
"And piercing should always be done along the length of the flesh or body, if gangrenes are located in the parts of the thigh or leg, and in places where there are muscles, tendons, nerves, arteries, and especially in places where reflection is not present; for those that are reflected upon, use piercing according to that member."
"But when the gangrene is in a fleshy place, it is better to leave piercing until digestion of it is confirmed according to completion, as we have said; for if you pierce it before that time, the course of the passage from it is prolonged and much filth flows out, and quickly its lips become hardened and its depth increases."
"But some gangrenes are pierced according to the width of the flesh or body when necessary, or according to what that member needs."
"And it is necessary that you make a small piercing in small gangrenes, and a large piercing with wide incisions or many sections according to the diversity of the size of the gangrenes."
"And there are other gangrenes in which the cord should be curved and cut when it is made, so that it is finished at once like bread dough, as was done with troches of dewlap and buboes."
"And of those that are incised with three angles in section; and there are those in which it is incised like the figure of a mitre leaf, as with gangrenes on the angle."
"And there are some in which round section and crescent section are used, similar to those."
"But that one to which gangrenes do not extend like lion's paws on the surface, it is necessary for you to pierce it with superficial or flat piercing alone."
"And when the gangrene is large and has collected much pus, it is necessary for you to pierce it but do not try to extract all the pus at that time. Extracting a part of it and then packing the gangrene the following day, extracting more each time until it is completely drained."
"And especially if the patient is an elderly person of weak virtue, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an old man in decrepitude, for the animal spirit is often resolved with the exit of the pus, and quickly the patient dies, and you operate thus."
"Therefore guard this chapter with great caution, and also the piercing that you make in these gangrenes, making sure to cleanse the wounds and consider whether the wound of the gangrene is small or has a flat section. If it is small, use linen or cotton dressings; but if it is large and the incisions of the piercing are many, then pause in each traction until they come together simultaneously."
"And if in the gangrene a part of the cord is cut off or curved in its circuit, it is necessary for you to fill it with old cotton or thread made from linen cloth, like when baking bread or cakes without moisture; and strengthen that on the third day; and then process it and cure it with what is necessary for other wounds until it is healed."
"But if bleeding occurs during your operation, then use a cloth wrung out in cold water and vinegar and place it on the location of the bleeding many times."
"But if the bleeding persists, it is necessary for you to apply regimen and cure and powders which have been recommended in many places of this book and division."
"But if it is during wintertime and the location of the gangrene has many nerves, then you should make a poultice with hot wine and oil and apply it to those locations."
"And if it is during summer and the locations are fleshy, then you should apply poultices made with water and oil or wine and oil, all of which has been cooked until the third day as we have said, and then drain the gangrene, cleanse it, and apply to its cure what is necessary for it until it is healed."
"And this is what is necessary regarding the knowledge of the cure of gangrenes universally; but according to the way of distinction I have already said how each gangrene should be cured specifically in its own chapter."
Chapter XL.
Of sectioning gangrenes that occur on the neck of the head.
In the chain of the small head, posthemas appear, which are species of knots containing tunics that are made by them; and their species are many.
And among them are pimples, and those contain moisture like lime. And there are those which contain moisture resembling dust, similar to them; and those that are stony, hard.
And in the section of all, and in the extraction of these there is no fear, since the extraction of them does not cause harm to the art.
And the operation in section of those is that you should spread them with an instrument whose shape is like this [drawing], called entromes, until you see that it contains.
For if what it contains is moisture, then immediately cut it with a section along its length into a surface section according to this shape:
And begin at the section of line .B. up to line .G. Then, once the moisture has been evacuated, immediately you should excoriate that by which that moisture was contained, and do not leave any cause of it, because viewed troops return if there remains any cause.
And quickly immerse it in Egyptian cement, if available, and if not, in water and salt. Then fill it with that and leave it for another day, because with this you will corrode all that which remains of that skin layer.
And again apply that cement on it second and third times if necessary, until you are confident that there remains no trace of that skin layer. Then cure the wound with ointment until it is healed.
"And if an abscess contains fatty knots, then you should incise it in this manner:" "And if the section has a cross shape, then insert your needle between its two lips and cut it completely,
"If your arrow should go awry, then do what I have told you first."
"And similarly, perform the operation and treatment of an indurated ulcer according to what we have told you; for incision over an indurated ulcer is easier because it involves less blood and fluid."
"And sometimes some of these ulcers are found on the head in certain men who have no moisture at all. The cause is that one once incised an ulcer on the head of an old woman and pushed the ulcer together like a hard, rough, white stone, which could not be opened, and if anyone were struck by it, it would injure them."
"But in other accidental ulcers on the head, this is not the case, such as those that come to the heads of children and at the roots of the ears; but the incision of these should always be a superficial one."
"And pause the perforation of those that are in the lower parts, since it is intended to alleviate the body from the excessive heat in the lower parts."
"And accordingly treat those with what is appropriate for that kind of treatment."
Capital Forty-Two
Of the section on scrofula which occurs in the neck.
These abscesses usually occur in the neck, armpits, and groin; however, sometimes they may occur in other parts of the body.
And those that occur in the neck are many that are generated between them, and all scrofula of these is within its own tunic, as in the nodes and abscesses of the head, as we have discussed.
And the kinds of these scrofula are many; for some are hard and stone-like, others contain moisture, while still others are malignant and do not respond to treatment.
Therefore, in that which you find to have good disposition upon touching it, whose color is similar to that of bone and is hard throughout, not annexed to the nerve of the neck, nor to the veins or artery, then incise it with a superficial cut from above to below along the line GA across the line GB, and scrape it away completely, extending the lips of the wound with tweezers, or several tweezers if necessary, as we have said regarding the abscesses of the head, and remove it bit by bit.
And it is more caution that the vein or nerve be not incised.
And let the spatula not be too sharp, lest it hurt your hand during the incision or cause further injury, and do not incise that which does not need to be incised; for if you should cut a vein or artery and interrupt your operation, then quickly apply cupping vessels or other powders that stop bleeding, and dress the wound, letting it rest until the inflammation of the abscess has decreased and the wound begins to heal. When blood is discharged
Then return to your operation once you have completed this step.
"And then you shall ask with your little finger if there is any cause of the other small sores, and then cut those and cleanse them."
"And if it's in the area of a large vein, take care not to incise that scrophulus from its root." "Then you must press it with doubled cloth firmly and let it fall inwards without injury."
"And then fill the wound with cotton wool that you have already moistened in Egyptian ointment, and then dress it."
"And if you cut that scrophulus entirely, then take care to join the two lips of the wound and dress it immediately afterwards so that there is no excess oozing left."
"But if there is too much oozing due to the size of the scrophulus, then you should extend your incision towards its root, and draw it out and administer sutures as directed."
"And those scrophulas that contain moisture should be perforated with a superficial perforation where you see the point of maturation, and pause the perforation when you have expressed enough pus from beneath the skin, as we have said."
"And then administer an ointment and dressings similar to those used for ulcers, so that it may cauterize what has come out from the perforation." "And when you see that the wound is already clean, then dress it with a healing ointment for flesh until it has healed."
Chapter XLIII
Of the incision of the head of an accidental impostume in the throat.
"Ancients called this section 'epilepsy,' but we have not seen anyone in our land who has had it."
"And this is the inscription of their sermon."
"And in men, epilepsy should be avoided because its extraction does not bring healing since all the veins and major vessels of the patient are here."
"But in those who have scabs caused by the mouth or ear, when the illness is not on the bone, it is necessary to avoid the section of epilepsy to prevent harm that occurs by suffocation."
"So when we want this, that we incise the epilepsy three or four circles of the circles of epilepsy, or with a small section across it in one who is between two circles in quantity, let the section be on the bone, not on the cartilage, and this place is convenient for sectioning because it is devoid of flesh and blood vessels from its surroundings."
"And if the doctor is inexperienced, it is necessary to extend the ear canal with forceps and carefully split the canal until it reaches the auditory canal, but avoid the blood vessels if there is any cause for this."
"And then incise the cartilage as recommended earlier; this is indicated on the section of the auditory canal by the membrane that is from there and which is from its disruption and for the extraction of pus."
"Then leave the wound open for some time."
"So when the time is removed at which perforation is feared, add two lips of the edge of the wound and cover only the cartilage."
"And then apply medications that promote tissue growth so that it may heal."
"And Albucasis says that the essence of what has been recommended is to see that some of these abscesses have already obstructed the ear canal of the patient, and the disease has come inside causing death, and the air passage has been cut off, and some go to incise the epiglottis so that the patient may breathe over the wound for some breath, and be saved from death."
"And for this reason it is commanded to leave the wound open until the malignancy of the disease is consumed; and the malignancy lasts for three days; and then it is commanded to close the wound, and heal that until it may be healed."
"And what I have seen with my own eyes is that a woman took a knife and inserted it into her ear and incised herself with it through the auditory canal of the lung, and I was called to treat her, and when I arrived I found that she was dead like one who has died, and I discovered the wound and extracted some blood which had issued from the wound."
"So I was convinced that she had not cut any vein or artery, and the wind came out from the wound, and I healed it until it was healed."
"And nothing happened to the woman if she had not had something in her voice, and some days later she returned for an improvement of her condition."
"And now you say that there is no fear in the section of the epiglottis."
"Chapter .xlv."
"About an incision for an abscess that occurs in the external ear canal, and is called a herniation of the ear."
"This abscess named hernia of the ear is a large abscess according to the color of the body, and it is common in women."
"And it occurs in two ways, either naturally or accidentally."
"And in the natural [way], it does not arise to be cured."
"And the accidental [way] is of two kinds: one is similar to fatty nodes, and the other kind is similar to an abscess which is made by the bursting of an artery, and in this there is danger." "And it is only necessary to perform incision with iron on that which is asked for." "And then you examine it and investigate it with the finger, and if you find it similar to fatty nodes, and it is not suspended from any of the veins, then you incise it like nodes, and extract it with what contains it of skin and bursicle; but if not, then the whole thing is explored, and then the place is treated with whatever is necessary for treatment until it may be healed."
"Chapter .xlv."
"About section of kinds of nodes."
"There are many species of nodes, and I have already mentioned all the species of them in the division."
"And it is necessary that I recount thus the difference between a node and an exitura in case there may be doubt."
"I say that in an exitura there is heat and fever and violent pains until the ebullition of the superfuities is quieted; but it is completed putrefaction which now ceases the fever, pain and heat."
"But in a node there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains only chyle or lymph which is proper to the sac."
"And according to the color of the body, and its beginning is like a pea and it becomes thus like an empty sac, whether large or small, and they are of two kinds: either fatty and containing moisture, and the colors of the moisture are many, as I have said in the division."
"Therefore, when you arrive at the treatment of a node, it is necessary to examine it and inquire into its beginning with an instrument which is called an introser, according to what will come in the following chapter on this subject."
"And this is the manner of inquiry for abscesses and all kinds of nodes: you take this instrument and introduce it into the moistest place which you find in the abscess, and you turn your finger little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated the channel."
"And then lastly you extend your hand according to the measure of the size of the abscess, and then extract the introser and consider what is issued in the trace of it."
"And if running moisture is found, of whatever color it may be, then you incise it with a superficial section as I have said in other abscesses."
"But if there is no moisture in the trace of the introser, then know that it is fatty."
"And cut it with an incision having the shape of a cross thus:" "As I have shown you, and suspend it with forceps, and strip the channel from all sides with ease, and preserve the skin or sac if possible over it, and extract that sanies along with the node."
"But if it is broken during the operation, then it is not possible to extract that sanies, and many times you will find there nothing, and then you extract it piece by piece until none remains."
"For if any cause remains of it, a little or much, the node returns according to its nature."
"And if you find that some small part of it remains, then fill the wound with some powdery acid caustic and strengthen the dressing, and apply over that which makes an abscess cure, and treat it with another treatment until it may be healed."
"If it is a large node, then cut the two lips of it and cure it with what heals."
"But if a pulsating vein is found near it, either pulsating or non-pulsating, then apply a compress and humidify the wound with triplets of treacle for two days or three until the dressing can dry out and the boiling of the blood may calm down; and then return to cutting away what remains of the node."
"Chapter .xlvi."
"About the forms of instruments necessary for section and perforation."
"There are three kinds of introseres, that is to say the large ones, the medium ones, and the small ones."
The great form of entering is this:
The small form of entering is this
They should have feet of iron, of almond-shaped, and well-shaped extremities, so that they may quickly enter the openings.
And these are the forms of the experienced ones, and they are named Alberich, and one of them is called Berith.
And there are three spices: large, middle-sized, and small.
The form of great experience is this:
The form of experiencing evil, the form of it:
The form of experiencing little, the form of it
It is convenient that they should be for those apostemes and exits and fistulas and buboes, so that between those are of the bones and other causes.
And so they are made redontz, thick, large, like big needles with which the stitches are sewn, and they are made of lemon wood, or of oak, or of iron, or of silver. The best ones are when they are made of lemon wood
And they are made of black lead, which should be opened for those fistulas in the concavity of which reflections are reflected, that they may be reflected with their levitation with those reflections.
And there are of three kinds: some of them are long, others medium, and others short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and the narrowness of it.
Form for a large lead plug:
"Method for the experiment of lead."
"Method for the experiment of small amounts of lead"
"The shapes of the rings are of several species, because some are simple ones, which are only a curvature, and they are of three kinds: large, few, and medium."
"And among these, there are circular rings, and they are of three kinds."
"Among those that have two curvatures, there are also three kinds."
"And among those with three curvaturas, there are again three kinds."
"And all of these are necessary in their places."
"Form for small simple ring, shape of light:"
"Shape of large ring with two curvatures:" "Shape of medium-sized ring with two curvatures:" "Shape of small ring with two curvatures:"
"Shape of large ring with three curvatures:"
"Form for medium-sized ring with three curvatures."
"And these are the shapes of the scalpels used to cut and scrape nodes and apostemes, and they come in three species: large, medium, and small."
"Form for large scalpel:"
"Shape of medium-sized scalpel:"
"Form for small scalpel:"
"The extremities of those with which section is made are sharp, and the other extremities are not-sharp, and they are not paused in such a way that there might be fear of incising a vein or nerve during scraping of nodes, and so that the malady may be healed and tranquility obtained a little by cauterization which follows the excision of the aposteme."
"And these are the shapes of spatulas, and they come in three species: large, medium, and small, as you see:"
"They are made of iron and resemble a rod with which alcohol is made."
"And at the pointed extremity there is a hole hidden by the spatula and through that hole you can insert or remove sutures as you wish."
"The shapes of spatulas, which are used between the said ones for the perforation of apostemes and do not cause harm, come in three species: large, medium, and small." "And these are the shapes of them:"
"The shapes of forceps used to remove blood flow and come in three species: large, medium, and small. The forms are as follows:"
"They are made of citric iron, round with some length, and they are subtle."
"And it is necessary that these species of forceps come in sizes large, medium, and small, so that by means of them blood flow can be removed quickly when needed, especially when there is no medicine at hand."
"However, do not use those for removing blood from all parts of the body, and only use them in fleshy locations, such as in the joints of thighs and buttocks, elbows and nipples, belly button, and similar moist flesh."
"And sometimes those instruments are made of small pieces resembling fishhooks in this shape: with them blood is removed when it is done by phlebotomy or through incision of a vein or artery."
"And sometimes they are made round like this:"
"Chapter XLVI."
"Of the care of men's nipples, which resemble those of women."
"Sometimes the nipples of some men become swollen during sleep and begin to resemble those of women or even appear like apostemes from afar."
"And if you encounter such a case, you should incise it with a crescent-shaped incision according to this form, from line B to line G, and then excise all the thickness, apply a poultice of caustic medication, and finally close the wound with sutures. Care for it until it is healed."
"But if the nipple leans towards its outer parts and becomes soft due to its size, as it happens in women, then it should be split into two parts lengthwise with two crescent-shaped incisions, each contained within the other at their ends so that the larger line contains the smaller one according to this form: from line B to line G. Then excise the node between the two lips of the wound, remove the suppuration, and administer what has been said about sutures and powders as necessary in its care until it is healed."
"And if you do not perform the incision that is necessary due to the turmoil of the ailment and blood flow, then you should apply a poultice of soft cotton soaked in corrosive ointment and leave it on until it has eaten away what is necessary. Then care for it until it is healed."
"Chapter XLVIII."
"Of the perforation of apostemes that come from the sides of the testicles."
"Those apostemes that arise from the sides of the testicles are of the species called scrofulas, hard ones which contain a point that can be extracted."
"And among those are some that contain moisture; and those that contain moisture should be incised with a crescent-shaped incision according to this figure: from line G to line B. And when all the sanious matter has been evacuated, then fill it with soft cotton and leave it alone for another day."
"And then the cotton should be removed and the wound cared for with appropriate ointment until it is healed."
"And if the aposteme is of the species called nodes or scrofulas, then incise it as we have said in the section on the treatment of scrofulous swellings."
"But if the wound has spread to the point of being difficult to heal, then apply cautery according to what we have said about it earlier."
"Chapter XLIX."
"Of the incision of apostemes that occur by means of an artery or a vein."
"When an artery is broken and the cord above it becomes consolidated, then often an aposteme occurs. The signs by which it is known that inflammation and aposteme are due to an artery or a vein: for when an apostema is caused by an artery, it is long and adherent in front of the body; and if you press on the apostema with your fingers, you will feel a creaking noise."
"And one that is due to a vein appears on the surface of the body."
"But the incision of this aposteme is an error, especially in those that are located near the armpits, groin, neck, and many other parts of the body; and it is very large, so its cure with iron should be avoided. And one that is on the extremities or the head should be avoided."
"But regarding those that occur due to inflammation of the sheath of an artery, incise along its length and then widen the incision with forceps and expose the artery. Then free it from its sheaths until it is completely exposed."
"And then place that needle on the other side and make it penetrate until it reaches the other side. Then tie the artery with double thread in two places, which will cause you to be able to extract two arteries that are located near the temples."
"And then pierce the place that is between two ligaments with a spit until all the blood comes out and the abscess is dissolved."
"And then apply treatment that causes putrefaction between the fallen ligaments, and properly care for him until he is healed."
"And if it is an abscess caused by the section of a vein, then you should hold with your hand what is nearest to the abscess on the skin, and then insert the needle where you have held it with your hand, causing it to penetrate; and be careful to make that hole double until you extract the blood from the other side, and then tie the abscess with good ligaments according to what I told you in the grapevine of two parts with two ends of the thread."
"But if you fear that the thread may come out, then insert the needle with the thread into the entire abscess through the first incision of the needle, and tighten your threads in four places."
"And then dry the abscess in the middle of it until what is inside comes out, and then incise the superfluity of the skin, allowing that which remains to remain tied."
"And then place over it some powder that you have moistened in wine and oil, and then apply the treatment which is done with hot water and fomentations until he is healed."
**Chapter on Abscesses That Occur Due to Twisting of Nerves**
"Thus when an aposteme occurs in the artery and vein, similarly it occurs in the nerves upon percussion or through excessive labor."
"And it happens mostly in the places of the assistants or the heel, or in any place where one twists the joints."
"A large abscess has formed, resembling the color of other flesh, and is located in the thighs. When pressed with great force, it causes the patient to feel as if they are stunned."
"It is not an abscess attached to the front of the body; therefore it is left behind. It moves with every part and does not go before nor behind."
"Therefore, those that are located in the joints need not be treated with iron, for it would cause too much stiffness."
"But one that is on the head or forehead should be opened with a scalpel." "However, if it is a small abscess, lance it with hot iron and excise it with a scalpel at its root."
"And if it is large, then suspend it with a hook, excise it, and remove its outer skin. Then approximate the wound edges and adjust them with sutures. And care for it until it heals."
"Chapter 52."
"To cut open an abscess that has occurred on the cheek which has occurred on the belly."
"Also some men are seen to have warts on their bellies and on other parts of their body which are called fungals due to their similarity with those that have mushrooms; the cause of which is subtle and the head of that is large. And the lips of them are turned, and it is among those that are small, and it is among those that are greatly magnified."
"And I have already seen one, and on his belly were two things that resembled mushrooms very much, and there was no difference between them in terms of their whiteness and small size."
"And the lips of those were turned inward and split open, and moisture ran from it all the time."
"So I cut them open and removed one weighing eighteen ounces and the other weighing six ounces."
"And the operation in the incision of them is that you should consider whether the illness is humid, and the color of the skin is white, humid, and of subtle size. Then you should cut it open with a broad spatula, and have cauteries ready in the fire before you, because many times what is expelled from the section is much blood; and if blood comes to you, cauterize that."
"And if the illness is sudden and feared, beware of making an incision with iron. Rather, take fresh lead filings and sprinkle them on that spot, in the manner which has been said; and leave it for two days."
"And properly adjust according to the narrowness of the lead filings; therefore do not cease sprinkling it greatly until it is completely cut off and falls away by itself without further effort."
"But if that thing is of large size, then in cutting it open there is some cause for fear and dread, especially one that is in the belly."
"However, it is possible that you can cut off the head of it, and properly cauterize that spot so that it does not return."
"And moreover, take care until the plague is healed."
"And beware that you do not presume to cut into that which is of dark color, little sensation, and regularly felt, for that is a cancer."
"And here I bring back the memory of the crab properly in this place."
Chapter LII
Of the treatment of inflammation of the navel.
Inflammation of the navel can occur for many reasons: it may arise from fissures in the skin that is over the abdomen, and then the thread or gut may come out from there according to where the other ruptures are; or blood may flow into it from a vein or artery according to what has been said earlier, or because of constricted wind in it.
But if it is due to a fissure in the skin and the exit of thread, then the color of the swelling is similar to the color of the body; and there is little pain, but it appears suddenly in various situations. And if it is due to the exit of the gut, then its situation with regard to that which has been mentioned earlier is one of very great diversity, and when you press upon it with your fingers it disappears, but quickly returns; and there is much pain associated with it, and a magnificent quantity of bath water and violent effort are required.
But if it is due to moisture, then there is little pain, and it does not disappear when you press upon it with your hand, nor is it contracted or swollen.
And if it is due to blood, then the swelling appears with these signs declining towards blackness.
But if it is due to raw flesh, then the swelling is hard, thick, and tough, and fixed in place according to its quantity.
If it is due to windiness, then his touch is lion-like.
If the swelling of the navel is due to blood from an artery or vein, or windiness, then you must be prohibited from treating him, for in that case there is fear and apprehension as has been taught in the chapter where it says concerning ulcers by an artery or vein.
And if the swelling of the navel is due to bile or tissue, then you should command the patient to hold his breath while standing upright and extend his body. Then take a tent and probe around the entire navel, and next, command him to lie on his back between your thighs. Next, encircle with a wide spatula in the area where you probed with the tent; then extract the contents of the swelling upwards using a large hook; finally, ligate it with strong flax or thread in an appropriate manner.
And next, hold the middle of the extracted swelling on the thread and insert your little finger into that opening and seek for the bile duct; and if you find it and hold it with the thread, then gently extract it and push it back into its place inside the belly.
And if you have found tissue, then take that with a hook; and cut away the superfluities of it.
But if it is against an artery or vein, then encircle that area and return to your operation. Then take two needles with strong threads attached and insert them into the circuit you have made around the swelling in such a way that they cross each other, making sure they penetrate well; then stretch the swelling in four directions over the needles.
And if you wish, remove the needles and let the location where the stretched skin was placed heal on its own. Or if it is thin, cut it when it has dried out and healed, and then dress the wound with something that promotes healing until it is completely healed.
And if the prominence of the navel is due to raw flesh in it or from moisture, then you should cut away the swelling as we have said and extract the blood or moisture which you find there. Then dress the wound with something that promotes healing and consolidates the location.
Capítulo LIII.
On the treatment of cancer
We have already said in the division of this book concerning cancer and its various types that it is treated with medicines. It is difficult to treat it by means of iron because it tends not to ulcerate easily; however, we have mentioned that cancer can develop from an untreated wound or sore.
And the ancients said that sometimes cancer can occur in locations where it is possible to eradicate it completely, such as when it appears on the breasts or scrotum, and especially when it first begins small.
But once cancer has become large and deeply rooted, it is not advisable to approach it because I have never seen anyone recover from such an illness nor do I know of any other treatment that could be effective.
And when cancer is located in such a way that it can be operated on, as we have said earlier, you should proceed by letting the patient's condition improve and purging them with black colchicum several times. Then, if there is a manifest swelling, excise it
And then prepare the patient for surgery by locating where the operation will take place. Then make an incision with a hook that is suitable for the situation, and carefully cut through all parts of the growth using the chain saw until there is no remaining cause for the spread of cancer. And let the blood flow freely, then remove it gently and squeeze out any remaining blood from the area. Then wipe away the thick blood with your hand or an instrument that you have at your disposal.
But if you have difficulty with thick blood flowing from a vein or artery, then cauterize that area until the flow of blood stops. Then treat the wound with other appropriate remedies until it has healed.
Capítulo LIV.
On the treatment of dropsy
We have already mentioned in this division the different types of water dropsy and their symptoms, as well as how they are treated with medicines.
And the type of water dropsy that is treated with iron is only the sole species of alithias. It is not advisable to approach this condition with iron treatment for the types known as tympanitis or hygrach because they are deadly.
And when you have treated this type of tympanitic dropsy with medicines and do not see any improvement in the patient's condition, then consider whether the patient has already reached a state of debility or if they suffer from another type of dropsy. If it is accompanied by other conditions such as coughing or abdominal discomfort, be careful not to treat it with iron because there is great danger involved.
But if the patient is strong and healthy and suffers from dropsy alone without any other illnesses or weakness, then the operation should be performed as follows:
"May be made of two pointed parts, long and sharp at one end like a sword; but it should have some shortening bit by bit, so that in the operation with it you do not penetrate into the intestines, and wound them."
"And accordingly consider whether the generation of hydrocele is from the intestines, for at that time you should stretch along with the section from the navel by three parts to the left side, on the right side over the penis."
"But if the generation of hydrocele is due to disease of the liver, then your section should be left of the navel by three fingers."
"And if its generation is due to the mesentery, then your section should be on the right side."
"And it is necessary that your section be made over the side towards which you want to draw off the superfluity, so that it may not flow into that part."
"And accordingly perforate with the instrument all along the cord, and properly entering that section, raise your hand with the spoon between the cord and the spermatic vessels, and you shall strip off that; if it amounts to one nail or more."
"And accordingly perforate the spermatic vessels within until the spoon reaches the desired place, and this is the place of water." "And accordingly draw out that and enter with an instrument whose shape is as follows:" "And it is like a thin silver cannula; it is made of silver or iron or laton, at the lowest part of which there is a small hole, and on its sides there are three holes: two on one side and one on the other side; and its extremity is cut obliquely in the manner of a feather, thus:"
"And at its uppermost extremity there is an armilla, for when the instrument reaches the water, then that will suddenly descend over it, and thus you shall evacuate as much water from the middle ear in one moment, for if you evacuate more than necessary at that time, the patient may immediately die from dissolution of his animal spirit, or he may become paralyzed, which is a sign of approaching death."
"But evacuate according to the quantity of his virtue, and consider also the disposition of the disease, the virtue of the pulse, and the goodness or badness thereof."
"And accordingly draw out the instrument and retain the water which is kept back by the cord, which retains the hole that you made over the spermatic vessels which I have told you to perforate in this manner."
"And accordingly repeat the operation on another day if the patient tolerates it well, and draw off a little water each time; do this for several days successively with caution, taking care that not too much water remain."
"But if you fear for the patient and let out too much water at once, then apply a plaster of hot sand to him, and bathe him with hot water, and expose him to the sun for a long time; and cure him with drying medicines until he is healed."
"And cauterize over the stomach and the belly near the place of extracting water, according to what I have told you concerning this that is precedent."
"Chapter Lv."
"On the treatment of children born with unperforated openings for urine."
"Sometimes, some children are born from the womb of their mother with the head of their mixture not perforated (either it is a narrow hole or it is not in its place)."
Therefore, cover immediately upon perforation of it as soon as it is born with a very thin membrane according to this form.
And then pause the wound with a subtle lead pin and tie that, and leave it for three days or four.
And when he wants to urinate, move him away and let him urinate; and immediately return him.
And if you do not remove the lead pin, it is possible that urine which falls onto this place will prevent it from closing
But the one whose pin has been removed should be treated with lead pins, as we have said, for too many days until it has grown enough.
But those in which the pin is not removed from its place are called "leditz", whose cause is that those who are born and have their pin removed are deprived of the end of the penis so that they cannot urinate through it until they raise the penis with their hand towards the top; and this is not because of its generation, for then sperm could not reach the womb directly, which is a serious illness.
And the manner of performing this operation is that the patient should lie on his back, and then extend the head of the penis with your left hand using forceful traction, and make an incision into the tip of the glans penis at the location of the urethral opening with a sharp spatula, like plucking out a feather, without cutting any skin, so that the meatus appears like the tip of the penis, and the pin falls in its proper place as needed.
And be careful when performing an operation to stop bleeding, because it happens often that this occurs; pause the bleeding with whatever is at hand and dress the wound until it heals.
Chapter LVI
Of albinism which occurs in the foreskin of the penis, and of whiteness, blackness, and adhesion of the foreskin to the glans penis.
Often this whiteness occurs on the penis and is a growth of flesh.
And among these, one is malignant and the other is non-malignant.
"Without malice, you should suspend it with a delicate hook and cut off only what is necessary, removing all of it completely. Then place your finger on that spot anointed with Egyptian ointment; afterwards, treat it with fine linen until it is healed."
"If the condition is malignant and of dark hue, then you should apply a caustic agent close to the incision and wound's edge."
"But if the inflammation is in the foreskin of the uncircumcised glans, and one part of the inflammation is inside the foreskin and the other part is outside, then you should remove the inflammation that is inside at the beginning until it has solidified. And afterwards, treat the exterior one, because when you treat both simultaneously, you cannot be certain that it will not become injured."
"And if gangrene occurs in the genitals and the foreskin appears black and inflamed, then you should cut away all that has already turned black and is about to decay or has already started to decay. And apply a plaster made from honey mixed with fine powder of barley groats and ground figs sieved."
"And treat it with another treatment until it is healed."
"But if there is a flow of blood, then apply a lunar caustic according to the following method:"
"Because cauterization with a lunar caustic is for two purposes at once: it stops bleeding and prevents pus from being corrupted."
"And if the glans is corroded and completely destroyed at once, then you should insert a lead cannula into the meat of the foreskin so that the urine may pass through it."
"In the adhesion of the foreskin to the glans (and this adhesion only occurs in those who are not circumcised; and when it occurs due to pus or an abscess), you should carefully scrape with a blunt spatula until the bond is dissolved and the glans is completely freed from all parts."
"And if it is difficult to separate them carefully, then you should cut some of the glans and foreskin with a sharp scalpel, because this is why the foreskin, when thin, easily adheres lightly due to its thinness."
"And then separate the foreskin and the glans with a thread of fine silk that has been softened in warm water so that they do not adhere again afterwards."
"And then treat it with astringent wine until it is consolidated."
"Chapter 57."
"Of the purification of children and the treatment of what occurs in those who are circumcised."
"Circumcision is not a continuous solution like other diseases. But since it is an operation of our own doing and will, and its proper place is in children, we must assign to it the best operation and easiest path leading to health."
"Therefore they say that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books, because they did not use it according to their laws. But this is only because we have acquired it through experience, which is why most artisans and barbers use circumcision and purification with a knife and probes. And they use a ligature with pitch and make an incision with the nail."
"And I have already proven that all these methods are inferior, and that the best purification is done with forceps, with a ligature of pitch used in purification as well as with the nail, because many times the cord of pus escapes upwards, because the cord of the foreskin has two tunics, and the inner one remains outside. And it is often necessary to make another incision and cause certain pain." "And in the purification that is done with a curette (a method used by barbers), it is not safe to make an incision at the end of the male organ, because it often goes into the urethra."
"But in the operation using a nail, you will often hit bone and ruin your operation." "And the cord of an infant is naturally short, and many times it hangs in such a way that there is no need for purification. I have seen this myself."
"But concerning the purification that is done with forceps and ligatures of pitch, it is proven to me that they are good, because the forceps have a proportional incision, so that the sharpness that is above is equal to the sharpness that is below. And therefore when you press your hand proportionally with two sharp points, you will make an incision according to their comparison in one single movement; and there is compression of pitch with a shape containing the cord of the foreskin completely without any error."
"And the first method of operation is that you should keep the child quiet if he is one who understands a little, so that you only tie the pitch on his foreskin at first, and leave it there for another day."
"And then do everything in your power to make him happy according to what he understands." "And then make him stay between your hands and prepare everything properly so that he is not afraid. And keep the forceps hidden in your hand or behind your ear, so that the child does not see them nor anyone else."
"And then place your hand on his foreskin and blow on the cord, and pull it out until the head of the foreskin appears. And then remove everything that has accumulated there from dirt."
"This is the form of the forceps used for purification:"
"The outer ones are not-cutting and the others are cutting, so that they do not come out from between the jaws. And let the length of the two points be equal to the length of two thumbs when placed side by side."
"But the error in purification is that sometimes you may remove the entire inner cord or a piece of it through the incision."
"Therefore, you should extend it with your nail beforehand before the inflammation of the place and make an incision according to its equality."
"And if you cannot hold it with your nail, then remove it with tweezers and make the incision."
"But if three days have passed and there is still some inflammation on the inside of the foreskin, then leave it until the inflammation has softened, and remove it easily, and make an incision according to what you have prepared."
"And beware of the head of the foreskin, so that you do not wound it."
"And then cure him with what will consolidate the plague according to the powders that we have recommended in the treatise on powders."
"And if it has been cut properly, and you follow the guidelines above, then it will not harm him."
"And also cure him according to what we have said until he is healed."
"Chapter LVIII"
"On the treatment of urine retention in the bladder."
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction due to stone or congealed blood, or by poverty or congestion.
And if it is not dissolved with what has been said and the cause remains severe upon the patient, then extraction must be performed using an instrument called a syringe, of which this is the form: It should be made of silver and carefully crafted like a quill pen of subtle thickness, about as long as a palm and a half, at whose end there should be a thin tube.
And the manner of extracting urine through it is this: Take the doubled skin and fold it over the end of the syringe's tube or wick for a good binding; insert the folded skin into the back opening of the syringe, cut off any excess skin with scissors if necessary, but forcefully insert it into the tube. Then apply pressure to the syringe with both hands and albumen of egg.
"Prepare the patient on the bench, grasp their thigh and wrap it with warm oil, both olive oil and hot water."
"And carefully insert the probe until it reaches the root of the thigh; and carefully bend the thigh upwards at the point of attachment of the belly; and carefully push the probe inside that; and carefully push it further until it reaches the bladder, and if the patient is not yet empty, do not act according to this order, but wait for the moment when it will be straight."
"And now slowly pull out the probe with the wool little by little, because urine sticks to the wool."
"And then remove it and perform a curettage of urine, using a probe, do not stop until the bladder is fully emptied and the patient feels relieved."
"Chapter 90."
"On the quality of clysters for the bladder with a clamp and similar instruments suitable for that purpose."
"When an ulceration or abscess occurs in the bladder, or blood coagulates there, or it is obstructed by a stone, and you wish to instill waters and medicines into that, then use the instrument called 'clampcedra', which has this form:"
"but at its end, it is closed, so it is blocked." "And in that there are three holes: two on one side, like this:"
"In the beginning was the hollow place, where that which is called 'it' resides, and its quantity may vary with no addition, except when some cause draws forth its humidity, it is drawn out; and when it is expelled, with it something else is drawn out; and when it expels long, according to what a lampwick does with naphtha in the battles at sea."
"Therefore, when you wish to expel humidity from the bladder, insert the end of the wick into the humidity and draw with it that which is expelled upwards, for the humidity is drawn into the concavity of the wick."
"And properly insert the end of the wick into the urethra as we have recommended in the circle; and properly expel the humidity with what you expel, for that humidity quickly goes to the bladder, and the illness ceases from it."
"And this is the form of the subtle sieve through which the bladder is sieved, and this is its form:"
"And it should be made of silver or lead, from which the top should resemble a small feather, and below that there should be a thin channel."
"And properly take the bladder of a beast, and place in it that humidity which you wish to sift into the bladder, and properly tie that between two strong ligatures with double thread, and heat that humidity over the fire."
"And properly insert the end of the sieve into the urethra."
"Then stretch your hand over the bladder with humidity, with downward pressure, until you feel that the humidity has reached the bladder."
"If you do not find the bladder, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle with it; and pierce that circle all around its circumference. Then insert your finger forcibly into those folds, as they revolve, until you feel what you want from the humidities, oils, and waters."
"And then take it with the instrument, just as you did with the bladder, until you express with your hand that the humidity reaches the bladder."
"Chapter .lx"
"Of removing stones."
"We have already discussed in the division of stones and their removal through medicine, and the difference between stones generated in the urethra and those generated in the bladder, and their symptoms."
"And we have said that there is operation with hand and section [surgery] for stone."
"And the stone generated in the bladder properly is that which remains in the bladder."
"And here we recount it with manifest exposition and abbreviation."
"Therefore it is said that stone generated in the bladder happens more often to children; and among its symptoms are: the urine that is expelled from the bladder is like water in its fineness, and appears in that area; the pain troubles the urethra, and often goes as far as the penis, and sometimes even beyond; and with that there is pressure on the anus."
"And it would be easier to cure children of this than those who have reached fourteen years old, as it is difficult for elderly people." "But among the young ones, it is between them that it is more frequent."
"And of this one for whom the stone is large and its removal easier. But if it is small, it is contrary to that."
"Therefore, when we come to the treatment of this one, at the beginning of it, we should remove the pain with a cautery that extracts all the opening which is in its urethra; for sometimes that opening prohibits the removal of the stone due to the examination of it."
"And then let the pain be taken with its weight and compressed until it moves downwards so that the stone descends to the front of the bladder or falls out of its place sometimes."
"And then let that cautery be placed between the two thighs more prepared, and its parts should be towards the things of it, so that the whole bladder is inclined downwards."
"And then remove that and all of it before."
"Therefore, if you feel the stone in the space, immediately cut open there with section [surgery]."
"And if it is not completely removed with that touch, then you should anoint with oil your little finger of the left hand if the pain is a child's or your middle finger if it is an adult one and insert that into its anus." "And remove the stone which remains there with your finger." "Then bring it out little by little towards the neck of the bladder."
"And then press upon that with your finger and expel it to the outside through the place where you made the incision."
"And command the minister to press on the bladder with his hand; and command another minister to extend the genitals upwards with his right hand and with his other hand remove the cord which is behind the genitals in the area where the incision is made."
"And then insert a spatula beveled in this way:" "and cut through it what is between the anus and the genitals, not in the middle of them, on the side of the left thing; and let the incision be made over that stone and your finger should be inside the anus, and let the incision be transverse so that the opening outside is wide and inside narrow according to how much it is possible for the stone to escape through it, and no more than that, because otherwise your finger which is in the anus will compress the stone due to the incision, and it will remain forgotten without remedy."
"And know that there are some stones for which its edge and margin make it difficult to extract due to this reason."
"And of those things, one is like the glans penis, round, and its extraction is easy."
"Therefore, if it is that which has angles and margins, adjust it in the opening [incision]."
"And if it is not thus forgotten [removed], then you should press upon it or press upon it with gentle pressure using a tool like a chisel whose end is curved and does not slip away, or else insert into there a thin instrument with a curved extremity."
"But if you cannot press upon it, then widen the opening a little and if you see blood flow, cut through that with gentle pressure using tripled vitriol."
"But if the stone is larger than one, then at first you press your hand on the mouth of the bladder and cut through there; then press a little more on it; and similarly do this if there are many stones."
"And if the stone is very large, then it would be ignorance to cut through that with a large incision because one of two things happens to the patient: either it becomes accustomed [to the condition] or it continues with the distillation of urine, because the place is not completely solidified."
"But instead administer expulsion of it from within so that it may be forgotten [removed], or press on the fracture of it with forceps in order to extract it piece by piece."
"Therefore, once you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with cloths of Aloes and dragon's blood, and press upon it." "And place over that a linen cloth dipped in oil and wine or in rose oil and fresh water so that a cauterizing blister may be formed."
"Then let the patient lie on their back for three days without removing the stitches."
"And once that has been removed, wash the place with water and much oil and then treat it with a fine liniment and a liniment of Diabazilon until it is healed."
"But if an aposteme caut and corrosive forms in the wound, resembling as if the blood is congealed in the bladder, and because of this urine is prohibited (and this is known by the exit of blood with urine), then insert your finger into the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains it will cause corruption of the bladder and its putrefaction."
"And then wash the wound with sour wine, water, and salt, and apply any opposite [remedy] that is suitable for healing until it is healed."
"And during all the time of the treatment, you should lie with both thighs raised and adjust the medications which have been placed on the place."
"And if the stone is small and in the middle of the penis, embedded in it, and urine cannot be expelled, then treat it with what I recommend before you come to an incision, because many have been cured by this treatment; and here it is: Take a pointed awl made of iron, whose form is as follows:"
"with a triangular extremity, sharp, inserted into wood."
"And then take pitch and tie it with that to the penis below the stone so that it does not return to the bladder."
"And then insert the iron into the penis, easily penetrating until the awl reaches that stone." "And gradually turn the borer with your hand in that small opening until you've pierced through it so the other side can penetrate; for urine is then released."
"And press your hand over what has been broken off from the opening of the stone outside the penis, because that is constricted and forgotten with urine, and the patient will be healed."
"But if this treatment is not suitable for some reason which prevents it from being done, then place a bandage on either side of the stone." "And cut into the stone with that penknife between two ligatures." "And pull it out." "And untie the ligature and clean the blood clots, which are formed in the wound."
"And there is no need for a bandage on either side of the stone, except to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and the upper ligature prevents blood loss when it is untied near the entrance of the stone."
"And therefore, when you tie the upper ligature, it is necessary that you elevate the cord above the ligatures so that it does not return to its place and cover the wound as we have said."
"Chapter 61:"
"On the extraction of stones from women."
"Stones are rarely formed in women."
"But if a stone is found in one of them, it is difficult to treat it and there are many prohibitions regarding its treatment."
"The first prohibition is that women have delicate genitals."
"And the second is because you cannot find a woman who willingly reveals herself to the doctor if she is chaste or has been married."
"The third is that it is difficult to find a woman who knows this art well, especially regarding the operation of a stone with the hand."
"And the fourth is that the location of the section for removing stones from women is far from the location of the stone, which requires a deep incision and causes fear."
"But if necessity compels you to do so, then it is necessary that you find a woman midwife who knows well how to perform the operation and is not easily embarrassed."
"But if you are deprived of that option, then seek a skilled and subtle male midwife, or present an experienced woman midwife who is versed in the ways of women, or a woman who has some knowledge of this art."
"So bring that woman to you and command her to do everything that you order regarding the examination of the stone at the beginning; which is done to determine whether the woman is a virgin. If she is, then it will be necessary for her to insert her finger into the woman's vagina and seek out the stone."
"So if she finds it, then remove her finger and then command her to insert the probe on it."
"But if she is not a virgin, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the patient's vagina and seek out the stone, since she can place her left hand on the bladder and compress it well."
"So if she finds it, then gradually move her finger from the opening of the bladder towards its entrance, using all your strength until you reach the desired goal."
"And when you have reached that position, insert the probe on it, placing your finger behind the opening of the vagina where the stone is located. Keep your finger pressed against the stone until you remove the probe."
"The incision should be small at the beginning. Then insert the probe into that incision and if you feel the stone, adjust the size of the incision according to the quantity that you know will come out from there."
"And know that stones are of many kinds: some are small and large, sharp and smooth, long and round, and have branches."
"So you should know how many kinds there are by what you have indicated regarding what you want to know."
"If you see bleeding, apply a bandage soaked in vinegar and hold it there for one hour until the bleeding stops. Then return to your operation until the stone is removed."
"And make sure you have prepared the instruments that are mentioned in the extraction of stones from men, so that they may assist you in your operation."
"If you see bleeding and know that the expulsion of blood is from the incision made in the urethra, then apply powder to the location and strain it with dry bread crumbs and stricture descent. Do not repeat this action; leave the stone and do not extract it, for otherwise the patient will die." "And then dress the wound."
"So when the sharpness of the bleeding has subsided after several days and the location is healed, then return to your operation until the stone is removed."
Chapter LXII.
Of incision for strangulated hernia.
A strangulated hernia is nothing but an aggregation of moisture in the white sac that is outside the abdomen containing the intestines, and it is called a "sac."
Sometimes it is seen in the proper paniculus that Nature prepares for him at the time of birth, even though it might be another one; and this is the cord of the genitourinary system between the white cicatrix which we have mentioned, but this is not all.
The cause of this hernia is weakness which occurs in the genitals, causing that matter to protrude through them, and sometimes it happens due to a blow received on the genitals.
This fluid has various colours, for its colour can lean towards citrine or sanguineous red, or brown, or it can be blackish-feculent or watery-white.
And the signs by which it is known where this accumulation of water is located are these: for if it is in the white cicatrix that we have mentioned, then the swelling will be somewhat elongated and egg-shaped, and the genitals will appear, as the fluid contains them on all sides.
And if the fluid is in the proper paniculus, then the swelling will be round like an egg and it is estimated that it is another testicle.
And if the fluid is between the cord of the genitals and the white cicatrix, then the sensation will be to the left.
And if you wish to know the colour of the fluid, then press on the colour of the fluid in the swelling with a thin catheter whose form is preceded; and according to what appears in the trace of the interior, judge what lies beneath it.
Therefore when we come to the treatment of it with iron, then we must command the patient to be flebotomized if this is possible for him, and empty the body of it completely.
And let him lie on his back on some cause a bit higher up, and place to the left a few cloths.
And then you sit on the left side of him and command the minister to stand on the right side of him, who will extend his whip hand to one of two latts at the cord of the genitals and at the parting of the navel of the abdomen.
And then take a broad knife and cut the cord of the genitals from the middle place along its length, close to the penis.
"Make an incision according to the rule, evenly spaced from the line where you should grasp the skin of the genitals, until it reaches the white navel."
"Remove that, observe it, and be careful not to cut it. The removal should be done gently yet skillfully, with the amount of skin removed being as much as possible."
"Next, perforate the belly full of water with a wide perforation and extract all the water."
"Next, separate the two lips of the incision with forceps and extend the belly at its sides. Do not touch the cord connecting the genitals, and make your incision in this manner as much as is possible." "And incise it completely or in pieces, especially its sides subtly, for if you do not examine the incision carefully, it is not certain that the water will not return."
"But if you proceed from the outside of its cord during your operation, then when you have completed the incision on the belly, return inside it and immediately join together the two lips of the cord of the genitals with sutures, and then take care of it just like other wounds until it is healed."
"And if you find the belly corrupted by some other illness, then it is necessary to ligate the vessels that are near the suspensiony ligaments, and extract the belly, and then take care of it with what we have said."
"But if the water accumulates in two places at once, know that there are two hernias present. Therefore incise that side just as you did on the other side, and if it appears to be an operation, then perform it."
"And then you should cleanse the blood, and enter into the incisions with wool soaked in oil or rose oil. Then place over this another wool soaked in wine and oil, and spread it out over both of the genitals and the belly button. Then place folded cloths and powders over it, and bind them together with bandages in this manner:"
"And then two cloths are taken and filled with wool carded in this manner. The ends of them are tied with cotton or wet wool, and they are attached with a bandage in the fly of the breeches, and one end takes the buttocks between the two, and the other end takes the groin, and two bands on both sides and two others above the thighs, and all tension should be adjusted in the fly of the breeches."
"And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with a cautery instead of an incision with iron. And if you take a thin cautery needle and incise the cord of the genitals with it, and light it according to what we have recommended until the white belly containing the water is revealed, then you should take cautery in this manner:" "And it resembles the Greek letter gamma."
"And then pierce that belly with it, and light it until all the moisture is driven out."
"And then extend the belly with forceps, and tear it open with forceps, and cauterize it with a thin lit forceps. And incise it according to what is possible for you until you have removed all of it. And be careful that the belly does not touch the fire."
"And know that this operation is safer and farther from bleeding than an operation with incision."
"But if you encounter an aposteme or bleeding during the time of incision or cautery, or bleeding, then you should take care of what is causing this to you according to what has been said."
"But if the patient is fearful and does not wait for a second operation due to its horrible nature, then perform a perforation according to what you recommend. And this should be done when you are certain, based on what we have said about the meanings, that that hernia is hydrocele."
"Then you should make the patient lie on some elevated pillows. Then perforate the aposteme at its lowest part with a wide spatula, and continue the perforation according to the length of the body."
"And let the opening be wide enough that all the water may run out."
"And then place cotton on the spot and bind it there, so that the remainder of the water may drain off." "And then treat it until the wound is healed."
"But if there is difficulty in the discharge of water at that time, then perforate it: and this happens only when the white panicle at the opening of the wound causes difficulty and prevents the escape of water. Then you should place into the wound a trocar or instrument with which the water is extracted from hydroceles, as shown below, or fit into the opening of the wound a small tube."
"And know that the water returns, and it accumulates again after about six months or approximately those times. And when it has accumulated, then it should be perforated in the same manner as before, for the patient will thus spend his days."
"Chapter LXIII."
"Chapter on fatty hernia and its cure."
"You should know that in this section about this hernia, great caution is required to avoid injury during the operation; for this reason, it is my recommendation to dismiss the surgery and save the patient from it."
"And remember the operation that was performed on him and the specifics of his abscesses."
"Therefore, I say that abscesses are formed in the bodies of those whose veins are affected and this happens for many causes: either due to acute severe inflammation which overflows into the veins, or due to injury."
"And its color matches that of the body, and it is not accompanied by pain, indicating a severe abscess."
"And a hard, elevated, encapsulated abscess with dark skin coloring, which is insensitive to touch."
"And sometimes it occurs due to the knotting of arteries, and inflammation of these vessels is perceived before remembering the injury itself, or due to venous inflammation."
"But what is caused by inflammation of arteries is known by the spreading out of the abscess when you press it with your fingers, and it does not require touching."
"But one that is caused by inflammation of a vein is not spread out by pressing it with the fingers due to its hardness."
"And it is possible that with this type of abscess there may be an incision made into other flesh; and this occurs when you insert the chain of veins, and then stretch the skin upwards at its edges, extract the white cylinder, deliver the suspensory ligaments of the vessels, tie them, and then cut the suspensory ligament as you completely free it from all attachments to the skin."
"So if the skin is firmly attached to those tissues, then you must extract the skin and incise that area."
"And if there is adhesion between the cylinder or between the vessels for any cause, then you must release all that adhesion and make a round incision."
"But if there is a birthmark of flesh in the place of adhesion that is behind it, then you must incise all that and extract the skin as we have said."
"So once your operation is complete, then fill the wound with lanolin infused in rose oil and wine, and afterwards dress it with the other dressing until it heals."
Chapter LXIV
Of the treatment of a hernia that occurs in childhood.
A hernia in children is an abscess wrapped in some kind of wrapping resembling a bud with softening of the testes, and it makes difficult exercise and walking for the patient.
And in treating this condition, fear is the cause of what preceded its onset.
However, we must speak about the operation on it according to how it first appears.
"I say that you should place the patient on an elevated pillow; then expose the suspensory ligaments of the testicles to the parts left uncovered; and then take hold of the tendon of the hamstrings with your fingers, as close as possible to the thighbone; and have another servant help you, stretching them with great vehemence."
"And then make an incision with a sharp knife along the right side of the vessels where they are uncovered."
"And then strip away all the surrounding parts, just as we have said in the extraction of an arrowhead from the temples."
"And then place a needle with double thread in that location where you first saw the vein appear, and tie it there; then tie it again at the last point where it disappears." "And then cut that in half with a straight incision along the length of the body and remove what has accumulated there from the putrid and corrupted moistures."
"And then treat the wound with the usual treatment for wounds to ensure that it heals well and does not fall prey to gangrene from one or both testicles, as this would be unfortunate."
"But if all the veins are visible, then it is necessary to remove the testicles or to tie them off with the veins, as they would otherwise be deprived of all nourishment due to the incision of the veins. Then they should be cauterized, or else cut off so that there may be no harm from them."
"Chapter LXV"
"Regarding the treatment of intestinal hernia."
"The occurrence of this hernia is due to a separation that occurs in the peritoneum spread out over the abdomen on the side of the abdominal muscles, causing some intestines from that rupture to protrude."
"And this rupture is either due to the ciphac or exception of him, and it happens thus these two species for many causes: either percussion, or leap, or cry, or elevation from some heavy cause, or seeming."
"And the sign of that, when it is by extension of the ciphac, is that it happens little by little over a long time, and does not happen suddenly, and it is an aposteme growing within the preon due to the ciphac compressing the bowel."
"And the sign of him is when it is by section of the ciphac, for at the beginning it causes sudden violent pain; and it is an aposteme different appearing near the duodenum appearing, and that is by emission of the bowel, and its body towards the parts outside of the ciphac."
"And sometimes it happens that the tissue is forgotten in the bowel, and this is called intestinal hernial."
"And sometimes it is accompanied by windiness, and sometimes it runs in the bowel furrow, and here it is retained, and there is great detriment of health with this, and sometimes it causes bad pain, especially when pressed."
"And in the treatment of these species of this illness with iron, there is fear because it is necessary to avoid cauterization in that."
"And the manner of the operation for this is that you order the patient to reduce the bowel with his own hand to the parts inside his concavity if he obeys its return, and then it should be covered over with his cloak between your hands, and elevate its chambers."
"And then stretch the duodenum which lies above the duct of the testes to the parts above, and incise the duct of the testes entirely along its length; and then insert two clamps of the section as you need them to open the section with those."
"And if, according to the quantity of that which is possible for you, it should happen that that part is forgotten."
"And then excise that cisphac which lies near the duct of the testes until the white hard cisphac is discovered on each part."
"Then you insert your finger into that which lies the testis, into that which is between the white cisphac, which lies near the duct of the bowel, and between the cisphac second, and separate with that adhesion which is in the part behind the bowel."
"And then take with your hand the duct of the testes to the parts forward, and with this extend the white cisphac above with your left hand, and elevate the bowel with the cisphac at the part of the section; and command the assistant that he extends the bowel outside and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind with complete solution."
"And then carefully examine with your fingers to ensure that there is no cause of the bowel being enclosed in the white hard cisphac." "But if you find any cause there, then you pull it into the abdomen from outside."
"And then incise in that part near the duct of the testes through the section from which blood and pus flowed, as we have recommended before."
"And then apply wool soaked in oil and place it on the wound; and apply the suture which we have recommended (and sometimes cauterize the white cisphac which we have mentioned near the incision of the bleeding point, for many times this happens), and leave the suture until it falls by itself."
"But if the wound closes late, then boiled water should be wrapped around it, and placed upon it until it falls as we have said."
"And then treat the wound with the other cure for wounds until it is healed."
"Chapter 66"
"On Ventous Hernia"
In this hernia, no one has been burned during its cure with iron.
The first step is done as we recommended in the case of a hernia caused by water: lie down on your back and raise your hips close to the section over that area with ease; then dry the middle part around the abscess with water boiled with salt.
Cure the wound as we said until it is healed
Capítulo LXVII
On the treatment of hemorrhoids.
Sometimes, rupture occurs in the hemorrhoids as we have said, and it becomes inflamed.
And do not give any laxatives to the patient without cause; if you do give them, it is little; and they return in all hours.
But if the time is prolonged with that, it makes an anal fissure in which the intestine opens into the anus; and this happens because of the extension of the anus which is in the hemorrhoids as we have said, which causes the anus to stretch, soften, and become inflamed and swollen.
And its cure is with cautery, as will be described later in this book.
And sometimes it is cured with iron according to this method: and that is for the patient to sit on his heels between two stools, and then dry the area of the rupture of the swollen abscesses with a cut made horizontally according to its size.
And then stretch the anus white which is below the spine so that it is exposed.
And then take a probe and place it on the most prominent part of the anus, and press it against the front of the abdomen.
And then cut both prominent parts on either side of the probe's end in the anus, and join them together with a suture.
And then extract the end of the probe, and do not insert anything into the anus at all, nor extend it further, nor any other cause as you will know better in the treatment of intestinal hernias.
And then treat it with the treatment for piles, and when you cut the veins, cleanse them and restore the pile so that it is consolidated; for the anus contracts and the prominence of the rupture does not remain.
And cautery is better in this place because it is closer to health.
Chapter LXIX
Of the softening of the scrotum's cord.
Many times the scrotum's cord in some men is softened because the flesh that is between it is softened, and it is noticeable by its appearance.
Then it is necessary for the one who is to treat him that they make the patient lie down on their side, and remove all clothing softened over the natural skin; and then join two lips with stitching.
And if you wish, at first the excess of softened skin can be removed with three or four cuts and firm stitching.
And then cut between the stitches, and also treat other wounds until they heal and discharge occurs.
Chapter .lxix
Of castration.
Know that castration is condemned in our law, but due to the request of certain people it has been written about in this book; and its remembrance is necessary only for two ways: one because it is within the knowledge of doctors when they are consulted regarding such things, knowing how to treat them; and the other way is that we often need castration of other beasts for our own use, as with dogs, goats, pigs, and similar animals.
And so it is said that castration is done in two ways: either by crushing or by cutting with a section.
But in that which is done by crushing, the way of performing it is that we seize the beast in cold water until its testicles become softened and lengthened and hang down. And then take them with your hand so that they are resolved and do not appear hard to the touch.
But in castration done by cutting with a section, you should hold the beast and press the cord of its testicles with your left hand.
And then lift up the suspending ligaments, and cut across each one with a section so that two openings result.
And then cut those which will appear to have burst open. "Ignore causes related to the liver, except for a subtle liver condition that affects the veins."
"This method of castration is better performed by crushing because strong crushing leaves no cause for the testicles to desire copulation."
"And appropriately treat the plague until it is healed."
"Chapter .70."
"On the cure of hermaphrodism."
"Hermaphrodism in males comes in two forms: one is when it appears as an empty space between the two testicles, where there are two testicles but a vagina-like opening figures between them."
"And sometimes urine flows from that spot which is in the chain of the testicles."
"In females, it is one type: when the vagina opens above the pubis just like two male testicles, slightly larger and thinner at the opening of the vulva, like the male penis and two testicles."
"And its treatment is divided into three types: two for males and one type for females." "And it is necessary that you insert those attached flesh parts so that the urine does not escape from there, and also heal them with care just like other illnesses."
"And in the second type of males where urine flows which is in the chain of the testicles, there is neither treatment nor operation for it."
"Chapter .21."
"On lentigo (freckles) and raised flesh caused by women."
"Freckles are naturally attached, they appear and disappear according to the weather; sometimes they are more pronounced in some women that they spread like in men and even during intercourse."
"Then you should remove the excess freckles with your hand or with oil and insert it."
"And do not make an incision in the end, especially on the front of the nose, to avoid bleeding."
"Then heal it with treatment for skin diseases until it is healed."
"But raised flesh is flesh that grows on the skin of the mother's womb and fills it up. It often resembles coal at its opening (and for this reason some first called it "cow's illness"); therefore we should remove it just like freckles, and heal it until it is healed."
"Chapter LXXII."
"On the treatment of a sore throat."
"A sore throat is when the woman's passage is not pierced or has a small hole." "And it can be either natural or accidental."
"Accidental is due to an illness that has preceded, and it is caused by excess flesh or attached skin, or thick and dense cicatrix."
"And it is caused either in the front of the womb or on its sides, or above or below it, and it prevents coitus, pregnancy, and childbirth. It often also inhibits menstruation."
"And the diagnosis of this condition is made by examining the uterus through the vagina if dilation is apparent. But if it is not apparent, you should examine it with your fingers or with a probe."
"But if the dilation is due to a thin cicatrix and it is apparent between the two lips of the vulva, then cut it and tear it apart."
"And if it lies on top of both labia majora, then gently press your fingers together from both sides towards the middle."
"And let the woman lie on her back with her legs extended. Then gently spread both lips with force until that thin cicatrix is broken and dilation is achieved."
"And then take some wool dipped in oil, place it on the location, and leave it for a day so that the area does not stick together."
"But if the cicatrix is thick and dense, then you should cut it with a broad-bladed knife or with a myrtle leaf."
"But if dilation is due to attached skin, then suspend that skin with oil and cut it."
"And use medicines that stop bleeding without causing injury, such as achiote and dragon's blood, and hyssop mixed with egg white."
"And then insert a wide lead cannula to ensure that the wound does not heal too quickly."
"And keep it like this for several days and apply poultices of linseed."
"And then heal it with other treatments to consolidate it until it is healed."
"And sometimes during childbirth other flesh also comes out, so you should cut according to this method." "But if this is due to a bone abscess, then do not use iron in any way on the bone abscess that is in the womb."
"Chapter LXXIII."
"On the treatment of hemorrhoids, prolapse of the rectum, and red tumor that occurs in the vagina of women."
"Hemorrhoids are a condition where multiple veins at the anus become varicose and continually bleed. And when these hemorrhoids become old, they hang down like grapes."
"And I have already spoken in the division about the species and signs of these hemorrhoids, and I will say now which ones receive treatment and which ones do not."
"So I say that hemorrhoids that are in the front of the womb and do not appear at examination should not be treated with iron."
"But those that are at the opening of the vagina and can be felt with the fingers are those that receive treatment."
"And you should place the woman in a warm bath and then gently spread her buttocks with forceps or rough cloth, and cut those hemorrhoids with razors."
"And then sprinkle powder from one of the non-injurious cutting powders on those places where bleeding occurs, such as aloes and similar things."
"And then have her press her feet against something for an hour, and then place her in warm water."
"And if bleeding persists, then have her drink a decoction of suma and the rind of pomegranates and citrons and similar things."
"And then take some barley flour, mix it with honey, vinegar, and wine, and make a poultice with this to place on her back."
"If blood is emitted, that is good. But if not, then apply two cupping glasses and perform scarification on the breasts."
"And then take wool and soak it in the juice of coriander or the juice of radish or the juice of garlic mixed with wine, and apply it to that place. And then treat that place with egg whites until it is healed."
"And treat it until it is healed."
"Chapter LXXIV."
"On accidental perforation of the bladder in the womb."
"Many species of abscesses can occur in the womb, such as bone spurs, stone-like abscesses, ulcers, adhesions, hernias, fistulas, hemorrhoids, cracks, prolapse, and other abscesses." "And I have already spoken about these diseases, the species of them, their signs, and their treatments in the division."
"And it is necessary that I say in this treatise about cauterization of an abscess that occurs in the womb when it is from those abscesses that become healed, and if you want to know how the operation of it with iron is done."
"Therefore, you should consider whether the pain of the abscess at its beginning is acute with percussion and swelling and fever. If it becomes red and if it is painful when touched, then do not cut it with perforation, but treat it with something that helps maturation until the sharpness of the symptoms ceases."
"And now you must place the woman upon a chair that has two arms; she should recline on her back and adjust her feet so they rest just below her belly, with her thighs spread wide. Then, place her arms by her sides in a way that is suitable."
"And then the midwife proceeds on the right side and administers the instrument with which the opening of the mouth is widened, the form of which will come forth in those cases that are about to be made."
"And when you want to administer this instrument, make sure it enters the mouth of the woman just until the point where the throat begins, and no further than that." "But if the instrument is larger than the opening of the mouth, then you should place powders on the surface of the throat so that the entrance of any instrument into it is prohibited."
"And it is necessary that you place a thread on the end of the instrument on the right side and above, so that when the midwife administers the instrument she may hold onto the thread and rotate the thread inside until the opening of the mouth is widened."
"And when the birth emerges and it is touched by the hand and is wet and soft, then you should catch that one with your hands using the spatula made of latten."
"And when the placenta is expelled, then you should place in a dish submerged in rose oil or verdigris oil which has some astringency and place it at the section of the throat."
"And then cover the mouth and over the vulva put clean wool submerged in water in which mallows have been boiled."
"And then it should be treated again two days hence, using this remedy that should suffice to heal it."
"And sometimes the wound and the inflammation are washed with a solution made of water and honey, or water in which iris root or long-rooted artichoke has been boiled, and then it is returned to the remedy."
"If the inflammation is inside the wound, it is forbidden to treat it with iron; then one should use the remedy mentioned earlier in this section."
"Chapter Seventy-Five"
"To teach midwives how to treat the drunk woman who is pregnant, when it presents itself abnormally."
"It is necessary for the midwife to recognize at the beginning the figure of a normal birth through its signs, namely when she sees the woman pressing her thighs and desiring to smell the air, and then she feels relieved by that which comes over her from below, and the expulsion of the child is hastened, she knows that this birth is according to nature's figure, i.e. the child comes out upon its head, and the second one either suspended or hanging from the navel."
"So when you see these signs, it is necessary that the woman's belly be pressed so that the embryo comes out gently, since when the first one comes out upon its head, the second one will follow, and it should be cleaned of those impurities with good cleansing."
"But if it is another than this birth is unnatural and blameworthy, for when the child comes out upon its feet and its body emerges before its head, and its feet are out first, or one hand comes out first, or a foot, or even the head with one arm, then it turns violently onto its neck, these are like those figures that are not praiseworthy."
"Therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all these matters, so that she may guard against error and deception."
"And I am showing you here the figure of those [birth positions], and what kind they are in each one, so that it may be indicated by this and understood."
"When the fetus comes out upon its head by natural impulse, and it is violently expelled from the woman and difficult to bring forth, so that her strength is already weakened, then one should do this: let women hold her and evaporate the pain of her womb with fennel cooked with honey and moistened with olive oil."
"And accordingly the midwife should insert her finger between those little lips and tear open with it the second one or break through that with her nail which is inside where there is humidity." "And press the woman's belly so that she expels the fetus."
"But if it does not come out, then it is necessary to lubricate the woman with mustard plaster and fennel plaster with honey."
"And accordingly command her to be pressed and make her sneeze with incense; and keep her mouth and nose closed for an hour, because the fetus will soon be forgotten."
"And if both legs of the fetus are forgotten at the beginning, then it is necessary to reduce them little by little with ease." "But if it does not obey the assistance, then place the woman upon a stool and lift up its legs, and strike the stool against the ground, so that the woman may not fall due to the concussion."
"And if the legs do not turn back and the fetus dies, then incise those [legs] and remove the afterbirth of the fetus or tie its body with cloth and remove it gently because that will be forgotten."
When the patient lies on their back, then you should press those legs upward, and promptly turn the foot slightly inward, and then tie that up, and promptly take one of their feet and extend it little by little.
Once he is inside the space [between the thighs], then you should command him to press down, and make that sneeze with certain conditions, because sometimes they forget if God wants it.
And if he doesn't forget what has been said above, then you should gradually return the foot to its natural position until it stops, because sometimes they forget with light pressure.
And if all that has been said above is prohibited, then take some ground aloe and dissolved gum, grind it well in the mortar with good percussion, and promptly apply it to the woman's womb, the lowest part of her belly. And promptly make her drink water infused with dillseed, until she obtains relief from her hypochondriac condition.
"And sometimes when the parts are left uncovered by him, then he should undergo fumigation with myrtle and rest upon it." "And when the fumigation lasts an hour, then you should make him sneeze over a cloth, and at that moment, remove it from his mouth, and press the lower part of his belly with gentle pressure, because the wind is quickly forgotten."
Examination of the lateral folds of the buttocks with one of his buttocks. If you cannot reduce it with your hand, then elevate the woman's hips and make her bear down.
And if she cannot bear down, then have her lie on the bedsheet, and strike his buttocks vigorously with your fist, and then administer laxatives composed of honey or mucilages.
And if the birth is imminent, then have her sit upon a chair and then examine the reduction of the hand, and push out the feces according to its natural form using gauze, and make the woman sneeze and command him to press upon himself until the feces are fully expelled.
Examination of the feces on his colon as his buttocks are spread and his mother's fascia is on his back. That the midwife should have her hand inside the child and gently rotate it, facilitating its passage.
And when that has been done and as much has been pushed out, then pause upon the child's fundament with what we have recommended of oil and mucilages.
And then command him to move his buttocks little by little, and when you have done that, then have her sit upon a chair and command her to lean over the right side, and then command him to press down; and make her sneeze with a condition. Exit of the child prepared on its side.
When they make horrible faces at you as per this method, consider that and then insert your second finger with your nail into the fundament until it has been emptied of fluid.
And if the child is suspended upon its face and colon, then insert your hand into the belly, so that it may not be retained and die.
And then push the child out through its passages little by little until it is born, and command the woman to press upon herself several times, and may he be expelled with gentle examination if God wills it.
Exit of twins or multiple fetuses Know that many times twins are born, and sometimes three or four, but this is rare and unusual. It has natural causes and does not happen often.
And count them, even if they are multiplied, as one fetus, and separate them by chiasm, distinguishing those between the ligaments in the navel of each. And sometimes they are expelled just like one fetus through gentle natural examination, but sometimes they are expelled through painful examination as we have recommended
And if some of them are difficult to bring forth during birth and they have come to what we have said about the unnatural figures, then cure them as we have recommended.
And if the midwife is subtle and does what she does with facility and subtlety, and patience, and is ingenious according to all figures as they are prepared for her by the art leading to health
Recollection of that which is formed in the matrix from embryos and aborted
Sometimes one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and even more than ten are formed in the womb, and I have verified that one woman aborted six, and another bore ten all formed. The cause of this was made known by the measurement of the glorious wise ones.
And all this should be in the knowledge of the midwife that she may know what to do in such a case, and therefore pause if it is necessary to do so.
Chapter LXXVI
Of the extraction of the dead fetus
When you care for the dead fetus as we have said in the division of medicine and it is not expelled naturally, and you see that force must be used with your hand, then consider if the woman is of sound virtue and does not have any of the accidents by which danger to her may be feared.
Then it is necessary that the woman should be placed upon the bed on her left side, and let her head rest in a low place and let her hips be elevated.
And the assistant should hold her from both parts, or lie on the bed with her, so that his body does not extend beyond the extraction of the fetus.
And then moisten the mouth of the womb with humid oil and mucilage of marsh mallow and fenugreek and linseed.
And then the midwife should anoint her hand with these oils and mucilages, and then insert her hand gently into the womb, and then search around with her hand for where the hooks are on the fetus.
The convenient places for this are: then consider if the fetus is prepared to come out on its head, and then place the hooks in its heels or in its neck or in its mouth or in its palate or below its beard or in its collarbone or in the places near the ribs or below the hypochondria.
But if it is coming out on its feet, then in the perineum or in the middle of the back
It is necessary to hold the hook with the right hand and pause its curvature in that place which is between the fingers of the left hand, and insert the hand gently and place the hook in one of those places which we have mentioned until it reaches the cause of birth.
And then pause and place another hook or the third one if necessary so that there may be equal traction and not too much extension according to its straightness alone.
And let it be moved in every birth so that the expulsion of it may be alleviated just as is done with teeth when they are extracted.
And it is necessary that between them the extension be softened; and if any part of it is retained, then it is necessary for the midwife to anoint some of her fingers with oil and insert them gently and turn around what has been retained.
Therefore if the birth of the fetus is difficult, then the hooks should be changed to another place where it may be pushed further out; and do this until the whole fetus has been expelled.
But if the hand becomes exposed before the other one and it is not possible to reduce it because of its curvature, then a cloth should be wrapped around that; and then extract it until all has been expelled, and cut it off at the junction of the hand or in the elbow.
"And similarly do in the other hand and both feet."
"If the fetus's head is large or if there is some constriction in the pelvis or if it is in the neck of the womb, then it will be necessary to insert between the aforementioned spines and split the head open and extract the waters, or else use an instrument called “alundat,” the shape of which will come along with the shapes of other instruments in the chapter that follows this one."
"And similarly do if the fetus has naturally a large head: and then it is necessary to insert this with forceps, or take hold of it with an “alundat” as we have said before; and afterwards extract the bones with forceps."
"And if the head is exited and is constricted above the pubis, then it should be opened up so that the fluid which is in the uterus may flow out."
"But if there are no complications or signs of imminent delivery, then you should proceed to extract the head little by little according to your ability."
"And if the lower part of the abdomen is inflamed or there is dropsy in it, then you must pierce it so that the fluid which is within may flow out."
"But if the fetus is lying on its back, then its attraction will be lighter and its direction towards the mouth of the womb will be easier."
"But if it is constricted above the belly and the uterus, then you must extract it with cloth which you will have wrapped around your hand, and cut open the belly and uterus so that what is inside may flow out."
"But if the other members are exposed and the head returns, then insert your left hand; but if the mouth of the womb is closed, then insert your hand into the lower abdomen and grasp the head with it, and pull it with those things into the mouth of the womb, and immediately insert a hook or two hooks, and pull it with those."
"And if the mouth of the womb is constricted by hard adhering clots which have occurred at birth, then it should not be troubled over that; but rather it is necessary to administer a copious evacuation of fatty humor." "And apply plasters and follow up the patient with waters that soften and moisten."
"If the patient is on their side, if possible it should be made flat; and let them be given what has been said for a live patient."
"And if this is not possible, then they shall be incised with scissors, and it shall be extracted."
"Ensure that no cause remains within the second one."
"And when you have completed all your operation, then administer what has been said about the cure of burns from which this may occur."
"If there is bleeding, then apply styptics in water and administer the other cure."
"And I have seen a woman whose fetus was dead in her womb, and immediately afterwards she became pregnant again, and the other fetus was also dead." "It happened that a long time after an ulcer appeared on his belly; it became inflamed inside the opening and began to discharge pus."
"And I was called in to treat him, but even though I treated him for a long time, it did not heal."
"Then I pondered on some causes that might have an attractive force, and pulled out a bone from him, but after several days passed, he pulled out another bone; and I was very amazed because there are no bones in the belly."
"And then I realized that they were the bones of the dead fetus."
"So I dressed the wound and removed many bones from it. The woman was then in good health and lived that way for a long time until one day she gave birth to a boy."
"And I do not affirm that this is strange, because in this there is knowledge and aid for the physician who works with his hand in treating."
"Regarding the shapes of the instruments necessary to extract the fetus."
"Form of treatment through which the main cause is opened:"
"This is the form of stretcher on which its ropes are tied, with two handles at both ends of each side." "It is necessary that this handle be made more slender and tight, and made either of ivory or wood."
"And let the width of each beam be two fingers and a half, and the margin of each one on both sides be one finger wide, and the length of each one is one and a half palm; and in the middle place of two beams there are two joints of that meter wood which are already fixed, whose length is more than one and a half palm, and the width of each one is two fingers or a little more."
"And these two additions are inserted into the mouth of the main cause so that it can be opened with those when you turn the two specified handles."
"Another similar form but more slender and lighter:"
"It is made of ivory or wood in the shape of a forceps." "But nevertheless at the end of it there are two additions like these, and the length of those additions is two palms, and the width of each one is two fingers."
"And when you want to open the main cause with those, then place the woman on her back and lift the weights with your hands, opening what is between her thighs." "And then open your hand with the instrument like you do with pincers, grasping according to how much you want of the opening of the mouth of the main cause while the meter makes what you want."
"The form of virtue which they say in the past:"
"The shape of pushing with which is pushed the deed:"
"The shape of embracing with which is held the large head"
"And it is similar to forceps whose teeth are at the end like this, and sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form whose teeth are like those of a saw with which it cuts and holds." "The shape of embracing little:"
"The shape of a hook having one spine:"
"The shape of a hook having two spines:"
"The form of a spoon having two extremities with which the head is cut off:"
"The shape of two broad spoons:"
"Nevertheless all those instruments are exercised, and the more numerous the species of it and the better prepared the craftsmen, the easier its operation and the better for people due to their quantity."
"And do not work with those instruments whatever they may be, because the need for them is inexcusable."
"Regarding the extraction of the second cause:"
"When the second cause is retained during childbirth, then you should order the sick woman to hold her breath, and then make her sneeze with a condition, and press your hand over its mouth and nostrils, and if it comes out through this, that's good."
"And if not, then take a cloth and make a hole in it, and place it over those herbs burned on the mouth of the main cause, such as calamus, rue, anise, chamomile, saffron Arabic and lignum casia, and holy balm." "All these herbs or some of them should be immersed in water in the cloth, and place it on the fire."
"And then place a reed cannula in the mouth of the main cause, and hold it there until the vapor comes to the concave part of the main cause."
"And then make her sneeze as we have said, and the second cause will be expelled with speed."
"But if even then this cure does not work and it is not expelled, then you should order the midwife to immerse her left hand in sesame oil or in an emulsion of althea, and then insert it into the womb and search with that for the second cause. And when she has found it, then take it out little by little. But if it is attached to the front of the main cause, then insert your hand as we have recommended, and when you have found the second cause, extract it slowly according to rectitude so that the main cause does not suffer from violent traction." "It is necessary that they be moved on the right and left sides with ease."
"And if the mouth of the main cause is obstructed, we have already recommended the cure with sneezing and with medication of the cloth with herbs."
"But if it is not expelled with all the causes that we have recommended, then be careful not to tire yourself out in repeated attempts at extraction, but whatever comes out of her mouth should be placed on the thing of the woman, and then cauterize it with a salve and tetrafarmacon. For this will make it rotten right away and it will dissolve and be expelled."
"But when it putrefies, it produces a bad odor in the head and stomach, and this harms the sick person. And then remedies should be administered by fumigation and whatever is suitable for that."
"But some of the Ancients already used fumigation with narcissus and dried figs."
"Form of an instrument with which a woman is fumigated due to the retention of menses and second causes:"
"It should be made of brass or copper."
"And the subtle end should be placed in the womb and the wide end over the fire, and the fumigation should be placed on the embers of the fire."
"And hold it there until that fumigation is consumed, then repeat another one."
"Regarding the cure of the unopened anus during childbirth:"
"Many children are born with their anuses not opened, which are thin and closed." "So the midwife should perforate that ciphac with her finger. And if not, then perforate it with an acute spatula, being careful not to touch the nerve."
"And also place over that wool soaked in wine and oil. And also cure it with salve until it is healed."
"But if you fear that it is closed, then place a cannula in the hole for several days, and remove it when the child wants to defecate."
"And it has already happened that the anus became closed due to consolidation of a wound or an abscess. So then that consolidation should be incised and also cured with what we have said about cure and lead."
"Regarding the cure of fistulas that come from there:"
"The fistulas that originate at the lower part of the buttocks are usually large and thick, which originate near the anus outside or in the space between the two parts."
"And it is one fistula or several."
"And with that thickness being old and running with moist white humors or thin putrefaction, and sometimes there are some penetrating parts of these fistulas."
"And those penetrating parts are known by what comes out of them through exit and windiness. And sometimes the illness itself is used for exit, and often worms come out of them."
"And sometimes those fistulas have penetrating parts that go into the bladder and into the urethra. And those penetrating parts also go into the junction of the perineum and into the opening of the vagina."
"And what is known as a penetrating fistula that enters the anus and non-penetrating is this: you put your finger inside the anus, and carefully insert a thin probe of brass or iron into the fistula where there is not too much curvature."
"However, if there is tortuosity in that, then introduce into that narrow tent of lead or horsehair that you feel the tent or the hair on your finger."
"And if you do not feel anything with your finger and there is no evidence of obstruction, vomiting, or wind, as we have said, then you will know that it is non-penetrating, and you should cease treatment."
"And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or the meatus of the urethra, then its significance is urinary discharge from that and prohibition of it until the place is consolidated in medicine."
"But if it is penetrating into the junction of the hip or into the bone and accompanied by pain in the region, then its sign is that the tent has entered here if there is not tortuosity in the bone, and pain at the site of departure; and that afterwards there will always be putrefaction; and that nothing will help it, nor will it consolidate with ointment."
"And in all those penetrating fistulas there is no cure, and the cure of those is the labor and emptiness of the foolish physicians on which we put our faith."
"But in that one that is not penetrating and is not ancient, cure with iron is hoped for according to what I will recommend to you, and what I have already said."
"And it is that the illness goes between your thighs above its two sides and elevates its camber within itself, the hips are inclined towards its belly, and appropriately enters a lead or iron tent if there is tortuosity in the fistula, into which you should know where the tent has entered."
"And if that one feels the illness around the buttocks, then it is necessary for you to insert your index finger into the buttocks."
"If you feel the tentacle already inserted in your finger joint before the cut is opened, and if what you feel between your finger joint and that flesh is another thing, then know for certain that it has penetrated; and therefore do not work on that one, as it is not its function."
"However some say that it helps in some men's digestion."
"And of the treatment by which one hopes to be helped in this, it is that you burn cauterize subtly according to the width of the fistula, as is preceded, and insert that burning into the fistula until it reaches around the bone; and repeat it two or three times until you know that all those flesh that are fitted like a bird's feather quill have been scorched."
"And also cure it with hot compresses wrapped in cloth until all those scorched flesh are healed, and then cure it with medicines that generate and strengthen the flesh, and if it is healed, good. And if not, then know for certain that it will never be healed by any other treatment."
"And if the tentacle enters and does not penetrate into the anus that you have said is in the buttocks, and between that and the tentacle which is a thin membrane of flesh or skin, and sometimes the fistula follows along the surface of the backbone, then cut off the tail from the beginning of the fistula, and you will see it cut with the tentacle inside it, and let it be in the fistula until the section reaches where the end of the tentacle has reached, and through that tentacle it is freed and cleansed."
"And also cleanse those flesh fitted like a bird's feather quill, which have not been injured by any means."
"But if blood flows during your procedure while you are operating on those flesh, then millet it immediately and use a light instrument to cauterize with fire or with sharp medicine, for cauterizing with fire has two good habits: it is a scorching of those scorched flesh, and an incision of the blood and drying out of the humidity."
"And also cure it with hot compresses wrapped in cloth or in three-folds until the place is healed, and then cure the wound with hard flesh-generating and strengthening medicine."
"And these are medicines that have astringent and drying properties; when they are applied, it is restored and healed and there will be no recurrence."
"But if the fistula has already penetrated into the anus and is prolonged on the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and feel it with that."
"And then if you find the tentacle and between it and yourself there is only a thin membrane of skin or flesh, and it approaches penetration, then it is not an operation to be done on it, but rather by means of faith and hope."
"And this is to be administered in one of three ways: either cauterize it as we have said; or dry it out inside until you achieve the concavity through which it is possible to enter with the catgut and perform the cure described above; and do not proceed with a section so that you do not injure the lappet containing the anus, and thus incur the sin of injury without intent. And also cure it with what we have said because even if it is strong, it will be healed quickly. Or stretch out that membrane and cleanse that pus which dried it inside near to the anus as we have said, either with a tentacle or with another instrument with a sharp point, and also cleanse those flesh fitted in the section until they are covered; and then strive to restore all the wound with a suture, and if the opening above is not healed, and the fistula remains open at the beginning of the anus, it will be easier for the disease to occur." "And sometimes the fistula is finished in this way: when you insert the tentacle into the fistula, and it appears on the side of the anus around the surface of the body with the chain and at the edge of the anus, then take a tentacle with a perforated extremity, which is like a needle for preparing hearts according to this form:"
"and insert it into that hole wrapped in linen or around those; and also insert the tentacle with thread into the fistula until you achieve the concavity of it."
"But if it is penetrating into the edge of the anus close up, then pull out the thread from that track so that you can insert your finger into the anus; and pull out the extremity of the thread and tie both ends together, and stretch each one separately, and leave it like that for one day or two days. And when you see that the thread is cutting into the flesh, then cut away that until those flesh are incised which are between the two ends of the thread and release them."
"And also cure the wound until it is consolidated and healed."
"But if the opening of the fistula is not penetrating, then cause it to penetrate in whatever way you are prepared, but do not penetrate too far into the anus lest you injure the lappet. And also heal it with that until it is healed."
"The form of the spatula with spines with which the fistula is opened: its curvature is very sharp and the other end is not sharp, for it should not injure anything that is not necessary, as sometimes happens."
"Regarding the suture of hemorrhoids in which blood flows from the incision of those."
"Hemorrhoids are of two kinds: for some are between the buttocks resembling coal, or those which are with thick fat." "And of these some are small and large, and blood flows from them constantly and they are many, and they are outside the anus, and at the extremities of it."
"But those hemorrhoids that are outside the anus are according to few humidity, from which flows yellow water or a little blood with continuous flow, and they are according to the color of the body."
"And the cure for those that are inside the anus is to tell the patient to squat down and express until the anus opens up and the hemorrhoids appear." "Then you grasp them with forceps or hold them with your fingernail and also cut those off at their roots."
"But if the forceps are not held in those because of the humidity and softness of them, then grasp them with rough cloth or with cotton or with a wool bandage, extract those with your said fingers, and also cut those off and sprinkle some powdered myrrh on that wound to cauterize those instead; or cauterize those according to what is said in the chapter on cauterizing." "And then cure them with another cure until they are healed."
"And if the anus does not obey evacuation, then cauterize the patient with a small biting cautery, and wash it with water that is in the anus so that it may easily evacuate when the patient strains."
"But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then their cause is light and it is that you grasp them with your fingernail or with forceps, cut those off, and cure them with what we have said until they are healed."
"And he who makes an incision should administer sutures to them in this manner: take thread wrapped around and put it into a needle and also extract the hemorrhoids from their roots above, and make the thread penetrate with the needle into the root of the other side, and wrap both ends of the thread on one side further away from the needle, and stretch the hemorrhoid strongly with tension, and then tie the thread and remove the needle."
"And do this for all, except one, which you should not touch, so that the excess blood flows from that."
"And first place a cloth dipped in rosemary oil or cerote on the back, and then place it on his buttocks, commanding him to remain still." "And then put that cloth inside a box, and when it is dried out, use those or another cure until he/she is healed."
"And when these are old and not useful in that medicine, then you should remove them with the point of a spatula or your nail until they are moistened, and wipe off the pus that is on top, which prevents consolidation. Then cure them until they are consolidated."
"Now you should remove that very violent pus, first making sure not to wound and to scrape until they are healed."
"Know that hemorrhoids are like nails, and they are not red but of the color of the skin resembling a small nail head, and they are found throughout the body but more commonly in the parts below the hips and buttocks, and there pain is felt."
"And then that which is in the circuit of the nail should be incised and held with forceps or a hook, and eradicated from its root. Then cure it."
"And if you wish, cauterize the second one that is mentioned in its chapter."
"But a verruca is a small, rough, fistulous elevation on the surface of the body, and many times they appear in the majority of children."
"And its cure is that you stretch and incise it, or remove it with a file or with tweezers until it is completely removed." "And if you wish, cauterize it with fire or with an acute medicine, as we have said."
"But a formica is a small, fatty or fistulous elevation on the surface of the body, commonly found on the forehead, and when it is touched it feels like the bite of an ant, and it appears around the body."
"And its cure is that you take a feather quill of a dove or an eagle feather, and it should be strong, and place it over the ant so that the circle of the quill contains it in its parts; then rotate your hand with the quill so as to incise what is around the ant, and press it on the flesh, and eradicate the ant from its root."
"And if you wish, do this with a wax or iron cautery according to this method:"
"Let the end of the cautery be drawn out to a fine point, smooth (i.e. not perforated), wrapped in such a way that when it is placed on the said part, its application and rotation are facilitated."
"And if you wish to cauterize the ant according to what has been said before in the chapter of cautery regarding the cauterization of warts."
"Regarding the shape of the instruments used for giving circumcision:"
"Sometimes circumcision is performed with silver or brass or melted wax or dough. And sometimes it is done with those instruments that are small and large according to the size of those for which they are used, because the one used in the cure of young children should be small; and those whose glans are short or retractile, their circumcisions should be small."
"The form of a large and rare circumcision:"
"The head of the catheter at its upper end, where the foreskin is tied, should be wide in this manner; and it should be distinguished from where the foreskin is tied like this."
"And the lower extremity of it, which is inserted into the glans, should be smooth (i.e. not open) and round, tapering to a fine point; and on one side of it there are two slits, and on the other side one slit, and the width of the slit should be according to the thickness of the glans and foreskin."
"And let the bag in which the medicines of bladder or wool are placed be about a span long."
"And it should be pierced with many slits so that as it rotates, the space between the slits is equal to the thickness of the finger."
"And then insert into those slits a strong thread of raw flax, or envelope them with it, and attach the bag to it. And when the bag is placed on it, tighten it at the head of the catheter between two distinctions with a strong constriction, and then cauterize with that each slit: But the manner of cauterizing with it is that you fill the bag with warm medicine, according to the amount of tolerance of the patient; and take care that it is not too hot nor too cold."
"And then the patient should lie on his back, raise his hips up, and place underneath him either cloth or linen. And then anoint the extremity of the cautery with oil or albumen of egg or mucilage of fenugreek or similar substances; then insert it into the glans easily, and then the assistant takes the bag and squeezes it with both hands and presses it violently until everything that is in the catheter is evacuated into the bladder. And then remove the catheter and the patient raises his hips to the wall."
"And if the medicine forces him to urinate, let him hold back as much as he can. And if he sleeps with it all night long, it is more likely to be helpful."
"But if you circumcise him in the case of diarrhea and frequent urination, then repeat the cautery until he is healed."
"And if there are hemorrhoids or painful abscesses in the glans, then use a small and round catheter like those with which children are circumcised."
"Regarding the treatment of plagues:"
"I have already said in the division of the treatment of plagues what was appropriate for this book, and I say now the treatment of those with maimed limbs using medicine according to their condition."
"Therefore I say that plagues are differentiated according to how they are caused and according to the place where they occur."
"And the causes by which plagues often occur are such as penetration of a dart or incision with a scalpel or knife or blow with a lance or club or arrow or similar causes."
"But the plagues that occur in the limbs of the body are such as plague that falls on the head, neck, foot, belly, thigh or similar ones on the members."
"And I am recounting the treatment of some plagues because this reasoning and rule applies to other plagues as well."
"And I will begin with simple head wounds, for the memory of compound ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter."
"Therefore I say that when a simple wound occurs on the head and it is not a fracture, then consider: if it is due to penetration by a dart or something similar, and only the scalp has been injured and it is a large wound, you fear that an abscess may form as a result of this illness. Then quickly perform cephalic phlebotomy and do not delay in doing so; and remove from him as much blood as the force of his strength allows, if no other cause prohibits phlebotomy, especially if the blood that comes out of the wound is little."
"The lobotomy is the opposite of the plague's departure, keep the patient from drinking water or eating heavy foods."
"If you prohibit any cause during the miniaturization process, it would be reduced in size and not approach meat nor wine."
"And pause over the plague, if it happens to cause an aposteme (abscess), it is customary to cut it open and dress it with oil mixed with roasted rose or wine in which it becomes thicker/stoptical."
"But if you are sure of an abscess having formed, then pause over the plague (abscess), if it is fresh and its blood has not yet changed from that which caused it."
"And if the air has already changed from that, then pause over the inflamed ulcer until it is healed."
"But if the plague is large or caused by an incision of space and similar ones, and its lips are not properly closed due to dust, then adjust them with a suture according to what I will recommend for the stitching of the lips."
"But if the plague is already uncovered by bone and skin, and it is not retention of it but only a small suspension, then incise it and treat the plague with medicines and restore the flesh in place of sinew. Command the patient to be fed foods that are coarse: heads of cabbage and similar ones, until he/she is restored."
"And if you find putrefaction in the sinew and it does not adhere to the bone, then incise all that is corrupt and remove it. Then treat it."
"But if in these plagues there is an artery or vein from which a flow of blood can come about, and it is not cut off by medicines, then inquire about the artery. If you find that it has not been incised, then incise it with a scalpel, or tie it. And if necessity prompts that what has been said does not work, then cauterize until the blood flow is stopped."
"And if these plagues are simple and small, then their cause is light. Therefore, powder them with this powder, so that it may solidify before the air changes them."
"And the manner of making the powder is as follows: Take one part oil of sesame, two parts dragon's blood resin, three parts myrrh resin; all well-ground and sifted. With this powder fill the ulcer, and bind it with a good binding so that it may adhere to it and coagulate with blood."
"And properly bind that above with powder and leave it alone. Do not remove it while it is still moist, so that the medicine does not lose its efficacy before it is healed."
"And sometimes one may use cauterization alone when oil of sesame and dragon's blood resin are not available."
"And this same procedure is done in large ulcers when it is convenient to pause upon them and bind them tightly, especially fresh ulcers with their blood, which the air has not yet altered."
"And if the air has altered them, and especially when it is summer time, then it is not suitable to apply this powder. In that case treat those ulcers with what has been said: pause upon them with some ointments made from digestives, or pause upon them with flour paste made with water and honey until they become dry; then treat them with the other cure until they are healed."
"But if a fracture of bone occurs in the ulcer, and it is small, then extract it with a gesture [i.e., manual manipulation]."
"And I say the cure for fractures of the head in what follows."
"On ulcers of the neck."
"But if an ulcer occurs on the neck, then there is no difference in treatment between that and a simple ulcer of the head."
"But if the nerve of the neck is incised or an artery, then if it is a nerve, there is nothing to do but avoid treatment with anything that causes violent contraction, such as vinegar and vitriol and similar things because they numb the nerves and contract them." "And do not apply to the ulcer any hot thing, because the substance of nerves is hot and their continuity is with the brain, which is the chief part of all members."
"And if it is treated with light medicines, such as a clean wound washed with sweet water, sometimes infused in rose oil or not, and turpentine when washed with sweet water, and other minor stones according to this manner, and moist ointments."
"But if the ulcer is large, then apply stitches or draw together the lips of it and properly treat it with powder until it is healed."
"But if there is depth in the ulcer or some purulent matter has accumulated at its bottom, then pierce it with something pointed and depressed."
"But if an artery is incised in the ulcer and bleeding occurs, then separate it or dry it up, tie it off, or cauterize it if necessity requires it."
"But if the vertebrae of the nape or all are injured and the veins of the neck are saved, then adjust the lips of the wound over the spine of the nape with stitches and do not touch it. Then equalize it and reduce it to its natural figure, properly bind it with suitable strapping, leave it for a few days; then treat it with ointments that have astringent and stimulating properties until it is healed."
"But if the ulcer has already reached the bone, then percuss it. And if there are fragments of bone in it, remove all that you can; and what cannot be removed, leave it until the ulcer purges itself, separates and its inflammation is alleviated."
"And if the ulcer is fresh, then powder it with that powder which I have recommended to you." "But if there is a fistula in the ulcer, then treat it with that of which the memory will come properly in its chapter."
"If it is a wound from a lance or scalpel and its depth is uncertain, then consider whether there is any wind in the ulcer when the patient breathes out. Then know that the ulcer is fatal."
"And if there is no depth and the ulcer is fresh with its own blood, then pause upon it with the first hour powder, and do not bind it tightly so that blood does not remain in its depth and return to the heart and worsen the illness. Rather, pause upon it with attractive ointment and wash it twice a day."
"And if the ointment is not at hand, then pause upon the ulcer with cotton wool so that it may suck up the humidity. And make the patient sleep on the ulcer so that what has been applied to it may run."
"But if three days or more have passed since the ulcer and there has been no spasm or cardiac tremor nor rigidity of breath in the patient, and other conditions are good, then know that the ulcer is safe; then treat it with linseed and other remedies until it heals."
"But if the healing of it is delayed and all time has passed, then know that a fistula has already formed. Therefore treat it according to its chapter."
"And if the ulcer is from an incision with a razor or scalpel and is simple on the surface of the foot or hand, then treat it with what is mentioned for suturing if it is large, or with powder if it is small."
If there has already been injury to the bone, and it is already incised, then twist the tweezers and gently attempt to extract those pieces if they are separated. But if they are not separated, then leave them where they can be easily reached, as their extraction is facilitated that way.
And for other accidental wounds in the other members, the treatment in cure is what we have said
Of the wounds of the belly
The condition that occurs in the belly is either great, small, or moderate.
And a small disruption is done differently, and indeed it is often difficult to reduce them, unless you quickly intervene with their return to their proper place, because they open up and become swollen so that entry becomes difficult.
And therefore the best disruption is moderate, because in that one it is not difficult to reduce the bowel, just as it is difficult in both species mentioned above.
And know that suture of the belly is done in four ways, but two sutures are common and convenient for sutures of other wounds of the body.
And two other sutures are proper to other wounds, but they are more proper in the suture of the belly.
And I recount each one with its exposition and explanation.
Therefore I say that when the wound is small and some cause of the bowel comes out through it, and it is difficult to reduce it, then this is in one of two ways: either because of the smallness of the disruption, as we have said, or when inflammation has come to the bowel due to the coldness of the air.
And therefore when this is the case, then you should scrape it so that you immerse a sponge or moist cloth in hot water alone, or take some water with squinant, and cypripedium, and spikenard, and myrrh with which to moisten the bowel inside until the inflammation is resolved.
And sometimes it is good to use wine in which there is astringency, and it is better than water alone in the resolution of inflammation.
And therefore when you see that the inflammation is resolved, then you moisten the bowel with water in which there is a lot of salt and mallows, because by this means entry becomes easier with little cause.
But if the entry of it is not facilitated by this cure, then cut open the disruption a little with an instrument with which you have made incisions.
And the first cure is better, when it is appropriate that it is not sectioning, and there is no need to cut open unless it is necessary and urgent.
Of the instrument, see its shape:
Sharpen one part of the knife acutely, and make the other part blunt; let its extremity be subtle but not too sharp-pointed.
And therefore when the hernia has been pushed out and comes forth through the anus, it is necessary to reduce it again according to its natural form in its proper place if this can be done.
But when the rupture is wide and situated in the lower part of the belly, then you should make the patient lie on their back and elevate their hips as much as their head; but if it is in the upper part of the belly, then you should elevate the head and feet as high as possible.
Similarly if the rupture is in one of the two sides of the belly, then always have your intention and attention directed towards that side where the hernia is located so that it may be elevated higher than the other.
And this should also be done in both large and moderate hernias.
"In small plagues, pause what is prepared for you, and immediately make your servant be between your hands with his entire disruption held in one hand and adjust the lips of it."
"This is the common method of suturing: take the needle, or count needles according to the amount of the plague's width. Then leave from the extremity of the disruption of the said finger, and thread the needle once, but do not insert it in both extremities of the skin with two knots that remain outside the skin on both sides of the parted flesh, until you have made it penetrate one side; then you have joined both extremities of the skin and both extremities of the ciphac, and now make four stitches."
"And again thread with double thread around the needle, and sometimes take both parts together, and then join both lips and the plague decently. Then leave the thickness of the finger and put another needle in it, and then tie it with thread like you did with the first needle; do not stop doing this if necessary until all the contraction of the plague is complete."
"And the needles should be between thickness and subtlety, for subtle needles hardly cut into the flesh, while thick ones are difficult to insert in the skin. Therefore they should be of medium thickness."
"And it is not necessary that the needle should be inserted in both extremities of the skin too much, lest the flesh be lightly cut and the wound opens before its consolidation."
"And do not make the stitches too long so that the wound is not prevented from healing."
"And then cut the extremities of the needles so that they do not leave the wound open during sleep. Then press over the stitches powdered with a little of each herb, which will hold the extremities of the needles in place; and leave them until you know that the wound has healed."
"And these kinds of stitches with needles are more suitable for small wounds, where one needle or two may be enough to close them."
"But the second stitch is common: it consists of bringing together with a single stitch all four extremities of the skin and both extremities of the cicatrix, using a needle with thread wound around it in subtlety and thickness."
"And when the needle has passed through these four extremities, you will reduce it from that same side where you started, so that the thread draws back and brings the edges of the wound together in order to make a stitch like sewing with cloth, with which the edges are strengthened."
"And pause between each stitch the thickness of the little finger."
"And this stitch is known by men."
"And with this stitch I closed a wound that had been caused by a knife to a man in his belly, which was about two palms long and wide. The disruption of the wound was more than one palm, and it had exited from the bowels around two palms near the middle of the member. And then I reduced that part where the bowel had been torn for 24 hours."
"And the wound was healed in the space of about fifteen days or so, and the man was cured. And he lived many years after that, and is still alive today."
"And other doctors had judged that he would not be healed; and by miracle he was healed, for I did not cure him with any ointment, because it was a place where no ointment nor any medicine could be applied. But I put cotton soaked in honey on the wound twice a day and washed it assiduously with water of honey until it was healed."
"But I will tell you two kinds of stitches proper according to the narrative of the Word."
"And it is that you begin with a stitch on the skin edge, and insert the needle from without inwards."
"And then, as the needle penetrates into the skin and through the length of the wound, leave the extremity of the cicatrix in which you inserted the needle; and make the needle pass through the other extremity from within outwards in the other extremity of the member."
"And then, when you have made it penetrate once more, now make it penetrate again in the same extremity of the member from without inwards; and leave the extremity of the cicatrix that is on this side, and make the needle pass through the other extremity from within outwards."
"And then, with that same penetration with which you made it penetrate into the cicatrix in the extremity of the member which is on the inside so that all may penetrate."
"And then begin from this same side and pass it with the extremity that is of the cicatrix on the other side, and withdraw the needle from the skin which has penetrated, and reduce it in that skin and attach the extremity of the cicatrix which is on the other side with this extremity of the member; and withdraw it from the skin which is on its part."
"And do this once or twice, and do it once again just as often until you close all that is without according to that example."
"And the sum of this manner of stitching is that you close with a skin stitch by which you close the skins, so that you close the cicatrix once from the side of the skin edge, and leave it open again until it has completed."
"But the second kind of proper stitching which you have especially taught by Galen, and this is of speech concerning it and recommended by him, is that you close it in such a way that certain physicians close it, namely, bringing together all parts to their corresponding parts by nature; and they apply the extremity of one part to the extremity of another part, and this is done according to what I have told you."
"That you leave the needle in the extremity of the member near the skin edge, and make it penetrate from without into the depth of that same place, leaving two extremities of the cicatrix; and then turn the needle round and make it penetrate again from without to within through both extremities of the cicatrix."
"And then turn those loops round, and make them penetrate from the depth outwards in two extremities of the member on the opposite side."
"And this manner of stitching is better than common loose stitching, and it is the stitching of which I have previously spoken."
"This is the speech of Galen"
"And some say that stitching of the belly is corrected with two needles, so that you insert in each a thread, and begin with needle insertion from where it is necessary for you to begin, and make it penetrate inwardly towards the other side according to stitching of those who close the veins by this method."
"And know that when a disruption is in the middle of the belly, then stitching of it is more difficult than that of other places on the belly."
"But judgment about treatment of wounds is judged by other wounds also."
"The reason for which is that when you close a fresh wound with its own blood before the air alters it, and reduce the bowel and close it and apply to it a suitable poultice, then you put dust upon that healing powder."
"And if the air has already altered the wound, then you put upon it some such things as are present which make a hard scar and join together the threads, and are consolidated cicatrix and member; and then cure it thus as is the curing of other wounds until it is healed."
"However, if you are not present with the medicines, then pause over that immediately, for it begins to emit a strong odor twice daily. Thus, as you have taught me, between times when it is healed, you do not need another medication in many dispositions when the plague is simple."
"If you fear that the plague may communicate to lesions in the principal limbs, then it is necessary that you submerge lion's oil in oil of high quality, or olive oil, and place those on the circuits of the joints between the elbows and armpits."
"And if you feel pain or putrefaction in its bowels, for many times this occurs, then crystallize it with black treacle vinegar and even more so if the corruption has reached the bowel and it is difficult to penetrate into its concavity."
"And know that that which is of the large intestine is of easier healing than that which is in the subtle intestines."
"And it is difficult to heal that bowel which is called 'gegunu' because it does not receive healing from any plague that falls into it; and this is due to the large number of veins that are in it, and its magnitude, and its subtlety, and its proximity to the nature of nerves."
"But if what proceeds from the plague is flesh, and you obtain that recently, then reduce it according to your discretion with which you also reduce the intestines equally."
"But if it has passed some time and it is already green or black, then strengthen it with faith on the spot that is darkened by it, so that blood fluxes may come, for in the flesh there are veins and arteries."
"And moreover incise that which is other than that limb, and pause at the ends of the thread hanging from the parts of the plague, so that over you may be relieved the attraction of it, you must cut off the skin and express the branch of the plague."
"Remembrance of the plagues when they occur in the bowel."
"When there is disruption in the bowel and it is small, then it is possible that it may be restored in some men, for example that one who was struck in his belly with a lance blow and the plague was on the right side of the stomach, and the plague was old and without fistula, and it had issue and wind."
"Therefore I followed the cure of him although it was not finished in the healing of it, but ceased to subtly examine that interior which had been healed and the place was consolidated."
"And I then saw that the place was already consolidated, so I spoke to him about the ailment that might occur because of the accident in his belly; and he did not become ill at all because of that accident, but remained in his usual dispositions eating and drinking, and indeed entered a bath and exercised himself in his sayings."
"And already some experienced ones say that when there is plague in the bowel and it is small, then it must be tied in this manner: take frogs with large mouths; and indeed adjust the two lips of the plague and place one of those which has its mouth open over the two lips of the plague. Then when it takes hold on those and opens its mouth, cut off its head, for it adheres and is not dissolved."
"And moreover place another frog near the first one, and do not cease doing this with frogs according to the quantity of all the plague."
"And moreover reduce that and close the plague, and those attached heads will remain in the bowel interior when the bowel is healed, and it does not occur any harm to anyone."
"And already it is possible that the bowel may be tied with a subtle thread which is made from the bowel of an attached animal, because it is more like a needle; and take the end of these bowels, and let it be much cleaned, and indeed tie the end of it with thread of linen, wrapped, and moreover insert that thread in needles and sew with that bowel, and reduce it in the disruption."
"And this manner of suture with frogs is only a way of trust and hope."
"But if the plague is large and extensive, especially if it is in one of the small bowels, for then it is only a subtle examination, and not the healing of it altogether."
"About the cure of dropsy and fistula."
"Know that every plague and abscess when it opens and becomes old, and is not consolidated and gives off branch at all times and is not cut off, then in whatever member it may be, universally it is called a fistula, and we call it that ulcer."
"And according to truth, a fistula is a hard, thickened, white nodosity without pain and with a cavity like the cavity of the navel, for this reason it is called that ulcer which is wrinkled, that is, a navel."
"And in some men it is humid and gives off branch, and when the humidity is cut off within certain hours." "And sometimes this humidity is much, little, thick, and subtle."
"I have already shown all those causes and their symptoms and the cure of them with medicines in the division."
"And it is proper that I should make you know the cure of fistula which is done by way of operation with a knife."
"And know that fistulas occur in all the members of the body because there are those which pertain to large veins and arteries, or nerves, or the caecum, or the bowel, or the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to some of the vertebrae of the back, or to certain composite joints by composition like that of the hand and foot; and there are those which give nearness to the principal member and similar ones."
"And therefore those fistulas among these which are in this manner are of difficult healing and do not receive cure, and occupation with them is labor and ignorance."
"And if there is among the fistulas one whose depth does not pertain to those places which have been mentioned and you hope and trust in its cure and want to come to knowledge of it, then take a probe of earth or iron, and if the fistula goes straight, examine it with that."
"But if the fistula is tortuous then investigate it with a probe of subtle lead because lead by its lightness is alleviated and bent according to its tortuousness."
"And if the fistula has many horrific branches, then you cannot examine it with a probe."
"Therefore dilate the horrific part by its horrific parts because the moisture with which you dilate that will go down towards the other horrific parts and their course."
"Then inquire carefully, according to the manner you are able, whether here has been bone or nerve damage. Determine if this is a distant or nearby fistulous cavity, or if it is a fistula with multiple openings and lies beneath all of this with great force, upon which you must examine the patient's complaint with your full strength. With this examination comes the discovery of pain, which you should compress with your hand over the area."
"And when you have examined all those causes with true steadfastness, then proceed to the treatment with confidence: first consider whether it is an apparent fistulous opening near the skin surface or far from joints, nerves, arteries, veins, or any other location you find."
"Then dry the fistula according to what is mentioned earlier about its nose, and remove that which comes from this filtration of rotting flesh, and that which is born in the opening of the flesh or of the skin and similar things. And cure that wound so it may be healed."
"But if the fistula is of great depth and runs perpendicularly, then you must insert your finger into it as far as possible and carefully clean out all rotting flesh. Then apply compresses soaked in acrid medications and place them inside the cavity of the fistula which you have grasped with forceps."
"And do this several times until the acrid medication has eaten away all the rotting matter in the cavity of the fistula."
"Then restore it with dressings that produce healthy flesh, until it is healed."
If it is not healed by this, then cauterize according to what we have recommended.
If the cause of the fistula is bone and it needs to be certified, then you should explore that and dry it according to what we have recommended, provided that you do not harm any vein, nerve or main member as we have said.
If the bone is exposed and there is some corruption and blackness in it, then remove that flesh within which the corruption has spread entirely; afterwards treat it with this medicine until it heals.
And if it does not heal and casts out flesh like before, then know that you have not yet reached the complete eradication of corruption; therefore uncover carefully and examine the cause of it and cleanse it with your last strong remedy, and afterwards restore it.
And if it is healed, then good! But if not, know that the corruption is in the deep and remote parts of the body which you have not reached, and therefore you should leave it alone.
And if the corrupted bone is small or can be extracted, then extract it using fine forceps suitable for that purpose.
And if there are many bones, then carefully extract all of them and do not leave any cause untreated with your strength.
But if there is any difficulty in removing the cause due to humidity or flesh or sinews, and there is no fear of error in its incision, then incise those membranes or flesh if it is nearby, and deliver the bones.
But if you are not able to extract the bones at that time, then close over the wound with a dressing that will keep it moist. Leave that in place until that dressing is absorbed and the wound becomes consolidated and healed around those flesh and sinew-covered bones. Keep the dressing clean so that it does not become contaminated.
When dressing the wound, if you fear infection, cover it with a dressing soaked in olive oil or Egyptian pitch or one of the green ointments, for when those membranes are dried out, they will separate from the bones and their attraction will be alleviated.
But if it is a large bone such as the thighbone or shinbone, or one similar to them, and only the surface of that bone is corrupted, then scrape off that corruption with a curette until all the blackness and corruption have been removed, and then restore the dressing.
But if a large portion of the bone is corrupted and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that wound and incise it at the location where the corruption has penetrated. Then treat it until it becomes consolidated.
And I recommend to you that when operating on the thighbone of a man, you use this model and assistant for your operation.
A young man of about 30 years old presented with pain in his thigh. Upon examination, it was found that the inflammation was on the inside of the thigh and had extended to the bone. There was a large abscess with no external cause.
And so the time was prolonged with that patient due to the error of the physicians, who allowed the abscess to become hard. Much material had accumulated and its treatment was suspended until the thigh became fistulated. Then it was opened in many orifices from which pus and humidity of the body were discharged.
And so he consulted many doctors for about two years, but none of them knew how to treat it except me when I was called.
And I saw the thigh of that man and the material that flowed from those orifices for a great distance. The whole body of that man was already emaciated, and his complexion was yellowish.
And then I inserted a probe into one of those orifices and reached the bone with it.
And then you examined all the orifices carefully and found that they originated from all parts of the thigh.
And then I took courage and incised one of those orifices until I discovered a portion of the bone. I scraped off that corrupted part, which was earthy, corrupt and discolored. And already a portion of the thigh had been corrupted, having penetrated into the muscle
Then I removed what was discovered and prepared from the bone that was uncovered
And you should have seen that it was not in the bone but only that corruption which you could excise and remove, as I had already removed.
Then he paused the dressing with a consolidation medicine for a long time, but it did not consolidate.
And then I reopened and discovered over the bone again according to the first discovery, and scraped off continuous corruption from the bone.
And I removed what appeared to be that corruption, and yet you continued with the treatment and dressing of him, but it was not restored.
And then you discovered it again and did not cease incising the bone little by little particularly and continuing the dressing of him, but it was not restored until you incised about a palm's length, and then you extracted it with the marrow itself, and then you restored it with medicines, and it healed lightly and became consolidated.
It was not necessary to repeat the operation and section of that thigh except for the disposition of his fearlessness and lack of tolerance, and his fear of death. For he was lazy in all hours due to excess evacuation and fainting badly.
Therefore, he healed completely, and there was nothing in place of hard bone and flesh. He had good posture in his body and regained his strength; he changed his ways and did not cause any harm or damage in any way during walking nor by any cause.
But if the bone is prominent in place of the flesh and causes pain, then you should cut it off in this manner: Take a strong thread and tie it at the end of that prominent bone, and command someone to stretch it out. Then take another piece of thick thread and bind it over the first one. Then bind it over the flesh that is next to the bone, stretching the end of it so that you draw the flesh aside from those parts where you want to cut, and then uncover the flesh over the place where you want to saw so that the saw does not touch the flesh.
And place a piece of wood or a board beneath the bone neatly, for when you do this, it prevents the saw from cutting into the corrupt flesh.
The sawing should be done little by little over the corrupt place, because if there is corruption in the concavity of the bone and it does not appear in its appearance to the touch, it may be necessary to saw again later.
But if the bone is corrupted but not prominent, then it means that one part is continuous with another, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part of it. In this case, you should uncover all the flesh from every side; place wood beneath it, and saw off the first part where the corruption begins so that the sawing continues to the other part.
The sawing should be done according to the location of the corruption, as we have said.
And if the corruption is at the joint, incise that corrupted joint and saw off the bone where it continues with the other part.
But if the corruption is in the continuity of two joints, then it is not in reason but by chance.
And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or foot, it is very difficult. But you should investigate how the corruption appears to you and abrade it accordingly, cleaning it according to each position that is possible for you, so that with each operation, you rectify what you can without harming any vein or nerve.
"And you should know what are the incidors and saws used to cut these bones. They must be appropriate according to the situation of the bones, their preparation, thickness, subtlety, size, smallness, hardness, and rarity; thus, you must prepare all kinds of tools suitable for that operation."
"You should know that this operation involves the use of tools of which you stand in need; when your knowledge and experience in the ways of this art are great and long, and you have seen many cases of illness, then it is fitting for you to know what tools are convenient for each illness."
"And now, at the end of this chapter, you will learn the number of instruments that you will use with ease to perform your prohibition, which you will experience on others." Here are some common forms of saws used in medicine and their uses:
"Another method:"
"Another method for a large hernia:"
"Method of Ray:" "The head of this awl is shaped like a star-headed key, and its points are shaped like the points of a drill."
"And it is not necessary except that with this (instrument) the heads of the joints should be rubbed when they are spoiled, or if the mouth is too wide."
"Form of a smaller razor:"
"Form of a broad razor:"
"A well-made form for another saw: let it be made in the shape of a semicircle with sharp edges like a knife blade." "What is its shape?"
"Form of razor with concavity:"
"Form of another subtle razor:"
"Form of another razor with a curved end:"
"Form of small razor resembling a tent."
"Form of another smaller cutter:"
"Form of another cutter; this one resembles an awl and has a serrated end. It is used in many places for cutting bone fractures."
"The shape of the awl which is suitable for use on those who are pierced by bones:"
"And its end is triangular with a sharp point."
"And it is made of Indian steel, and similarly for all the cases that we have mentioned concerning razors, cutters, and saws."
"For cutting through extremities and for the serration of bones."
"Extremities can be injured due to intrinsic causes or extrinsic causes. If, after treating the corruption with medicinal remedies, there is no improvement in the condition, sometimes the corruption may spread to other parts without any apparent cause. In such cases, it becomes necessary to cut into that member at the point where the corruption has reached, so that the illness may subside and not result in death or harm, which would be a greater loss of the member."
"And the sign of someone in whom this has occurred is that the member becomes black where it was burned or scorched, or the blackness spreads to where the putrefaction entered that member which extends and takes over the entire body. Therefore, it is necessary to cut into that."
"And similarly, if corruption occurs due to the bite of some venomous creatures such as scorpions, marine animals, vipers, or similar ones."
"And if the corruption or bite is at the tip of the finger, then cut off the finger so that the corruption does not spread to the hand."
"And similarly, if it reaches the hand, then cut off the hand at the wrist joint so that the corruption does not spread to the arm."
"And if it affects that person, then cut off the arm at the elbow joint."
"And if corruption passes beyond that and sometimes reaches around the elbow joint, then death from this illness occurs. Administering any other cause for treatment at that stage is merely a matter of quantity of virtue."
"And similarly, when corruption affects the toe of the foot, then cut it off at one of the joints."
"And if it affects the ankle of the foot, then cut off the entire foot." "But if it can go into the knee, then cut off the leg at the joint of the knee."
"But if corruption has already spread to the knee, then there is no remedy except for release, and let the illness take its course to death."
"The manner of cutting off the member or sawing it is that you stretch a bandage on the side where you want to cut, and another bandage over that place. And let the assistant extend one bandage to the sides below, and let him extend another bandage above. And you separate the flesh which is between the two bandages with a wide blade until all the flesh is exposed, and then it can be cut off or sawn."
"And it is necessary that linen cloths be placed on all sides to prevent infection from occurring, and that the wound be dressed properly with clean bandages."
"But if bleeding occurs while working, then cauterize the place carefully, or apply some absorbent powders to stop the bleeding. And then return to your treatment until it is complete."
"And then bind up the member with linen cloth in a convenient manner and care for it until it heals."
"And I report to you something that happened to a man in his foot, which I and you are reporting here. This is the fourth case where blackness appeared on his foot with burning like fire."
"And this corruption occurred first on his toe and then spread throughout his entire foot."
"Therefore that man decided to cut off his foot because of the intensity of its corruption which caused him great pain and burning. So he cut off his foot at the ankle joint, and it healed."
"For a long time afterwards that same corruption appeared on the tip of his finger."
"And then it came upon me, and that surplus which I had placed on the hand of medicines, immediately returned to cleanse the body; but the surplus did not return, and it began to flow into the other finger before it even reached the hand."
"And he ordered me to cut his hand, but I did not want to do that hoping for the return of that surplus, and more so fearing the death of the patient, because the force of the disease was overwhelming."
"And after he left me, he returned to his land and I heard that the man was prepared and had cut off his whole hand, and he was healed."
"And I do not now narrate this story except to be helpful regarding what can be said about this illness, and that it may have meaning according to which it is interpreted and acted upon."
"De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis" can be translated as "On the treatment of diseases of the spleen and the quality of cleansing with medicines by enema". This phrase suggests that it is a medical text discussing the treatment of diseases related to the spleen, and the use of medicinal enemas in such treatments.
"When an apostema occurs in some fleshy members and the space of the apostema is prolonged until it collects pus, and then it bursts and perforates, and the pus is discharged from it, and the place remains void as if it were a vessel, and the skin that is above it appears like finely woven cloth, and it has not reached ultimate corruption, and does not print on bone or nerve or ligament, it is called 'sinu', and it is not called fistula."
"But if the space is prolonged until corruption prints on some member, then it is called 'fistula' and not 'sinu'."
"And the treatment of it is that you cut away that skin entirely as it is turned back over itself, especially when it is thin and made like cloth, so that it does not adhere to the place because of its corruption."
"But if you hope that the skin will adhere and that that corruption has not yet reached its ultimate conclusion, and there is some opening in the skin, then you treat it with an enema."
"And when you consider the sinu, if it is large and the arm that comes out has a fetid odor, then you administer an enema with the Egyptian medicine which is made of oil and vinegar and cinnamon received in equal parts, and they are ground together in a vessel, and cooked over the fire until the medicine becomes hot and reaches the consistency of honey."
"And then you take as much of that as is necessary and dissolve it with water and honey; and administer that enema to the sinu, and strengthen the opening of it, and leave the medicine in it for the duration of two hours."
"And then you remove that with a sponge; and do so for however many days are necessary until the sinu is cleansed and the corruption is removed."
"And sometimes an enema is administered with water of ashes when this medicine is not available; and you take the ash of vitriol, and place it on the water; and then cook that and administer that enema with it until you are assured that the sinu is now healed."
"And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the water of ashes, then you administer an enema with warm water and honey mixed together with three parts cinnamon, and also administer it with wine and honey mixed together; for the property of honey is to cleanse and wash, and wine makes the sinu adhere, especially when there is excess of astringency and dryness in the wine."
"And when you do this sometimes and you are assured that the sinu has been removed, then you administer an enema with that which causes flesh to grow in it."
"And when you take of the ointment called diafinicon and dissolve it with sweet oil and astringent wine; or whatever other medicines and ointments you administer that have properties which I have already written about in the treatise on ointments."
"And if the opening of the sinu is narrow and the cannula of the enema cannot be received, then you dilate it with a small iron gradually, and pause in it with a hot cloth wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it has been dilated."
"And similarly, if the opening is wide, then you gather together its lips with a suture and leave in it the amount which enters between the enema without addition."
"And if the opening of that from which the arm emerges is elevated above its parts, then you dry it at its base where it enters into it so that the arm may run freely; for when the arm is restricted by the narrowness of the sinu, flesh can be generated there."
"And if it is not possible to dry the sinu at the entrance of the os near its base as you wish, then have the member prepared with such preparation that the arm may emerge from it lightly according to your desire and that there is in it no cause for the arm to be retained."
"But that which is over the opening of the sinu, you remove it at all times so that nothing may be adjusted to the arm." "And in order that you may know whether that which emerges from the arm is much or little, or digested, or undigested:"
"And with this you also consider the place of that sinu, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and if there is an abscess."
"And when your treatment has been prolonged in this manner and you see that the matter which is poured over the opening of the sinu adheres or approaches adhesion, then you remove it on the third day, and when you remove it, then change the cloth for another and renew the ointment."
"But if the sinu is far apart from space and there is subtle virus, then do not despair of its adhesion, for its healing is near; for some people in whom flesh is slowly generated in their wounds, and among them are those in whom it happens conversely."
"And if from the sinu after many days an undigested arm emerges, then you know that the sinu does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the sinu is delayed and the cause is prolonged, then you apply medicines which are drying, and if the medicines are humid in their substance and virtue, they are dry like diafinicon ointment when there is excess addition of sage."
"And the last most effective thing with which it is treated is that you take diafinicon ointment and dissolve it in sweet oil, and mix it well with old wine in its substance, and then apply it over there and use it."
"And in that action, if there is no arm present, use diafinicon ointment mixed with honey, cooked until it thickens, or take myrrh and aloe wood and incense, triturate all of them and powder over the honey when it is hot on the fire, then line this over cloth and apply it over the sinu; and also line that with honey which you have cooked until it thickens, and powder over cloth."
Sometimes a long and rough broth of heaven's lilies (and it is the lilies of heaven) and flour of barley and centaurea is administered, and use those simples or adjust them, sieve them and sift them and powder them over the honey which has been recommended.
And if the wound is prolonged and not healed by this treatment, you will know that corruption has spread to the bone itself, and then you must investigate whether it has reached the joints or other hard parts or even ligaments. Then you should treat it with fistular cure, as described above.
Of the treatment of blisters and nails rubbed raw and cutting the tip of the finger added and sectioning.
A blister is an abscess that appears beneath the nail of the thumb or another finger and grows more quickly on other fingers. If it is prolonged its treatment is more difficult, either it is an abscess from a cauterized abscess, or it is corrupt and throws out pus which corrodes the root of the nail, and often the whole of it becomes corrupted, and often its corruption reaches the bone within, which then has a foul odor, and the tip of the finger becomes blackened, and its color becomes dark.
And therefore, when you have that which has been said in the division and your treatment is not effective, then you must incise with iron all the superfluity that remains of the nail, and immediately cauterize the wound with it, for cautery is very useful in this case.
But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, but the growths at the edges of the nail begin to compress the flesh within, and they start to pierce and cause pain there, then you must make a thin cut from the angle of the nail that pierces the flesh, and push it out and incise that flesh easily, and place over that which remains of the flesh medicines corrosive enough to remove everything; and immediately treat it with ointments until it is healed.
But if the corruption has already entered into the bone, then you must incise the bone there and extract it, for there is no time when the bone can be healed if it is corrupt.
And if the corrosion and corruption extend to the finger, then you must incise it at one of its joints according to how far it has spread, and immediately treat it until it is healed.
But if the nail receives percussion or attrition and there is intense pain in that place, then at the beginning you must bleed the sore, and immediately dry the nail with a sharp spatula with a transverse section from top to bottom, taking care that the section does not reach the flesh that is under the nail, for you will cause intense pain to the sore, and it will be the cause of the formation of excess flesh in that place; and immediately treat that place with something that relieves pain.
But a finger that is swollen, which occurs in many men, is usually all flesh and very painful to the bone, or it may be very painful in the nail.
And some of them are born at the root of the joint, or the formation is in some joints of these fingers. But that which is formed in some joints of the finger is not painful, but that which is formed at the joints is usually very painful.
And those that are born fleshy, the section is easy, and it should be incised there near its root with a wide spatula.
But that which is born at the root of the joint is difficult to cure; therefore beware of the amputation of it.
But that which is formed in the finger near the joints must be incised at the beginning with a round incision into the bone, and immediately saw it with one of those suitable saws for that, and immediately treat it until it is healed.
But consolidation which occurs in these between their visible veins or by the nature of the person who is born that way, or by consolidation of phlegm or by burning with fire, or by similar causes, then you must dry that consolidation until those fingers return to their natural form.
And immediately place between their bands of linen soaked in rose oil to prevent them from becoming consolidated lightly, and separate those, or place between those a thin sheet of lead so that they are consolidated according to what is necessary.
And similarly if consolidation occurs in some of these with the palm, then you must dry that consolidation according to what is prepared and suitable for the figure of the member.
Of incision of veins, there are two kinds:
Vices such as varicose veins are caused by thick, engorged veins full of melancholic superfetations which occur more often in the legs, especially among those who travel, work hard or carry heavy loads.
Then you should administer a purge of the black bile from the body several times with strong expulsion, and also bleed the patient from the basilica vein.
But the treatment of varicose veins with iron is done in two ways: one is that it should be incised and the black blood drawn out, and the other way is that the vein should be elevated and all of it extracted.
The procedure is as follows: first, insert a sharp instrument at the beginning of the vein with cold water so that the thick blood may be resolved and liquefied. Then, tie off the unhealthy part of the vein below the swelling using a bandage, and then cut the vein open wide in one or two or three places. Next, elevate the black blood from the vein at the upper end of the unhealthy part, using a tube, and draw out as much blood as desired, repeating this process several times until the vein is emptied of its harmful properties.
And then ligature that vein, and command the patient to abstain from foods that generate black bile.
And repeat the treatment by phlebotomy when the veins are filled again and it is necessary for the patient.
But the elevation of varicose veins is done in this way: first, remove any bandages from the affected area and then have the patient bathe and insert cold water into the vein until it becomes reddened and the veins are dilated. Alternatively, you may exercise the limb vigorously if bathing is not available, until the member becomes fatigued.
And then cut the cord in the direction of the vein on the right side at its length or at its end above the knee joint, or below it at the ankle.
And then tie off the cord with a ligature and strip away the vein from all around it until it appears at the surface of the skin. This should be done while the vein is still pulsating, because sometimes it becomes dark-colored after being tied off.
Then carefully remove the ligature and tie again with a white thread that is strong enough to hold together.
And then place some lint there until it becomes elevated and freed from the ligature, and suspend it with a linen bandage.
And then cut another section near that section three days later, and strip away the vein from its attachment above it until it becomes visible.
And then elevate that again and incise it in another section below the ankle, and then extract it from that section until it is emptied by the second section, and also extract it from the section that is above it.
And do this until you have extracted all of it from the section that is above or below all the sections, so that everything is emptied. Then stitch it closed.
And if you are unable to extract and elevate the vein completely, then insert a strong doubled thread needle into it and ligate it and remove it. Otherwise, place some lint there and roll your hand around it until it is expelled. And be careful not to cut into the vein, because if it breaks, it will become difficult to elevate and will cause harm to the patient through that injury.
And when all of it has been removed, then apply to the wound a dressing made of wool soaked in rose oil and unguent roseum. Cover this with another dressing and let it heal.
And if the vein is contracted and twisted in such a way that it has no straightness to it according to what we have said, then you must make incisions along all of its tortuous parts and at the points where it is adhered. Then suspend it with ligatures until you have elevated it completely.
And be careful when making your incision that you do not cut into the vein or damage it, because it will then be difficult to elevate. Use caution and skill in this procedure.
Form of the Incision with which a Vein is Cut:
"It is not sharp like needles and does not have a pointed tip so it will not pierce the vein. It has thick flexibility like that of a lion. If it were thin, it would cut through the vein due to its fineness."
"Removal of a leg vein."
"This vein is found in the calves of the legs, especially in hot lands like those inhabited by Arabs and in dry, arid lands with little tenderness where neither grass nor herbs grow."
"And it is also generated in other places on the body besides the calves."
"And its movement is one of putrefaction that extends from the spine like venom, coming from within the body, causing serents and worms to appear between the spine and the flesh."
"And a sign of the onset of this condition is inflammation in the calf, with swelling at that location. The vein begins to emerge from the site of that swelling, appearing like a plant root."
"And then when the vein appears at its end, you should take a piece of lead weighing as much as two dragons [an ancient unit of weight] and tie it around that area. Leave the lead hanging from the calf."
"And whenever it happens that some cause appears outside it, cover that with lead and leave it tied in place." If the condition persists, then cut off a part of it and wrap up the remaining; do not cut that which has not yet come out, for if you cut that, it will constrict and enter the flesh causing an abscess and putrefaction in the area leading to bad ulceration.
It is necessary that it should be treated slowly and extracted little by little, until it is completely removed from the body and no remnant of it remains in the body.
And some men have told me that this vein is as long as 20 fingers, and I have even heard that one man has had it as long as 30 fingers.
And if it is cut at the time of its treatment, then insert a probe into its track and pierce that with a long probe through the body until all liquid is evacuated from the matter, and apply putrefactive medicines to the area for several days; and afterwards treat it as you would treat an abscess.
And this vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears at the junction of the leg or in the leg itself, and it comes out with many openings; it is said that there are almost as many branches as openings.
And so treat it thus as we have said in its division, along with what has been said above.
On the section of worms generated under the skin, also called bovine disease
This disease is called in some lands the bovine disease because it often affects cattle and there are many worms that are born between the skin and the flesh, which crawl throughout the body and cause swelling of member after member until they break through the skin and come out.
And its generation is due to putrefaction of some humors, just like the occurrence of worms and serpents and earthworms and roundworms in the belly.
And it is feared because of its harmfulness, for when it goes into the body and rises to the head, then it often enters the brain and causes damage to it, and this happens very often.
And therefore when you wish to treat it and remove it, first find out its path and appearance through the senses, then take what is on top of it and what is below it with pressure and constriction, and then dry it off and pull it out.
And if it is embedded in the flesh and you cannot grasp it, then apply a cautery with fire to the spot where it resides, for its greatest danger is corruption of that area, as we have said.
And if it has reached the head near the brain, then press over the eyebrow with strong pressure and dry out that area, and remove it; and the patient should use medicines to cleanse their body of putrid, harmful humors, and avoid foods that cause putrefaction.
On the section regarding the disease known as "nafir"
This disease is called "nafir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes on suddenly in certain members of the body, and then changes from member to member.
And now I will tell you about it as I have promised you. I was called to see a woman who was ill in a village, and when I examined her arm, I saw a small inflammation on the vein of the arm. And after about an hour, I saw that inflammation move just as if it were a living worm crawling along, but more softly than it should have been, like molten silver flowing from place to place.
Then the pain went away from that spot and appeared in the muscle nearby, and then it remained there for about an hour.
And then it moved to the other side of the body and reached the other arm.
And she told me that it was moving throughout her body, as I had seen. And she was greatly amazed by its changes and the speed with which it moved from member to member. And I had already seen something like this in my own hands before, but I have not seen many people who can grasp the pain as it moves from member to member. But I did not see it so clearly with my hands as in this woman's case.
And I do not think it was anything but this because the woman was old, with dry skin and visible veins, and in this appearance to the senses there was that movable windiness.
And it is necessary that this does not appear according to its course in those who are delicate and have moist bodies with concealed veins.
And when you wish to treat it and the patient feels that pain, then do not grasp it with your hand as we have said, but press on it lightly and dry out that area where that blocked windiness has come out, and apply a cautery to that spot.
But if you cannot grasp it with your hands, then treat it by purging the body and using medicines that expel windiness. And apply plasters made from foul-smelling herbs and those containing serpentaria and similar substances.
On the extraction of arrows
Arrows are various in their species and also vary according to the parts of the body where they strike. For there is great diversity among them: some have large points, others small ones, concave or blunt points; some are solid. Some have three angles, others have tongues, while still others are star-shaped.
And the signs of an arrow striking the brain are: when it pierces the bone and comes out through the fontanelle, which is on top of the brain. This happens due to sudden violence, leading to blindness (scotomia), dizziness (vertigo), redness in the hands, inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasms and confusion of understanding, vomiting bile, and severe difficulty speaking or loss of voice. And there is an exit point for white, powdery fluid like milk from the wound site, and it resembles the moisture of flesh.
And therefore, if these signs appear, then refrain from treating or attempting to extract the arrow, unless it is external.
But the signs of an arrow striking the heart are: it is near the left nipple, and there is pain where it has been driven into hard flesh, not soft. The movement of the arrow feels like a pulse, and black blood flows from the wound. There is sudden coldness in the extremities, followed by sweating and fainting; therefore, know that death will come suddenly without delay.
And the signs when an arrow has struck the lung are: frothy sputum of blood coming from the wound, and the vessels near the collarbone become congested. The patient's complexion changes, and they exhale with great force or pant for breath, demanding cool air to breathe.
And if the arrow strikes the pleura (the lining of the chest), then pain will be felt near the lower ribs. There is great difficulty in breathing with violent pain and sighing, and all the members are affected by muscle weakness.
"And if the arrow strikes the stomach, then swiftly remove from it any undigested food."
"And if the arrow enters the belly and remains stuck there, then some rent of the skin, or the flesh, or bowel may be torn; and there is little hope for recovery through the extraction of the arrow."
"And if the arrow strikes the bladder and urine is passed outside, and there is pain in the external parts, then you know that it is fatal."
"But other members such as the face, neck, throat, shoulders, arms, spine, collarbone, hip, knee and their corresponding limbs are saved according to the best practices when the arrow does not strike a vein or an artery and is not poisonous."
"And I will tell you what I have seen about these arrows, so that you may know how to treat them."
"It happened that an arrow entered the tear duct of a man's eye and I extracted it from the other side through his nostril, leaving behind the feather of the arrow in his ear, and he was healed without any harm to his eye."
"And I extracted another arrow from a Jew which had entered his eye through the upper eyelid, leaving behind the eyelid and extracting only a small part of it with which it adhered to its shaft, and it was a large pointed arrow of the Turks with a lion's head on it without feathers."
"And the Jew was healed and suffered no harm to his eye."
"And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man which had entered his throat, and it was an Arabic arrow with feathers on it. And then I incised over that between two guides and it was already submerged in the man's throat. And then I carefully extracted it and the Christian was healed."
"And I extracted another arrow from a man which had entered his belly and I thought that he would die because of it. And since thirty days had passed and there was no change in him due to its condition, I incised over the arrow and extracted it, and he was healed without suffering any great harm."
"And I saw a man in whom an arrow had entered his back and the wound had healed over it. And because it was about seventy years old, I extracted the arrow through the opening of the wound."
"And I saw a woman in whom an arrow had entered her belly and the wound had healed over inside her without any change in her condition. And the woman suffered no harm to any of her natural functions."
"And I saw another man in whom an arrow had entered his face and the wound was healed over it. And he broke off the arrow without suffering much pain, and appeared to be very brave."
"And I extracted the arrow from the nose of one of the king's princes which had entered into the middle of his nose and had already inclined slightly to the right. And the whole arrow was hidden."
"And I was called for his cure about three days after the arrow had entered him."
"And then I opened the wound of the arrow very tightly. And then I carefully probed it with my finger and did not feel anything; but he felt a pricking from behind the right ear. And then I suspected that this prick was due to the tip of the arrow."
"And I widened the opening with an ointment in which there is attractive and digestive virtue. By doing this, I knew that the place would be opened so that it would appear to me the place of the arrow and I could cut on it."
"And there was no significant injury where the arrow had reached that place. And I continued to apply the ointment on it for many days without causing any harm, and meanwhile the wound healed up and the swelling from the extraction of it went down over many days until one day he felt the arrow inside his nose and recognized this before me."
"And then I applied a corrosive medicine to the wound for many days until it opened up. And with my finger I felt that and extracted the tip of the arrow subtly, which adhered to the shaft."
"And precisely I applied that corrosive medicine to the opening of the wound until I saw the tip of the arrow visible. And it took me about four months' time with this."
"And precisely when the wound was enlarged and I could insert the forceps into it, but it remained stuck and did not come out easily, then I continued subtly to pull and manipulate on it with various methods of extraction until one day I began to pull it out with forceps made for this purpose, according to what is described at the end of the chapter. And precisely I restored that wound."
"And some physicians judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored. But I restored it and the wound healed up completely, and the illness was healed entirely without any remaining cause."
"And I recount to you the details of extracting some arrows because you should pause and consider this rule and meaning about what I have not said, since the parts of this art and its definitions are not understood by narration alone, nor is that book comprehended."
"And the skilled artisan says little about many things; and about what is present, he compares it to what is absent. And he achieves new operations and new instruments depending on the removal of foreign causes of the art when they occur."
"And therefore I say that arrows are not expelled from the limbs into which they have entered except by two ways: either by attraction of the place where it has gone in, or by the opposite direction of its path."
"And that which is expelled by the place through which it entered, or is an arrow proceeding in a fleshy location, and is attracted and expelled."
"And if it does not come out at the time when it was shot, then you should let it be for some days until the flesh around it becomes softened, and its attraction and exit may be facilitated."
"Similarly, if it is stuck in bone and does not come out easily, then let it be for some days and repeat the attraction and movement each day until it is finally expelled."
"If it still does not come out even after some days, then you should bore into the bone around the arrow with a subtle awl so that the place may be enlarged by the arrow and thus you can extract it."
"But if the arrow is already hidden in the location of the heart and is hidden from sensation, then you should seek it with a probe, and if you find it, then attract it with some instruments which are suitable for its attraction."
"If the patient's wound is too narrow and deep to operate on directly, and there are no bones or major blood vessels or nerves in the way, then open up the wound further until it is wide enough for the arrow to be safely removed."
"If one of the patient's ears is injured and needs to be removed, then carefully cut through all the flesh in which it is embedded using all the skill you can muster. Use all your ingenuity if you cannot remove the ear due to its fracture or torsion."
"When extracting the arrowhead from any location, use gentle twisting with your hand and forceps in all parts until you can grasp it. Use extreme care to ensure that the arrowhead is not broken and is easily extracted."
"If you cannot extract the arrowhead at that time, then leave it in place for a few days until the surrounding tissues have had a chance to heal. Then try again when the patient is feeling better." "If bleeding becomes profuse during surgery, then follow the procedures for treatment of hemorrhage as described in the chapter on wounds and injuries."
"And be careful when incising veins, nerves, or tendons. Use all your skill and care to extract the arrow smoothly and calmly, without hurry or hesitation, as I have instructed you."
"And once the arrowhead has been extracted, contract it to its original shape according to the figure indicated on the casing of the arrow. This is more helpful." "But if this is not possible, then do whatever you can based on the figures available."
"But when removing arrows that have been shot from behind, or when there is no wound channel present, or if the arrow has pierced through to the exterior of the body, feel along the path of the wound above the rib cage until you find the emerging point. Then grasp it with forceps according to its size and pull it out gently."
"But if the arrow is stuck in bone, then twist it gently in the opposite direction until you feel the arrowhead give way. Then push it further in and extract it."
"And if this does not work, leave the arrow in place for a few days to allow the surrounding tissues to heal, then try again when they have recovered."
"And if the shaft of the arrow is still inside, then push it further in with it."
"But if the shaft has broken off and you wish to apply traction, then insert a probe into the wound cavity and find the tip of the arrowhead. Then place it in the concave end of the probe and gently pull it out with the probe."
"But if the arrowhead is barbed or has a broad head, then forcefully insert an instrument into the wound cavity to push it back in, for such arrows are easier to extract this way."
"And if the arrow is poisoned, then it is necessary to excise all the flesh around the wound, if possible, and then treat the wound as appropriate."
"And if the arrow has struck bone, or entered the abdomen, bladder, or chest cavity and is close to vital organs so that you can touch it with your hand, then carefully grasp the arrowhead with forceps without injuring veins or nerves, extract it gently, and suture the wound if necessary. Then treat the wound until it heals."
"Method of extracting arrows using forceps:"
"Limbs like bird beaks seize arrows in such a way as not to let them go."
"Their grasp varies greatly: some arrows are seized firmly, others loosely, depending on the size of the arrowhead and its narrowness, as well as the width of the bowstring and the tension on it."
As rays pass through it, may it alleviate the pain within him in the hollow of his side.
Of phlebotomy of the veins
The veins of phlebotomy which are most commonly opened are 30, among which there are those in the head numbered XVI, namely two pulsating veins near the ears called "temporal"; two veins located in the temples appearing like herbs; and two veins located at the corners of the eyes called "canthi". There is also a vein prepared in the middle place of the forehead, and one which is at the end of the nose. Then there are two on the neck, and two veins on the upper lip, and two veins on the lower lip; and these are those called "angle" [veins]; and finally two veins behind the tongue. In the arms, five veins are commonly opened for phlebotomy: among these there is one cephalic vein which runs along the wild side of the arm; the people call it "the vein of the head". There is also a median vein called "sorda" composed of a branch of the basilica and another branch of the cephalic. The basilica is a vein placed on the inner side of the arm, called "cubitalis", which the common folk call "the vein of the belly". The funis of the arm rests upon the elbow joint and this is the vein commonly opened for phlebotomy. It appears above the pulse in a manifest way. The salvation vein is that which lies between the aforementioned auricular and the little finger; it has two branches.
In the foot and leg there are three veins: one of these lies on the outer side of the ankle joint on the wild side of the leg, another is the saphenous vein located behind the knee joint on the inner side of the leg. The third is the sciatic vein located behind the knee joint on the outer side of the leg. There are also other veins in the leg which resemble these.
The benefit of opening the veins near the ears is for treating ancient head colds, headaches, migraines and ulcers of the head from ancient times.
And the quality of letting blood from those veins is as follows: it should be done after removing the hair from the sick person's head. The head should be anointed with oil in the occipital region where both veins are located, using a wide cloth and good friction. Then tie the sick person's shirt tightly around their neck with a bandage so that both openings appear near the ears on two slightly elevated points of the head. Take hold of those with your index finger and if you feel the pulse there with your own finger, then proceed with caution.
Approach thou taketh the lancet scalpel, which is sharp-pointed, and thou insert it beneath the vein in the elbow until the phlebotomy comes to the bone. Then lift up thy hand with the vein and the elbow above and cut through the vein with an incising incision. And let the length of the incision be the size of two fingers or thereabouts, and cause as much blood to flow out as thou wishest.
Then apply powder and bandage it so that it may heal.
As was stated at the beginning of this book, some wounds are incised and cauterized.
Most of the two veins called arterial are to the temple, the help of phlebotomy is in ancient migraine and evil humors and frequent ophthalmia and sharp pains from excess fluid accumulated in the chest.
And the quality of phlebotomizing them is according to what I recommend to you: constrain the illness with a vein in such a way that both veins appear clearly under the skin and show their pulse, and then proceed gently.
Then lift up the elbow above the vein at its beginning with your little finger, insert the phlebotomy lancet into it, and raise up the vein thus; and incise it just as you did in the other two veins, and cause blood to flow according to your necessity.
Then release the constriction of the illness, and place your finger over the vein for an hour, then place cotton and powder and strengthen it above with a tight bandage, and leave it alone until it is healed.
As was mentioned before in the beginning of this book, the memory of these veins, their incisions, and their attraction.
And thus the help of phlebotomy of the frontal vein is especially useful for the cephalic veins in ancient illnesses of the face and migraine and rigor and fetid ulcers.
And the quality of phlebotomy of it is according to what I recommend to you: thus, the illness should be strengthened with a bandage so that the vein appears; and then take the instrument called "fossor", the form of which is this:
Place your finger on the prominent point that is at the head of the vein and strike it with a pestle or another tool in the manner you desire, allowing blood to flow according to the quantity you wish; then immediately relieve the patient's perforation and strengthen that area so it may heal.
And sometimes it is opened with a flebotomy knife, however it is not necessary that the flebotomy knife have an acute tip like other flebotomy knives, as long as its side edge is sharp; and thus open it crosswise, for the bone is close by and might break the flebotomy knife if it is thin.
But the benefit of these two veins that are near the lacrimal canals of both eyes is for the itching of the eyes due to heat and sebaceous matter in the eyes, and for illnesses of the face.
And the quality of bloodletting is that after the patient has strengthened their neck with a bandage, then perform the bloodletting, and you should be standing on the head of the patient.
And perform the bloodletting crosswise along the length of a little bit with a blunt flebotomy knife, for there is not much flesh in that location; and if the flebotomy knife is thin, its tip will break easily.
And then make the blood flow as much as you need, and pause on that spot, and strengthen it for one night with a bandage, and then remove the bandage.
But bloodletting from the vein of the nose is beneficial for acute fever and sudden sneezing, and for illnesses of the face and migraine and heat that occur in the face, especially when it is chronic.
And the quality of bloodletting from there is that the patient strengthens their neck and then places their nose in your left hand, and take a thin flebotomy knife that is long and place it in the middle of the head of the nose straightly, for the vein does not appear to the touch here, and because the blood begins to flow soon.
Be careful to gradually withdraw your hand with the flebotomy knife and make the blood flow according to your necessity; and then bind it for one night, for that wound heals easily.
But the benefit of bloodletting from both carotids is for the cure of dropsy and the beginning of leprosy, and for many illnesses and impotence and malignant ulcerations that are like herpes zoster.
And the quality of bloodletting from there is that each patient strengthen themselves on their neck with a bandage; and the operator stands over the head of the patient, and the patient sits on a seat.
And then bloodlet the vein along its length with an ample flebotomy knife little by little; and then remove blood according to a moderate quantity or according to what you estimate is necessary; and then do the same for the other vein.
And then remove the bandage and strengthen both veins with a middle ligature so that the patient is not fainted, and leave them like that until morning for the wound to be healed.
And the benefit of bloodletting from the veins of the arms is for small abscesses and pustules of the mouth and corruption of the gums and malignant ulcerations and fissures, and for malignant ulcerations that are in the nose and around it.
And the quality of bloodletting from there is that you make the patient sit in front of you, and strengthen their neck with a bandage, and then turn their lips and observe both veins of which one is on the right lip and the second on the left; and the demonstration of each is by its darkness, and more so because in the circuit of those there are small dark veins; and then cut each with an incisive incision.
But if there is doubt about which one it is, and you do not know which one it is, then you can make an incision in the largest of those, and from the manifest pus of those.
And do the same for both veins that are in the upper lips.
"Of the two veins that are left of the tongue, it is appropriate for phlebotomy to be performed on the cephalic vein at the forehead, and on the malady of the uvula, and maladies of the mouth."
"And the quality of phlebotomy to be performed is that which follows the malady between their hands in front of the sun, raises the tongue of them, and watches left of the tongue, one side of the vein and the other side of the vein, and the color of each declines towards blackness."
"And then phlebotomize each one; but be careful not to end your hand in phlebotomy of those who have arteries left."
"And the veins that are phlebotomized in the elbow are those in which blood usually flows in all men, and the phlebotomy of them is done according to two methods: either they put with the flebotomy lancet mirtle or olive oil of subtle inclination; or they cut with flebotomy knife, and call if necessary, and this is the form of it:"
"Let the side of it be like this: when veins are full and convex, it is appropriate to open them with an apparent large incision, and those that contain thick and turbid blood."
"And this flebotomy is of lesser width and more subtle point, and it is appropriate for phlebotomy of thin veins that contain subtle citrine blood."
"But the benefit of phlebotomy of the basilic vein which is one of three veins, is that it extracts blood from illnesses that are on the left side and neck, and from those that affect the feet and belly."
"And it is appropriate for the phlebotomist, when performing phlebotomy on that one, to guard well that one and be cautious about it, because there is an artery left of it; if he errs in adjusting the puncture of the flebotomy needle, he will cut into that artery and cause blood flow; therefore it is not appropriate to phlebotomize that with a puncturing flebotomy lancet, but rather cutting without tourniquet."
"And if the basilic vein does not appear by manifest appearance, then you should leave that one and move to another, or seek some of its branches; or you can phlebotomize in place of it at the end of the arm where it is manifest; and cut it with flebotomy tourniquet as we have said."
"But if you want phlebotomy of the median vein, then before the narrowness of the arm where you touch the place within that you know the pulse's place, and press firmly with your thumb on it; and raise the arm and cut the vein with concave incision with flebotomy tourniquet as we have said; and guard against hitting the artery by some space in the place."
"And when you compress with strength the limb, if swelling occurs in the place that you have pressed with your thumb, then that swelling is swelling of the artery, therefore avoid it."
"And if blood flows in the phlebotomy like urine of a child, and the blood is thin red, then you know that it is blood from the artery; then you stop and pause your finger on that for some distance; and then remove your finger, and if the blood stops, because many times it stops, then you compress the arm and leave that one."
"And guard against the wound of the incision, and be careful with it and do not move it for some days until it is healed."
"But if the blood does not stop flowing, and you see that there is no remedy for it, then you have cut into the artery; because the point of it is contracted, and the blood has stopped; therefore take some lint and fill that one, and press a linen bandage over the place of the vein with narrowing descent with limb and powders within another day."
"And then if the blood stops flowing, good. And if not, then cure it with that which has been mentioned before for stopping flow of blood."
"And the cessation of blood flow from it is difficult in many dispositions because of the smallness of the vein and the possibility of movement of the arm."
"But regarding the black vein, phlebotomy is beneficial for removing blood from the upper part of the head and from the left side of the body; because it is composed of branches of the basilic and branches of the cephalic, as we have said."
"And the phlebotomist should be careful in phlebotomy of that one because left of it is a nerve; therefore if he errs in adjusting the puncture of the flebotomy needle and touches the nerve, numbness will occur, and healing will be difficult, and sometimes it is not healed completely. And this nerve often appears at the sensation; and if it is hidden from some people and is thin and does not show up, then you should pause the flebotomy needle with which you phlebotomize with tourniquet incision, and avoid the nerve with your strength."
"And if the vein is between two nerves, then cut the vein along its length."
"Bleeding from the temple vein offers relief by drawing blood from the head, thereby alleviating headaches."
"Do you wish the phlebotomy to be performed with an olive-shaped lancet or a myrtle-shaped lancet? For it is safer than all other veins, as neither artery nor nerve is left behind."
"But even if a boil forms in some people after the first attempt at phlebotomy, do not strike it again."
"The first [consideration] is that you should know that phlebotomy should only be administered for the conservation of health and with hope and caution of avoiding illnesses, and that it should be performed on one of the veins in the elbow area, such as the cephalic, basilic, or median cubital vein; and that it should be performed at the beginning of spring, after fasting during spring and autumn, and around mealtime during winter, when signs ofpletion appear."
"And phlebotomy should be performed either on the third day or at least one hour after breakfast."
"However, phlebotomy should be performed whenever it is deemed convenient and necessary, whether during the night or day, at any hour and at any time."
"And children should not be phlebotomized until they are at least 14 years old; pregnant women should only be phlebotomized from the fourth to the seventh month; and elderly people who have already surpassed their sixtieth year of life should not be phlebotomized."
"And when someone wishes to be phlebotomized for any reason whatsoever, they should cleanse their bowels beforehand with a lion's-claw purgative; if there is much retained fecal matter in them, so that the veins do not draw the superfluities during the phlebotomy of the purified intestines, which would harm the principal members."
"And patients with sacred sickness and drunkenness should not be phlebotomized until they have recovered from their illness or sobriety. And phlebotomy should be avoided near colic pain, vomiting, and stomachache; and during multiplication of coitus, work, and exercise after fasting or vigils, or any cause that weakens the body or soul."
"And it is important to consider the subtleties of humors beforehand if the blood is thick; with foods and drinks, and with medicines if that is possible."
"And it is appropriate to take a bath beforehand if nothing prohibits it, or rather if one has been exercised for the sake that blood may be subtilized."
"And pause the phlebotomy before noon, especially around the hour of Terce, as we have said."
"And continue only if that part is protected from all animal accidents such as distress, anger, fear, and from all corporal accidents such as work, excessive exertion, coitus, and similar things."
"And at his seat, let there be present the causes used in the usual practice of men with aromatics and fragrances and balms and similar things according to their quantity."
"And let the phlebotomist sit on a cushion that is higher than the cushion of the person who is to be phlebotomized."
"And let him first extract his arm and rub that with his hand the phlebotomist two or three times; then let him strengthen the limb with a bandage and wrap it twice."
"And let the bandage be tied moderately, for if it is not equitable or if it is with superfluity, then it hinders the flow of blood; or if it is too loose, it hinders the course of blood entirely."
"And after tying off the bandage, let the person to be phlebotomized rub his hands together until the veins are engorged and clearly felt."
"And let the phlebotomist anoint his lancet with a little old oil specifically; then pause his left index finger on that vein where he wishes to perform the phlebotomy so that the vein may swell slightly and he may feel which vein he should pierce for blood flows from veins like strings under the skin, and it is also important to avoid those veins that are full of windiness because when one presses the lancet upon them they contract beneath the lancet."
"Therefore, let the phlebotomist be firm and attentive to all these causes."
"And then pause the lancet if the vein is filled in one stroke, that is good. But if not, repeat this another time nearby there or on it with haste if the location is not inflamed."
"And if the location is inflamed or the illness worsens, then let it be left alone for a day or two and do not tighten the bandage, because that would draw out an ulcer. Nor should one take a bath."
"And repeat the phlebotomy if necessary."
"And if the incision is small and blood flows subtly, and you fear that not enough blood will flow out, then repeat the lancet in that same furrow according to correctness and adjust the aperture slightly, but do this quickly before the location becomes inflamed because many people become inflamed with a small opening."
"But if the location is already inflamed, then do not repeat upon it because that will serve no purpose. Rather, pause on some part of the oil furrow for that alleviates the course of blood." "And it is better in this location to use oil than any other oils."
"Similarly, administer an oil furrow in all phlebotomies where veins are pierced with the prohibition of blood flow, and they do this with Tyriaca Alfadoc and Sagzenea when pausing on one of those over the location because blood is subtilized and revolved when it is thick."
"And if a large ulcer is generated in the location of phlebotomy because many times this happens, especially to those who have not been bled for that day or whose vein opening was small, then coitus and pause upon the location with a sponge infused in water and salt slightly scalded, and tighten it there for an hour because it will be dissolved."
"And this should be done immediately after the letting of blood from that vein with the completion of it or another vein."
"If there remains in the location for some days a blackness or greenness, do not heed this. But if you wish, pause upon it with some cause of Aloes and Myrrh dissolved, or some cause of mint juice or chamomile or similar things."
"Many times ulcers and elevations occur because of phlebotomy at the basilica."
"Therefore pause your hand upon that [the ulcer], and if you should press too much with your compression, then that elevation is harmful and bad. And therefore guard yourself to pause upon it with some cause of what we have said because much blood flows from the artery."
"The affected area should be made rigid using a plaster containing an astringent substance to toughen it. Then treat this with another remedy until healing is achieved."
"Remove blood from every person according to their strength and the prevailing color above their blood, as it appears."
"If the blood is black, let it flow until it becomes red. Similarly, if it appears thick, allow it to flow until it becomes thin. Likewise, if it is sharp, wait until its sharpness is relieved."
"For those who are full and strong, and require bloodletting at one sitting, the vein should be opened widely, and the incision should be long."
"In the case of the lean person, do the opposite. Bloodletting should be done in several sessions and the opening should be narrow."
"The best way to perform bloodletting from a vein is through a transverse cut, not a puncture."
"This method of bloodletting is safer from bleeding and injury to nerves. It is more praiseworthy and safer than bloodletting done according to length and width."
"If syncope is likely to occur during bloodletting, you should prepare the patient beforehand with a little bread soaked in wormwood wine or simple oxymel. Remove blood at that location in three or four sessions."
"If the patient is cold in temperament, then before bloodletting, give them bread soaked in myrrh syrup or aromatic honey syrup spiced with pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and similar spices, or highly fragrant syrup."
"If syncope occurs during bloodletting due to the loss of too much blood, then you should give them water made from meat and fragrant honey syrup to drink. Use aromatics such as aloe and apply it topically around the area."
"And use the other causes that have been mentioned in the division under the chapter of syncope from evacuation."
"For those who wish to raise their arm and dissolve the blood on the second day, bloodletting should be done for excessive evacuation. The strength of the bleeding will be weak, gradually evacuating the blood according to the quantity of the strength over several days."
"However, for those who wish to raise their arm and draw blood again on the second day, and have a strong constitution, they should do so approximately 7 to 9 hours after the first bloodletting."
"But those who wish to draw blood from their body in opposition to the direction of the part that declines, it should be done on the second or third day."
"But for those bodies in which there is already scanty blood and it is sharp and causes fever, blood should be drawn from them once, drawing out a large quantity. Attention should be paid so that syncope occurs, as you will have conserved all the conditions of bloodletting. Place your hand on the pulse of their body to prevent death occurring instead of syncope, for many times this happens due to ignorance and negligence."
"And when you wish to release the arm and evacuate blood again on the second day, even if the vein opening has closed and it is difficult to draw out blood, do not press upon it with violence. Rather, press gently with the hand slightly curved, as this is too harmful."
"Let the bloodletting be done a second time until it flows freely. Or remove the acuteness of the bloodletting that has coagulated in the vein opening with a gentle pressure using tragacanth gum or saguenaria. Pause upon it and press gently until the blood flows out."
"And if the vein is inflamed, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the inflammation has subsided."
"And if there is a necessity to provoke evacuating blood again and it is not an excuse, then perform bloodletting on that location or on the other arm in another vein."
"And the vein called 'funis of the arm' is bled in place of the cephalic or basilica veins when they are not prominent or are hidden. For it consists of those."
"And the quality of bloodletting from it is that the patient places their hand in cold water until the vein becomes red and appears clearly."
"And bloodletting should be done gently with a ligature made from woolen thread with moderate tightness. And bloodletting should be performed transversely in small sections, not latitudinally nor lengthwise."
"And let the opening be wide and let your bloodletting with which you bleed that person be done just above the junction of the hand."
"And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then immerse your hand in cold water again and let the blood run into the water until your need is satisfied."
"But if it is summertime, then you are excused from immersing your hand in cold water. And the mesh is paused for bloodletting in cold water during wintertime."
"And bloodletting from this vein is safer than all other veins because it has neither a palpable vein nor nerves."
"And bloodletting of the little vein on the right hand is beneficial for diseases of the liver."
"And the quality of bloodletting from it is that you should tighten the hand with a ligature or your hand, having placed it in cold water until the vein becomes inflated and clearly visible. Perform bloodletting transversely on it; and if some of it remains, do not worry about it."
"And take care not to finish your hand during bloodletting, because there are nerves in these veins that are bare of flesh."
"And again immerse the hand in cold water and let the blood run into it, because if you do not immerse it in cold water, the blood will coagulate in the vein opening and the flow will be prohibited."
"And when blood is drawn according to the necessary quantity, then press upon the vein with oil and salt so that it does not close suddenly. And do likewise for any other wound."
"But the benefit of bloodletting from this vein on the left hand is that it is beneficial for diseases of the spleen."
"And do likewise in bloodletting this one as you did the other."
"And the benefit of bloodletting from the vein called 'sephena' is for diseases that are in the parts below the body, such as diseases of the womb, and retention of menses, and diseases of the sinews, ulcers of the skin and old sores, and their like."
"And the quality of bloodletting from it is that the patient should place their foot in cold water and make friction over it until the veins become clearly visible. Then tie a ligature around the junction of the foot; the location of the vein appears just below the said knee, and it branches out into many small branches on the face of the foot."
"And then bleed the thickest branch or one of those below the knee towards the ankle joint because it is better and safer."
"And if you bleed this vein on the face of the foot, then beware of the nerves that are near it on the face of the foot, and pause your bloodletting with that which you use for bleeding across, as if you wished to cut it."
"And let the bloodletting be moderate."
"But if you cannot draw blood, then immerse the foot in cold water again and let the blood run into it until it is evacuated."
If the flebotomist errs in the first attempt, then try again with the flebotomy a little higher up, for the vein is swollen; and do not fear the malignant humor, but guard against damaging nerves as we have said.
Similarly do the same to the other leg.
And of the saphenous vein, the location is as we have said, behind the ankle joint below the head of the fibula.
The benefit of bloodletting for this condition is to relieve pain in the hip when it is used to remove heat.
The characteristic of bloodletting for this condition is that the patient enters a bath, and quickly and firmly binds the vein on the inner side of the thigh above the ankle joint with a long thin bandage so that it does not become visible except through that.
And then when it appears, immediately flebotomize according to each vein that you are able to and according to the traverse, and it is better; or else incise that with an incision or cut that one with a section, for the location of this one is swollen.
And it is more common in men and less so in women. And if you find that one, and it does not appear to the touch at all, then immediately flebotomize some branch of this one, and it is that which appears on the back of the hand towards the little finger and the ring finger.
And beware of the nerves, and let flow as much blood as you wish.
And moreover untie the ligature and press on the place of the bloodletting firmly for a short time, for it heals easily.
Concerning venesection and the qualities to use that one
Bloodletting is done with a lance, or a needle, or a vein-opener.
And bloodletting is done in two ways: one of them is with scarification and extraction of blood, and the other is bloodletting without scarification.
And this bloodletting that is without scarification is done in two ways, for either it is with fire or without fire.
And the places on the body where bloodletting is administered with scarification and extraction of blood are fourteen in number, among which one is where bloodlettings are paused: at the nape of the neck, which is the last part of the head; and the middle place of it on both parts of the neck equally; and bloodlettings on the chin, below the jawbone but above the mouth; and bloodlettings on the two spatulas; and bloodlettings on the hollow of the hand, which is at the end of the wrist; and bloodlettings on the two elbows, which are on the two arms; and bloodlettings on the two knees; and bloodlettings on the two ankles.
And bloodletting does not extract blood except from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and for this reason it does not cut off virtue by those means, just as it is done by phlebotomy; nor is it necessary that bloodletting be done with fire or without fire in any illness caused bypletion until the whole body has been evacuated.
But if bloodletting is provoked by illness or by continuity, we administer it at any hour at the beginning of the month and at the end of it, and in the middle of it and at any time.
And therefore when there are times in any of those causes, and particularly if it is at the third or mid-month, we command bloodletting to be done after two or three hours have passed since that time.
And the benefit of bloodletting from the nape of the neck is that when it alleviates heaviness in the head and prevents collapse on the eyes, but it is necessary that this be an appropriate evacuation of the whole body.
And this bloodletting is located at the site of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein
It is not right to use this [bloodletting] in those who have a feverish condition or catarrh, for it gives great harm.
And therefore it is not necessary to use that bloodletting on the elderly, and on those whose heads have feverish illnesses
But above that, if it is continued upon it, forgetfulness occurs; and therefore you should command the bloodletter to pause his hand slightly after the bloodletting at the places where forgetfulness is generated.
But bloodletting from the armpit is located at the site of phlebotomy of the dark vein and the basilica vein: and therefore it alleviates asthma, and constriction of the breath, and the division of the windpipe of the lung, and coughing, and repletion.
And it is necessary that the armpit bloodletting be done gently, for if it is done forcefully it generates weakness in the body and stomach.
And bloodletting from the temple alleviates accidental pains in the head and ophthalmia, migraine, and pleurodynia, and toothache; and it is located at the site of phlebotomy of the basilica vein
And you should command the bloodletter not to press his hand during scarification lest he wound the artery and cause bleeding
And bloodletting below the chin alleviates hoarseness in the mouth and corruption of the gums, and it is similar to those illnesses that are in the mouth; and it stands at the site of phlebotomy of Alephairic, which are on both lips.
But bloodletting that is done over the two shoulder-blades alleviates headaches, which are caused bypletion of heat.
And bloodletting from the two places below the eyebrows alleviates the benefit of phlebotomy of three veins, that is, the basilica, dark, and cephalic veins, for it attracts blood from all those veins multiplied in the flesh, and those small veins from the other veins more thick until attraction reaches the three veins.
And command the bloodletter not to proceed with scarification, for that place is devoid of flesh, and thus it has nerves and arteries there
And it is a bloodletting with which blood is let from the buttocks and alleviates hemorrhoids of the anus and ulcers that are there
And you should command the bloodletter that it be a large bloodletting, and of iron, for that place requires strong sectioning; and many subtle bloodlettings are drawn out by strong suction, and it should be scarified with scarification
But bloodlettings from the calves diminish by diminution evidently for they draw out blood from all the body and alleviate old pains of the kidneys and abdomen, and bladder; and they provoke menstruation and alleviate botch and dimple; and they stand at the site of phlebotomy of two saphenous veins, Alachoben, and two cavillas.
But they greatly weaken the whole body and cause fainting in many men
And bloodletting at Alachoben has benefit similar to that of bloodletting from both calves
"The position of the windpipe is such that it begins wide and gradually narrows due to suction. Do not prolong this position excessively, but rather pause gently and remain quietly so that the humors can come together evenly." "And do not stop iterating this until you see the spot already reddening and swelling, and notice the appearance of blood's color."
"And then you shall slowly scratch and irritate the skin little by little, taking care with the position of the body."
"And that man who has tender skin from few hairs, it is necessary that you scratch him once and not twice, for the place not to become ulcerated."
"And command the blower to amplify the scarification, and press gently, and keep the suction easy."
"And if the blood is thickened, then it is necessary to scratch twice, for in the first time the way of subtleization in the blood and its moisture is opened." "But on the second occasion, with careful scrutiny, the extraction of thick blood should be obtained."
"And if the blood is too fetid, then the third scratch should not be done so that it can succeed."
"Finally, when we want to extract blood little by little or a little bit, one scratch is enough for us."
"And if we want to extract much blood, we scratch with much scarification; and if we know that the blood is thick, then it is necessary to scratch for a strong scarification."
"The term 'scarification' refers only to the depth of the cut."
"And if the skin of that person is thick, hard, dark, and its pores are narrow, then the places where the cups will be used should be anointed with lenitive, opening, and dissolving substances; if it is in summer, thus as oil of aloe or violet oil, or oil of bitter almonds, or oil of cumin seed; and if it is in winter, then narcissus oil, lily oil, camomile oil, or blood should be used for those similar."
"And if the superfluity is thick and fatty, then the oil should be bitter almond, balsamite oil, aloe oil, or aneth oil, and similar ones."
"But if the person being cupped has wide pores and tender skin, then it is prohibited to use oil; and for this person, the places where the cups will be applied should be washed with warm or hot water of solatrum, cumin seed water, or pennyroyal water, and similar ones to those."
"And for the person whose blood is very moist, wash his cups with sour wine, or myrtle and sumac water, and similar ones."
"And for the person whose superfluities are thick, wash his cups with old wine, or water of sansuc (majoram), or decoction of aneth, or chamomile, and similar ones."
"And it is necessary that the cupping be done before a bath; having to administer it close to the moment of bathing for one or two hours, and it is necessary that he/she sleeps close to the cupping."
"What is this: that it is necessary for the person being cupped to be regulated before cupping."
"And it is necessary to consider at the beginning: if the person being cupped or the one who should bleed him/her has a choleric nature and vents over sharp blood and inflammation, then he/she should take causes of cooling, such as sour apple milk, chicory with vinegar and lettuce, and secanolabum, julep, and similar ones."
"And pause their foods such as pheasants, birds of prey meat, and sour seasoned foods, and similar ones."
"And for the person whose complexion is cold, it is necessary that he/she drink rosehip syrup with honey, or syrup of fennel seed, sumac, and myrrh, and let him/her be advised to use sparingly of drinking and eating, and avoid foods of pheasant, rabbit, partridges, small birds, and pigeons."
"And it is necessary that on the day of cupping and bloodletting, drinking should be greater than eating."
"And it is necessary to give some men tyriaca altharca or muscatel medicaments, such as musk powder, or alcelet before cupping or bloodletting, so that the principal members are comforted and that the blood be subtilized; but those who have scabies should not take it."
"But the cupping that is not done with scarification are those that are done to pause its liver, and on the navel and gout, and on the umbilicus, in the joints of the elbows, and the armpit of the axilla, because these members do not suffer scarification upon them."
"And it is not desired for these except the attraction of blood from the member, such as pausing cupping on the breast in disease of flux of bloody blood from the nose; and they use it so that cold hard inviscid cupping may be dissolved from the member, such as pausing on the abdomen and navel; because this rarifies the member and scratches it and removes pain by resolving the cupping."
"And already cupping is paused on the temples when there occurs in them oppression or dizziness, because by virtue of strong attraction it draws out oppression and expels dizziness from its place."
"And similarly, it does when cupping is paused on the liver and spleen to resolve that which is enclosed therein."
"And these cuppings are administered with suction only; but some are also administered with fire."
"And sometimes they are administered full of warm water in the diseases of the spleen."
"And this is why the cupping should be filled and made larger, that is cold water alone or water in which suitable herbs are cooked."
"Form of cupping administered with fire: let the width of the opening be that of two fingers, according to how we have formed it; and let the quantity of the pitch be at most a palmful; and let it be on his side, in the place that is in the circuit, as much as him/her, and let the wick be small according to the quantity that enters into it like a needle."
"Let it be made of wormwood or citrus with thick margins, lion's tooth, hawthorn and myrtle, so that the member does not hurt from its position upon it."
"And let it be placed in the middle of the transverse line of wormwood or iron where the candle with fire is paused."
"And already this cupping should be much larger than that which we have recommended, and the lesser one according to the diseases and state of him/her who uses it."
"And the cuppings of children and weak ones are different from those of young people and robust ones."
"And the quality of pausing this cupping with fire on the member is that it extends the mecha with fire from decently burned wood before a small candle of wax, and pauses it on the middle of the transverse line in the middle place of the cupping, so that the fire may be kindled around the edge without burning the body of the sick person."
"And immediately it should be paused on the member of the sick person, and let the wick that we have said be on top, until when we have the cuppings and do not need to hold the wick, then the vapor will rise over that wick, immediately the cupping will be dissolved."
"And soon after, extinguish the wick according to its manner, and repeat it if necessary."
"But in cupping that is administered in the disease of pleurisy with water, there is neither transverse line nor wick, and it is not administered except that it should be filled with water, and it is paused on the member alone."
"And this is its form: And this cupping, the larger it is, the better, for it can receive a large quantity of water."
"Chapter 97."
"Bloodletting is not performed on certain members except in cases where the use of cupping glasses is impossible due to their small size, such as the lips, gum and similar areas; or on members that are devoid of flesh, such as the fingers and nose, and their like."
"And the quality of using those bloodsuckers that are found in clean waters from ponds."
"And they should be let loose during the day and night in clean water until they are hungry, ensuring that there is no cause for vomiting in their stomachs. And first, the body should be emptied with phlebotomy and cupping glasses. And the limb of the patient should be rubbed until it turns red. And then they should be placed on it."
"And when they are full, they should be removed."
"If it is possible to suck out the location with cupping glasses, this is preferable in treatment."
"And if not, then wash the location with vinegar and hot water. And rub it and press on it."
"If the body's blood flow is prolonged near the skin's blood vessels, and this is prominent, then you should immerse a cloth in hot water and apply it on top to cover the prominence."
"If blood is abundant, then sprinkle on it vitriol trisulcated, or powders and substances similar to those of the stiptics, until the blood has ceased. Or place on the spot many pods of cooked broad beans, and leave them there until they adhere to the spot and the blood has ceased."
"If necessary, repeat the application of leeches when it is possible to change those that have been used."
"If bloodletting by leeches is prohibited due to suspension, then the spot should be rubbed with fresh blood or a needle inserted into the spots until blood flows; and these should be applied immediately when any blood is felt."
"When you want them to fall off, sprinkle on them a little powdered aloe, salt, or ash, and they will soon fall off."
"This is how the chapter of the third part begins: On restoration." "This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and concerns the restoration of fractures and accidents of dislocation in bones."
"Oh, son, know that those who boast of this chapter are foolish doctors and the common people, and those who have never regarded the books of the Ancients nor read a single letter from them."
"And because of this reason it happens that this method is private among the learned in our land; and I have not forgotten this during all my life; nor have I added what follows except for the length of reading the books of the Ancients and study over their understanding, so as to extract science from them."
"And therefore I direct this to experiment and study throughout my life's duration."
"And I have already described in this chapter all that my science contains and about which my experiment has passed; since here I have briefly for you others and relieved myself of the occupation of lengthening it; and abbreviated it to the point of abbreviation; and shown it to the point of declaration; and formed many forms of instruments administered therein, as is done by addition of declaration, as I have done in two preceding chapters."
"Chapter One."
"Summaries and collections of the essence of bone fractures, from which a preamble is necessary before we begin to remember the members that are broken and diverse if each one." "It is therefore necessary that I say in the prologue of this chapter the summaries of the discourse, and the chapters under whose understanding the artisans are forced to stay at rest over their truth, so that you and those who are eager may know or learn this noble art besides you."
"And therefore I say that when some fracture or dislocation or torsion or concussion happens, it is necessary at the beginning to bleed that one with flebotomy or to alleviate him, or whatever ensemble you may prohibit any cause, as debility of virtue, or if he is a child or old in decrepitude, or if it is time of violent heat or cold."
"And therefore it is necessary to content him with his food of fresh herbs and meat of birds and crayfish; and prohibit gross meats and full viandas and all vianda that fills the veins with blood, so that you may be sure of avoiding an abscess, and if you are not afraid of effusion of matter in the member."
"And therefore it is necessary to return the patient to his first regimen with which he was accustomed to live."
"And therefore when the bone begins to be restored, it is necessary that the patient be nourished with nutrient foods rich and heavy in which there is viscosity, such as foods made of wheat cooked with water, rice, chicken, eggs, beef, butter, fresh fish, thick wine, and similar ones; and with this regimen coagulation of fracture is performed more easily and better."
"And know that the bones of those who are in their first vigor and those who are old do not have it possible for them to be joined and consolidated according to their nature due to the dryness of their members."
"But nonetheless nature adjusts and adapts itself to the bone broken in any part whatsoever, as glue that adheres and strengthens it insofar as it is conglutinated and united together, until the end of fortitude and firmness comes, as fire at the beginning, insofar as no cause prohibits it from its works."
"And for this reason it is necessary that you suspend the patient's foods, foods in which there is gravity and viscosity and thickness, as we have said."
"And know that the species of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of members, for a fracture of the bone of the leg is different from the fracture of the bone of the head; and the fracture of the bone of the foot is different from the fracture of the bone of the hand; and similarly all other members are diverse among themselves."
"And I come with a reminder of every species of fracture, explained in its own chapter distinguished from the others."
"Great diversity of fracture within itself." "And the species of fractures of the bone are diversified within themselves; for an arched fracture occurs in some other way than stellar ones do; and sometimes it is made according to the length of the bone: these are the fractures of the satagia and stars and additional ones that occur and do not occur, as happens in the pen when it is prepared to write, and a fracture with plugging and disruption in the head, and a small fissure fracture."
"And to each species there is a proper pain or torment in its restoration, according to what will come later the reminder of it distinguished in its places."
"Great sign of fracture of the bone." "And for this reason a fracture of the bone is known: its tortuosity and prominence and depression at touch, and it also happens when you press it with your hand."
"And therefore when there is no apparent tortuosity nor does it happen that any pain is made upon touching the bone with agitation and the patient does not find great pain, then there is no fracture here."
"It is possible that there may be tortuosity or a small fissure, therefore you should not move it with your hand and compress everything; rather pause upon it regarding the medicines of which reminder will be made at that moment which is convenient for the place; and especially let there be straightening through subtle restriction."
"And know that the place where it is arched and not split into two or other than stellar ones do, since all its parts are removed, then you should begin at your hour to straighten it insofar as an abscess may happen."
"And if an abscess occurs there, then leave it for some days until the abscess stops; and then splint it according to each manner that you can of elevation and binding."
"And know that restoration of it and binding of it is easier than the bone in which stellar ones occur."
"And then strengthen it according to what will come the reminder of it."
"But if there are stars in the bone, then it is necessary to extend this broken member in two parts, if it is the hand or foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two strings or with one string and your hand."
"The position you take to pause the affected limb should be according to its natural shape, while the parts are extended. Then you should endeavor to return those additions with ingenuity and according to each manner that you can in their places."
"And be careful, according to your knowledge, not to cause harm to the patient through your operation of their limbs or injury. And endeavor, according to your ability, to apply one bone with another in its best forms."
"And it is necessary that at that opportune time you touch him with your hand firmly, and if any different cause arises, correct him and equalize him according to the quantity of your strength."
"And avoid violent extension and compression, as many foolish doctors do who often cause an abscess to cauterize by their operation or cause contraction in the limb, as we have seen happen too often."
"And the quality of compression for a limb in repose is that which I recommend, because you should know that broken limbs are diverse in their smallness and greatness, and in their shape."
"And for those that are small, like the arm, hand, and foot, and similar ones, it is necessary that the wrapping be of very fine cloth."
"But for those that are large, like the thigh or calf, it is necessary to have a wrapping that is thick and strong, because tight wrapping connects the limb well and compresses it equally on all sides, so that nothing enters inside."
"And at the beginning, begin your compression of the dressing, pause appropriately according to what is necessary, over the location of that fracture with three wrappings or four, depending on how much the limb deserves it. And tighten your hand a little with the bandage."
"And when you have wrapped up to that point beyond the highest part of the fracture location, then tighten more so that your compression is not lessened by what you have used to compress the fracture site." "And then extend yourself with wrapping from the fracture site a little way, and gradually loosen the compression until you reach about half the length of the limb."
"And then take another bandage and wrap it again over the broken site with wrapping, and extend yourself with wrappings beyond the fracture location. And your operation should be in tightening the wrapping and loosening it gradually according to what was said earlier about the first wrapping."
"And then pause between the wrappings with a layer of wool or cloth with which to equalize any twisting of the fracture, if there is any twisting in it. And otherwise, do not pause for any reason."
"And then pause over the other bandage, and then press down upon those wrappings carefully made at that time, if there is no inflammation or cauterized abscess in that location. And otherwise, pause over what covers the abscess or inflammation; and leave it like that for a few days. And then tighten over those wrappings."
"And the splints should be made of thin, fine reeds, well-shaped; or they can be made of wood from a fig tree, or branches of palm. And each splint should be about this width and shape:"
"However, the splint placed over that fracture should be thicker and wider than the other splints, and its length should be proportional to the size of the limb. And then tighten over those splints with another bandage according to your first compression; and then lay above it with felt carefully, according to what was said about compression, so that your compression is stronger at the fracture site, and as it goes further from the fracture, the compression should be lessened."
"And the threads should be medium in thickness and fineness, and made of wool. And if the threads are thick, like those used by some foolish people who use cords of twisted flax for their operations, it is a great error when compression is uneven."
"And very fine threads are not suitable, because you will not achieve compression with them as you wish. And there should be less than one finger's breadth between splint and splint."
"And if the pain is felt at the ends of the splints near the compression in those places, then pause with wool or carded lamb's wool between them until it stops hurting."
"Sometimes a fracture occurs with plague, and disruption of the knee joint happens. I have spoken about this in Chapter 18 on singularities."
"And know that not all broken limbs are bound with splints on the first day; because when a limb is large, you should wait for about 5 or 7 days, or more, according to your certainty of the appearance of a cauterized abscess before binding it with splints."
"And this is the method used by plasterers to restore fractures, dislocations, and distortions."
"The method of plastering commonly used for the restoration of fractures is convenient for many complications, especially for women and children because it does not bring heat or friction. And you should take powder from a millstone; that is, the bran left over after the movement of the millstone against the walls of the mill."
"And it is ground like that, but sifted with chalk and water, and used thickly and coarsely."
"Another method of plastering for the restoration of fractures, dislocations, and distortions: take assafetida, ladanum, acacia, enula, and miguel, which is the resin of wild mastic, all of them ground and sifted and mixed with aloe or chalk water if the condition is scaly. And use this plaster because it has a good composition and restores lightly broken bones, suitable for many people."
"Another method of plastering that suits fractures and distortions: Take miguel resin and white wax, each one dragma x; myrrh and aloe each dragma v; acacia dragma vi; and Armenian bole dragma xx."
"All of these are ground together in a mortar with great care, sifted, mixed with water or chalk water, and applied."
"Method of plastering for joints and separated bones in their locations, and also useful for pain accidentally occurring in those areas, as well as for cracks and fractures: Take clean wool, immerse it in vinegar and cooked oil, and apply it to the location."
"But this plaster does not have the virtue of restoration nor does it prevent or cure cauterized abscesses and does not properly expel pains."
"Another method of plastering that restores broken bones: Take leaves from wild fig trees and poppy pods, mix them together and make a plaster out of them."
Mix in equal parts of ale root, chamomile flowers, and violet flowers. Add ground iris flour until thickened. If the limb is not scratched, boil with wine and apply as a plaster for bone fracture restoration or to resolve remaining abscesses.
If it is scratched, then soak it in coriander water made wet with water and apply the plaster.
Another method of plaster that is even stronger in resolving than the first one when an abscess occurs during bone restoration: Take equal parts of ale root and seed, balm, melilot, marjoram, violet flowers, chamomile, and ground iris. All are crushed and cooked with willow water or sweet water or wine, according to the quality of the limb and the rest of its color.
However, Hippocrates does not specify in his book that it should be plastered on the broken limb during its restoration, but rather recommends a cerote made of wax and oil, and nothing else. He advises that it should be medium-soft between thickness and subtlety.
However, it is seen that in Galen's book, plasters are applied on the broken limb during its restoration and the causes of drying with slight heat are such as myrrh, frankincense, and similar ones for those same causes that we have recommended.
Method of plaster that relieves injury and pain: Take equal parts of niter, cypress, human hair cuttings or bird feathers, and ale root. All are ground together and sifted, then cooked to make the plaster.
However, if the amount according to how much remains of the plaster and it is appropriate to be loosened, it should be considered that if there is no pain or swelling nor has the bone broken, then it should not be removed too soon. And if there is severe pain or swelling or inflammation at the location, then you should remove it immediately in that hour and take off the plaster from it.
And then take some linen and a wet sea sponge, immerse it in hot water, and with that wash the area inside until the swelling stops and the pain is relieved. Then let the limb rest for an hour. Then plaster it again with wool submerged in sour wine and oil or rose oil, laying it on top of it for one night to ensure the formation of a dry abscess and that the inflammation of the limb has subsided and its pain has disappeared.
And then repeat that gentle strapping with a small plaster again, not tightening too much the first time, and gently until it is healed.
And if at some point the abscess, redness, pain, inflammation, and all other accidents have disappeared completely, then you should again plaster and strap it as you did at the beginning.
And if no cause of those that we have mentioned appears on the limb, then you should not remove it before three days or four or five or seven. And sometimes all this is left for twenty days according to what you see through the loosening of the limb, as we have said, until the fracture adheres and joins together with the coagulation of the flesh above it.
And then adjust the strapping more tightly than the first time, according to how much the swelling of the limb has decreased by remembering it.
But if you find the location of the fracture already dry and shrunken more than it should be, then know that nutrition is prohibited from reaching it. Therefore, immerse it every day that you remove the plaster with hot water until all is done in three days. Then loosen the strapping a little, and through this operation the limb receives nourishment and heals easily.
But what foolish restorers of the fracture of the limb do again when it was not restored at first, according to how it should have been restored, and is restored crookedly, that is an error according to their operation, and great fear. And if they were right, the Ancients would have enlarged upon this in their books and practiced it.
And I have not seen any of them do that, which is why it is more reasonable that they should not do it.
Chapter Two: On fracture when it occurs in the head.
Fracture types are many, and their appearances are diverse, and their causes are distinct. For some fractures are caused by blows that break all the bone within the cavity, leaving the bone like a log, thus this type is called compression; or the blow cuts some part of the bone without cutting deep into the flesh; and this type of fracture is called avulsion.
The plague of these two fractures is either great or small, and it occurs in compression or tension fractures. The cause of this is a blow accompanied by force or impact on bone, and they appear similar to each other.
This fracture is either penetrating, nearly reaching the surrounding soft tissue around the bone, or it occurs on the surface of the bone. The severity of these two fractures can be either great or small.
And there is a fracture that occurs within the bone itself, in its smallest detail resembling a hair's breadth, and thus this type of fracture is called capillary fracture.
There is also a fracture that occurs from impact or blow by a hard object which causes some of the bone layers to enter into the inner parts, and this happens at the concave location like what happens to eggshells when they are struck and their inner parts break open.
This usually occurs in the bodies of human bones, especially the heads of long bones such as femurs or tibias.
And therefore all these species of fractures appear like stars separated by lines. And I have brought all this to your attention in its proper place.
Know all these types of fracture by their detection on the surface and by inquiring about them through touch and examination of corrupted flesh around them.
Capillary fractures are recognized by the fact that they appear as small dark lines on the surface of the bone, which can be wiped clean and felt with the fingertips. These lines appear black when examined closely.
"In treating fractures, consider initially the patient's symptoms. If you find them significant due to manifest fear, such as vomiting from cholera, diarrhea, loss of consciousness, fainting spells, high fever, discharge from the eyes and ears, and similar symptoms in severe conditions, then healing is doubtful."
"If you find non-life-threatening symptoms, then proceed with treatment."
"If the patient comes to you already injured, especially if it happened during winter days around December 14th, then you should examine the bone before treating according to proper procedure."
"If it happens during summer days, then you should examine the bone on the 7th day, ensuring that the surrounding flesh is not corrupted and that symptoms as recommended have occurred."
"If the fracture has already reached the muscular tissue covering the brain and is in pieces with attrition, then you should insert the comminuted and attritional fragments as I will instruct you."
"And after shaving the head of the patient, uncover the bone according to your custom and ability following the shape of the injury, making it easy for the patient."
"If you detect the bone through skin wounds or pus accumulation, then pause your procedure according to what is necessary. If you see fluid oozing from the wound, place cloths soaked in wine and rose oil on it until the inflammation subsides and blood flow ceases. Then begin with the circumcision of the bone and its removal."
"And this is according to one of two operative methods."
"And one method is that you insert the bone with a narrow-bladed incision knife, and this is its shape: Then administer another incision knife, slightly wider than the first one, and this is its shape:"
"And then use an even wider incision knife."
"And you should have different types of incision knives available in various sizes, some wider than others and some shorter than others with sharp tips made of iron or steel."
"Use them skillfully to strike the incision without hitting the head or hurting the patient."
"If the bone is hard and tough, then you should first drill around it before administering the incision knives with the handles, which are called non-penetrating handles."
"However, these are not called non-penetrating handles but rather those which do not penetrate the end of the bone at that point where it is about to be cut. For the handle has a round tip or edge on that side which is left behind with an acute head similar to a small margin or circle, which prevents being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone."
"And it is convenient for you to take many of these handles, each suitable for the thickness of each bone. So that you may have them ready during all surgeries on the brain, with tips that are sharp and their length and width according to the thickness of the bone."
"And this is the shape of three types of handles:
E approprincipitally cut with scissors what is between each trace of the bone, and collect that subtle pus which you can gather at the end of the incision, as we have said, before you remove the bone, either with your hand or with some other cause through certain instruments which you shall have prepared for this purpose, such as tweezers and forceps.
E que tu gardas que l'inscissori non tocave null'am causa del ciphac.
E donc cum auras circuyt lo os perforat, e sera separat del ciphac si es continuat amb ell, e auras aquell extrayt, covent et engualhar aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en lo os amb altra esturment semblante a inscissori, però covent que sia pus teon i pus subtil que las altres incisors.
E si roman alguna partida dels ossos petitos i satajas, llavors pren aquella amb facilitatz amb aqüell que és deves tu dels esturments; e aprop aquò cures la plaça amb liniments i engueix els quals havem dit.
E l'altra manera d'operació és més lleugera i llunyana del pau, la qual diu Galien i l'elogia per gran elogista; i aquest és el seu discurs: és necessari que al principi comencis a discoverir la partida de l'os del lloc on hi ha la fractura més visible i evident, entre que quan haves descobert aquella partida i haves posat de banda l'extremitat d'aquest incisi lent i alegre, el qual aquesta és la seva forma:
E és que la partida lenticular és llarga i no incideix cap causa, i la partida aguda és de l'altura de les dues cares davants en longitud, així com es veuen; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac amb la cara de l'incisió aguda a l'os.
E després, percuteu sobre l'incisi d'una partida amb un petit martell fins a tallar tot l'os amb facilitat com si girés, i tu estàs segur que el panicul no es podrà produir en aquest accident que temis de cap manera; i si el metge era el més bo de tots els homes i el més ignorant d'ells; certament, i si fos dormit.
Ara, si hi ha cap causa annexada a l'os del panicul en alguns llocs de l'os, talla aquella amb l'extremitat d'aquest incisi lenticular i allibera-la d'aquell lloc amb facilitat, perquè és alliberada d'aquell lloc sense nociu ni por.
I si la fractura de l'os no penetra dins el panicul i allò que es abscis o es ostenta de l'os és la seva cara i roman amb aspereza i petites arrugues, llavors cal que arrasin aquesta aspereza i erradiquin aquestes arrugues amb rasuradors subtils dels quals tu has preparat diversos nombres de diferents quantitats perquè sigui possible aplicar-ne els més convenients en tot lloc segons allò on haures d'actuar aquest os trencat i la seva figura.
I cal que administres en la teva raó quan rasures l'os al principi els més amples dels rasuradors i després els més subtils, i no deixis de fer-ho fins a arribar a aplicar els més aguts i subtils de tots.
però en cadascuna d'aquelles altres petites fractures capil·lars i fractures subtils, cal que apliques cura segons com tu has trobat per rectificar-ho.
I és que no s'ameguda sobre tots aquells que han estudiat en aquesta art. I això és el que hem demostrat en fractures grosses.
I si el panicul es reté quan tu erradiquis l'os, llavors cal que agafis drap segons la quantitat de la ferida, i sumergis aquell en oli rosat, i posis-lo sobre la ferida; després pren altre drap doble o triple, sumerge'l en vi i oli rosat i posar-ho sobre un drap prim, i fa-ho tan lleugerament com puguis sobre aquest, sense gravar el ciphac; i finalment aplica-hi un liant gruixut, però no estrenyis aquest només per la quantitat que tinga la ferida.
I deixeu-lo amb aquesta cura durant un dia o dos fins que esteu segur de l'apostema caut; després, retireu-ho i aplica-hi medicaments per evitar la siccitat excessiva, com ara raig d'oli de llinos i farina d'erba, pols d'henna i aristologia, i altres semblants.
I també pots fer d'aquestes medines pols que s'hagin aplicat a la ferida de manera seca; i, generalment, aplica-hi tots els medicaments que tinguin la propietat d'aseure i no de morder.
I mantingues la netedat de la ferida durant el teu tractament i no deixis que s'omple de suc o d'altres coses; i no deixis que es faci virulent a causa del teu tractament, perquè quan s'aplica sobre el panicul del cervell, es corromp i pot produir malaltia greu.
I també pot ocórrer al ciphac del cap quan l'os és mondificat i més encara quan se'n fa el tractament; i si això passa, apareixerà una negror a la superfície d'aquest. En aquest cas, si s'han produït les accidents que hem mencionat abans, sabràs que ha estat un cas fatal.
I si no s'hi ha produït negror, sinó només a causa de la medicina aplicada sobre ell, és per la virtut d'aquesta medicina que s'ha produït aquesta negror. En aquest cas, cal prendre una part de mel i tres parts d'oli rosat i barrejar-los amb un drap; després posar-lo sobre el ciphac i aplicar-hi especis de curació fins que s'hagi guarir.
Capítol III
Quant al capítol III, parla de la restauració del nas quan es trenca. Es diu que si el nas es trenca per una caiguda o un cop, cal aplicar-li una cura immediata perquè no es produïsca una ferida profunda. Si això passa, s'ha de netejar la ferida amb aigua bullent i després es pot aplicar un liant fet amb mel i vi. També es recomana l'ús d'unes pinces per estirar els extrems trencats del nas fins que s'ajunten perfectament; després cal aplicar-hi una bèndiga feta de llana impregnada en oli d'oliva, i fixar-la amb un cotó. Finalment, es diu que cal esperar tres dies abans de retirar la bèndiga.
Has de saber que el nas no es trenca en dues parts alhora i més amunt, ni en una d'aquelles ocasions que es veuen, perquè té dos ossos. La partida esquerra és cartilaginosa i no es trenca; només hi ha atricció, tortuositat i sinuositad.
però si es trenca una de les dues parts del nas, llavors cal introduir el dit petit dins del seu nas i empènyer l'os trencat amb el dit índex i el dit polze de fora, fins que el nas torni a tenir la seva forma natural. I cal fer això amb cura i evitant causar dolor al pacient.
I si la trencada és a l'os més alt del nas i el dit petit no arriba fins allí, cal usar l'extremitat d'un ganxo de mida petita.
I si la trencada afecta les dues parts del nas, llavors hauràs de fer el mateix que s'ha descrit anteriorment.
Cal actuar amb rapidesa per a restaurar el nas en el primer dia després de la trencada, si és possible. Si no ho és, cal esperar fins que s'hagi resolt l'hematoma i aplicar un cataplasma càustic.
"And then insert into the tip of the nose a cloth plug, if the fracture is in one part, or two cotton balls, if it is in two parts, and ensure that the cloth or cotton is thick enough to fill the passage of the nose."
"And some of the ancient restorers say that cotton balls should be wrapped in linen and changed throughout the day, but this is not visible to me; however it is necessary that the plug should be inserted into a piece of alum and powdered myrrh."
"And sometimes it is placed in the nose instead of cotton, a piece of linen wrapped around it; even if there is strong fracture and inflammation preventing inspiration."
"If this method is not necessary for you, then do as you wish, or use cotton balls instead."
"And if there occurs another time an abscess, plaster the nose with wax or fat melted in vinegar and rose oil, or with diacylon."
"But if there is no abscess formed, then you should plaster it from the outside with sesame flour and powdered myrrh mixed with alum; and also apply a piece of linen soaked in warm water over it, without ever washing the nose for any reason."
"But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or crushed, then it is necessary to split them and extract those that are convenient using appropriate instruments; afterwards stitch up the wound and treat it with something that incises and consolidates, along with appropriate plasters."
"And if there is inflammation inside the nose, then it should be treated with cotton balls and lead cannulae administered until it is completely healed."
"Chapter Four."
To restore the jaw when it is clenched.
If the jaw is broken but the fracture does not extend across the entire length and is not displaced or fragmented inward, then its reduction will be easy.
Therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, insert your left index finger into the patient's mouth and do likewise for the left side with your right index finger. Push the bone fragment gently inward with your finger until it aligns properly with the outer edge of the bone using your other hand.
And if the jaw fracture is already separated into two parts, then you must apply traction to both segments in a straight line until it is possible to achieve reduction.
And if teeth are loosened or displaced due to the fracture, then strengthen those that you expect will break with a gold, silver, or copper wire. Then apply pressure on top of the broken jaw using cotton wool, folded linen, and a large sterilized gauze pad or a piece of wood cut to the length of the jaw. Then tie it securely in place according to your preference and the situation at hand, ensuring that it is not too tight as to cause further damage.
Tell the patient to rest quietly, avoiding any movement of the jaw for about 10 days and to eat soft foods that do not require chewing.
If you notice that the jaw's position has changed in any way after the reduction, then on the third day, carefully remove the splint and check if there is any alteration in the fracture site. Then pack it with iodoform gauze or plaster of Paris powder mixed with egg albumen or flour paste, ensuring to remove the cotton wool first. Finally, apply a bandage made of linen around the jaw.
And when the splint is securely attached and the position of the bone has not changed, leave it in place until the fracture has healed and strengthened. Often, this type of fracture takes about three weeks to heal completely.
And if an abscess forms later on, then apply warm compresses frequently to the affected area until the abscess is drained and healed. You may also use hot saline rinses to help relieve pain and promote healing.
And if the fracture is comminuted (i.e., broken into multiple fragments), then determine whether there are any loose bone fragments or bone spicules present. If so, carefully remove them using appropriate instruments designed for this purpose.
If the wound from the fracture is large, then you should widen it further with a curette or rongeur according to your needs. This will allow for better visualization of the fracture site and facilitate reduction.
And once you have removed any loose bone fragments, if there is still some debris present in the wound, then carefully clean it out. If the wound is large, pack it with gauze soaked in an antiseptic solution or a suitable dressing and apply a bandage to keep it in place until healed.
Chapter Five
On the restoration of the clavicle when it is broken.
The clavicle (collarbone) is often fractured near its midshaft and this fracture typically occurs in one of three patterns:
Broken or separated, or in two parts without accidents; it is easy to restore. Or thus: it occurs with accidents and is difficult to restore.
In that case, when the fracture is without plague, you should have two ministers present: one to hold the assistant and follow the broken clavicle, and the other to extend the neck towards that part.
And appropriately align the fracture with these said tongs so that it may be made according to its proper shape, and without prominence or concavity.
And if you need more extension, then it is necessary that you place on the skin of the patient's chest a compress made of cloth or wool, and its size should be according to your need; extend and raise the clavicle and compress the compress with your hand while aligning the fracture as needed.
And if you cannot bring the end of the clavicle to the outside edges of the fragments, then it is necessary that the patient be raised up on their back and place a bolster made of cloth or wool under the shoulder muscle.
And the assistant presses on the muscles at the fragments from below until the bone of the clavicle is raised up to its proper position; then you can correct the fracture and align it with the tongs mentioned earlier.
But if you feel resistances from the clavicle and they are painful, then it is necessary that you cut over that area and remove those resistances with ease.
And if it is retained in the bone, then you should perform an incision on it with one of the scalpel blades that you have prepared for this purpose, as you had placed over the clavicle the instrument called "cophac"; and this instrument is made of wood or iron, and its shape is like this:
And it resembles a spoon whose concavity looks like this; and its width should be according to your need, according to the size of the bone or the prominence of it.
But its length should be according to what is possible for you during the operation; that it has two extremities like this, and one extremity is wide and the other is narrow.
And if the disruption of the skin wound that you made when removing the bone resistance is large and you are sure about causing an abscess, then you should approximate the two lips of the wound with suture.
And if the disruption is small or you fear causing an abscess, then you should fill the wound with dressings and powders according to the quantity of the wound opening.
And if an abscess occurs, then you should take a cloth soaked in vinegar oil and rose oil and wine, and place it on that area.
And all of that, make sure the board is not placed on top of the fractured bone; and for this reason it is important that you see the patient every day, so that when you notice that the bandage has softened or observe that the board has already moved out of place, then you should correct that and tighten the binding.
And then place the patient's sleep on the collarbone and place a small pillow below the armpit at night so that the elbow joint is elevated above that side, thereby elevating the clavicle fracture due to the elevation of the muscles, or else the arm should be tied to the neck.
And do not remove the bandage unless you see that it is healed without any wound or abscess, within twelve days.
And then renew the emplaster if you have seen signs of improvement in that area, and adjust it to fit the tightening and restore that and leave it until it has been restored and the clavicle fracture has coagulated.
And it is strengthened and comfortable in about twenty-eight days, although sometimes in some men it may take less time than that.
Chapter .VI
On the restoration of a fracture of the shoulder blade.
"The spatula was broken in the right side of his head, but it did not break him, only its edges."
"And therefore when the head of him is broken — and it is broken in the middle of his head — and not known except by touching, then according to what is the figure of the fracture, force the preparation of him and reduce that according to the natural figure in every way you can."
"And first apply powder of ground aloes with egg-white and stop the wound; then apply poultice of doubled cloth; and then apply a layer of subtle table salt according to the quantity of the whole spatula or a little more."
"But if the wound is concave in some places of the spatula, then you will fill that concavity with wax, and then apply the layer according to equality."
"And then strengthen it above with a long humid bandage with proper constriction and with firmness of the layer within that it may not be removed from its place."
"And consider the bandage every day; and whenever it is softened, change it again and strengthen it and equalize the layer if it has been removed from its place."
"And heal the wound on his own face."
"And the bandage is restored in 20 days or 25 days."
"And then when this number is completed, you will dissolve the bandage, and know for sure which are those bones of which the beginning was not touched nor their dissolution."
"And if you proceed to the place of the heavy bone and put down the shoulder, then cut upon it, drain it, and do according to what we have said in the fracture of the clavicle of separation of abscess if any occurs here."
**Chapter VII**
**On the Restoration of Fractures of the Foot.**
"Sometimes the foot is broken in its middle part and then it becomes twisted; but the extremities of it are more often shattered and comminuted."
"And when the middle of the foot is broken, its accidents are that it declines towards the inner parts and there occurs great pain, difficulty in breathing, coughing, fever, and vomiting blood; and it is declared in the cavity of the broken bone and is not concealed from sensation."
"And its restoration is that the wound be elevated on its own back, and a bolster placed between its sole; and properly press the muscles of it, and adjust its sides with the aid of two boards, and perform the operation of it and equalization according to all manner that is possible and convenient for it, until the figure of the bone returns according to what is fitting."
"And then place over it a plaster and gauze, and place over that a thin slice of wood or linen or clay, and wrap that in cloth; and carefully apply that to the broken bone so that it is not moved; and bind it on the back sometimes with a round bandage, and strengthen it with proper constriction; and carefully consider the bandage at all times, and when it is softened, strengthen it."
"And if it is necessary to remove that bandage due to corruption or pressure or pain or abscess that occurs in the place, then carefully cut and loosen that and eradicate the plaster and correct that which has occurred there according to the manner of curing it; and then replace the plaster, sometimes changing its face; and adjust the constriction until it is healed."
**Chapter VIII**
**On the Restoration of Broken Ribs.**
"Know that fracture of the ribs occurs only in thick places on the back, and their extremities at the front part are not subject to such injury except for those that are cartilaginous." "And its recognition is not concealed from sensation by inquiry with them."
"And the reduction should be done thus: align the fracture with these [tools] in the most possible manner, until it is aligned as necessary. Then plaster and strengthen the broken bone with starch if needed."
"If the rib fracture is displaced inward, then it causes severe pain and puncturing, similar to what happens to someone who has been pierced. And because the bone presses on the lung's veil, it makes breathing difficult, coughing, and vomiting of much blood. This condition is difficult to treat."
"And already the Ancients used this for many purposes."
"And they said: whenever foods pause the sick person who generates inflammation and flatulence, so that the abdomen may be inflated and extended, then the fracture will be pushed outward."
"But we would not advise this because it could cause a wound infection if not done carefully. And if an infection has already occurred, then this method will not help."
"And some of them said that it should be paused from above with force and sucked out. And this is like reasoning, but nonetheless it is feared that the suction may draw the superfluities into the lungs due to weakness."
"And some of them said: whenever that place is covered with wool that has already been immersed in hot oil, and powders are paused between the ribs until it is filled up, then let the bandage be tied around as tightly as possible according to its roundness; and let the sick person be treated with food and medicinal cure for pleurisy."
"And if the sick person feels violent constriction that cannot be endured, and the bone pierces the lung's veil with painful punctures, then we fear for the sick person. Therefore, it is necessary to cut over that place, uncover the broken rib, and pause on top of it the instrument that preserves the cyphac, the memory of which has already been given, and gently chisel away the bone and remove it."
"And moreover, if the wound is large, let us join its edges together with stitching, and treat it with plasters until it is healed."
"And if an abscess occurs internally, then quickly and gently pour powders mixed with rose oil onto the place, pause it there, and let the sick person be treated with what is appropriate for internal abscesses."
"And let him lie on his back while sleeping until he is healed."
Chapter ix.
On the restoration of fractures of the spine and neck.
Sometimes fracture occurs in the bones of the neck, and tartar forms on them, similarly to the spine of the back. "And when this happens to someone and you want to know if it will be healed or not, then consider: for if the sinews are already softened, stunned, deadened, and cannot be moved nor extended nor stretched, and when they are constricted with your fingers or pricked with a needle there is no pain felt in them, then you should know that it will not heal, and such conditions are mortal."
"And if they can be moved and feel constriction with your fingers or punctures, then you should know that the nape of the bone is saved and that the illness will improve with treatment."
"And if it looks similar to this in the spine of the neck, and you want to know whether it will be healed or not, then consider its weight."
"Therefore, if you find that the sinews are already softened, it is like what happens in the muscles. And moreover, when he lies on his back, there is difficulty breathing and excretion without his will, and sometimes he lies on his back and wants to urinate but cannot, then you should know that it is mortal, and therefore do not try to treat it."
"But if none of these causes occur, the cause is better and easier to treat."
"And the treatment for this is that you should perforate the seat of the internal abscess that has formed on the broken spine with rose oil alone, or mixed with mulled eggs; pause it there several times a day until the abscess is sedated."
"And then pause one of the comforting and exiting plasters on it, stretch it with linen; and command the sick person to use rest and tranquility and not to sleep on the part where he feels pain until he is healed."
"And if the inflammation of the bone becomes sagging or some cause is already separated from it, then it is necessary to cut over the backbone and remove that bone. And moreover, join the edges of the wound together with sutures if it is large; and moreover treat it with some incensory of herbs until it is healed."
"But if the end of the bone is broken off, and it is the end of the coccyx, then you should insert your left thumb into the anus, and grasp the broken bone with your other hand according to what is possible by equilateral grasping; and moreover pause an emplaster and astel on it, if necessary, and stretch it."
"And if you feel broken sagging bones in it, then cut over that and remove them, and treat the wound with the treatment described earlier until it is healed."
Chapter x.
On the restoration of the ankle joint.
"The bones of the ankles are easily broken, and when they break, their fracture is not other than communion at the ends of them and are inserted in the length and decline towards the inside. And it happens that the sick person feels pain and puncture in that place, and the ankle becomes stunned when there is a fracture."
"And the restoration of this is that you should stretch your hand over it until it covers the fracture which has the figure of it."
"And if the fracture is only at its end, then you should grasp it according to what seems equal to you by grasping until it fits with its natural figure."
"But if the fracture is in the length or has already declined towards the inside, then have the sick person lie on his stomach until you are ready to restore that fracture." "And then when you have grasped it, pause an emplaster on it, and moreover pause a splint of wood or bone on it, and stretch it with great tightness so that there is no fear of puncture from fracture nor removal of the splint."
"And grasp the concavity with whatever fills it until that grasps takes on its proper tightness, and command the sick person to sleep on his back or on his side."
"But if an internal abscess forms, then cease the extension of it and its restoration until the internal abscess is sedated, and pause on it what sedates that according to what has been described earlier. And moreover return to restoring it and stretch it as much as necessary."
"And if the sagging bones or they are comminuted, then remove them."
Chapter xi.
On the restoration of the fracture of the fibula.
"The fibula is that which is between the thighbone and the head of the shoulder."
"And if it is broken, then its restoration is in one of two ways. One way is that you should take a flat piece of wood with medium thickness like this:"
"And let there be tied at both ends two strips of linen, and moreover it should be suspended from the elevated place."
"And have the sick person sit on a chair, and then gently lay his broken arm on the wood so that it reaches its little head in the middle place where the curvature of the wood is attached."
"And then suspend some heavy weight on it, or let the assistant gently extend it towards its outer side. And then the doctor should carefully place the fracture together with his hands until the fracture returns to its proper place."
"The other method is to have the patient lie on their back and suspend the hand of their neck with a bandage. Then command two assistants, one of whom should hold what is above the fracture with their hands, and the other should hold them from below; each extending their part."
"And if you want the extension to be stronger, then stretch over the fracture with a bandage and over that another one. And each of the two assistants should extend their part."
"And if the fracture is close to the extremity of the bone, then half of the bandage should be placed over the joint and the other half below the fracture."
"And likewise if the fracture is close to the elbow, then the bandage should be placed over that spot and over that elbow."
"First of all it should be done with ease and without trouble; and immediately after, if it is tied correctly and applied properly, then stretch that bandage but avoid causing an abscess."
"But if an abscess occurs, then leave the bandage on for about seven days, and apply over it a compress made of thread soaked in vinegar and rose oil until the abscess reappears, and then stretch that bandage."
"And the way to stretch that bandage is as follows: apply a plaster over the fracture, and then apply a wrapping of wet cloth over the plaster; and also adjust the arm over that support, and place their hand wrapped in linen over their muscle."
"And apply the cloth and stretch it over that support for the arm so that the arm is in a still position; unless there is some cause preventing it due to the broken bone."
"And then use splints."
"And then apply over the fracture that splint which should be placed wider and stronger than the others. And place between each splint the width of a finger; and let the length of the splints be according to the fracture, adding three fingers on either side."
"And also stretch over the splints with the bandage which was mentioned at the beginning of this chapter."
"And then your bandage over the location of the fracture should be made tighter." "And as the fracture becomes longer, so the bandage should be looser."
"Therefore, if you arrange the splints and bandage in that way as we have said at the time when you restore the limb to its proper position, then do so."
"And if you fear an abscess occurring, then leave the bandage and splints on for about seven days as we have said."
"And also consider the limb in all cases for three days so that no swelling or inflammation occurs there due to excess bandaging; otherwise, regulate the diet according to what we have said."
"But if you are worried that nothing will happen due to this, then do not remove the bandage but leave it on for at least three days or more."
"And let his sleep be on his back, and let his hands be placed over his stomach."
"And place over the elbow joint a pillow full of wool wrapped in linen. And keep watch at all times during the night or day to ensure that the figure of the broken limb is not displaced nor dissolved, and that the limb remains warm; otherwise, adjust it with your skill."
"And arrange the diet of the patient according to the order which we mentioned earlier. Thus, in the beginning the food should be subtle until it is time to begin stretching [the limb]; and then you must gradually increase the amount of food."
"As for the custom of removing the splint and changing the bandage, this should be done after forty days. And then it is necessary to remove them and administer baths and medications which heal that [injury]."
"If the fracture is already consolidated, then do not remove the bandage from that limb nor the splints for about one day or two months."
"Chapter XII."
"Of the reduction of fractures of the arm."
"The arm is composed of two bones which are called the two elbow bones. Of these, one is small and it lies next to the thumb; the other is large and it lies above the little finger on the outer side."
"And sometimes only the larger elbow bone is fractured, or the smaller one, but often they are both broken together."
"And when the small elbow bone is fractured at its upper end, then its reduction will be easy and its healing will also be quicker."
"But when it [the small elbow bone] is fractured on the outer side, its fracture is severe and its healing difficult."
"And even worse than that is when both bones are broken together."
"Therefore, if the bone that is fractured is the small elbow bone at its upper end, then it is advisable for the physician to perform the reduction with ease and gentleness until that [bone] is completely reduced."
"But if it is the large elbow bone that is broken, then you must perform the reduction with greater force."
"And if both bones are broken together, then you must apply the traction much more forcibly."
"And you must keep the figure of the hand in its proper position during the reduction and traction, extending it upon a couch. And let the thumb be placed above all the other fingers, with the little finger below them, and let the patient lie on a pillow."
"And place a cushion in front of him at his head or feet so that he does not make any effort."
"And then the assistant should extend the arm from the outer side with one hand and hold it there with bandages; another assistant should do likewise above."
"And then the physician should gently reduce the bone until he brings it back to its best position."
"If there is any displacement of the bone in the fracture, then you must carefully reduce all the displaced fragments back into their proper position with your skill."
"If there appears during the reduction any separation of the fragments that pierces the elbow joint and you are not able to reduce it, then proceed as we have said above."
"But if the fracture is accompanied by a wound, I have already spoken about that in another chapter, and therefore I will not discuss its treatment here."
"And if an abscess forms at the beginning of your reduction, then you should take a piece of linen smeared with cerate made from rose oil and white wax, of medium thickness between thickness and thinness. Then stretch this linen over it with gentle pressure until the abscess yields. And then remove the cerate and apply a plaster prepared from powdered myrrh with a little honey; and then apply splints; and let the splint that is placed upon that fracture be wide and strong."
"And know that the number of splints used for the arm is usually greater in the major positions, either when there is a fracture of one elbow bone or of both bones together."
"And then apply the pressure upon the site of the fracture with great force and violence. And if you observe that the traction pulls more on the upper side of the fracture or on the lower side, then apply gentle pressure according to what is written at the beginning of this chapter."
"And let the bandages wrapped around the fracture be soft and moist, not hard or rough. And let the linen with which it is stretched be of medium thickness between thinness and thickness, as we have recommended."
"And observe the limb and the bandage for a few days." "And if any cause arises which requires correction, such as swelling in the limb, then you should immerse the limb in warm water until that swelling ceases."
"Then allow the limb to rest without being too tightly bound so that it may recover; and then apply traction again."
"When the extraction has softened and the bone is dislodged, appearing as such, then correct all this with your power."
"If you find that nutrients are prohibited from reaching the limb due to excess stricture, then soften it a little and allow it to rest for a few days until proper circulation is restored. Then strengthen it."
"However, if the illness has not been caused by any of the conditions mentioned earlier, it should then be released within approximately 20 days or so around that time."
"Then hang the limb of the patient with their own strength and move it agitatedly, and let them sleep on their back."
"Know that this fracture takes 30 or 32 days to heal, but in some cases it heals in 28 days. All of this depends on the complexion and strength of the patient."
"Chapter XIII"
"On the restoration of fractures of the hand and fingers."
"You should know that in the case of a hand pinch or nutcracker injury to the toes, it is not always fracture but often merely contusion."
"And when it occurs with fracture or contusion, you should have the patient lie down and place their hand on that extended [arm] at shoulder height."
"The minister should then extend the broken bones, and the doctor should align them together with good alignment."
"And then you must apply a plaster and cotton, unless there is cauterization to prevent pus. Then place a splint on top according to the size of the location, and wrap it with linen."
"But if the fracture is in the bones within the palm of the hand, you should make a bandage like a splint from cloth and tell the patient to press it with their clenched palm. Then wrap it tightly with cloth."
"And let the splint be made of leather covered in cloth to allow for elevation, so that the leather can adhere closely to the palm. Then bind it as needed."
"But if the fracture is on the outside of the hand, you should place splints above and below the joint of the fingers on the palm to allow the hand to be upright and straight. Then bind it as when wrapping a wrist between the fingers."
"And if there is a fracture in one of the knuckles, you should align it properly and bind it with the palm. And if desired, place a small splint on the outside to elevate the fracture and prevent movement."
"But if the fracture is in another knuckle, such as that of the middle finger or the index finger, ring finger, or little finger, you should align it and bind it with the corresponding finger. Or they can all be bound continuously, which is better. Or place a small splint on top as mentioned for the thumb."
"And consider, in your treatment, the condition of the wound and its opposite side – with your operation – according to what is necessary when such causes arise, as described in this narrative."
"Chapter XIV."
"On the Treatment of a Fracture of the Bone of the Thigh."
"The bone of the thigh is often fractured and it is felt when it becomes displaced at the articulation in front and the pus accumulates above."
"And its treatment is done in such a way that the muscle is bound above the fracture and another bandage is placed below the fracture. And the patient should be made to lie on their stomach and face down."
"And then the minister should extend all the muscles to their insertion when the fracture is in the middle of the bone."
If the thigh is fractured, then bring the ligament close to the bone at the start of the penis, so that the extension goes downwards, and the other ligament leaves the fracture.
Similarly, if the bone is fractured near the knee, then make sure that the ligament is close to the kneecap and the extension goes upwards.
And then the doctor aligns the bone with both his hands so that it reduces naturally and the bone joins together in good union. Afterwards a plaster cast and bandage are needed to prevent swelling of the limb if there is no suppuration (pus formation). But if pus forms then allow it to drain for several days until the inflammation has subsided and then return to your treatment.
The plaster cast should be made in this way: wrap a firm bandage over the fracture and fold it twice or three times, removing any excess material. Then wrap the leg so that it reaches the ankle and thigh.
Then insert a long strip of adhesive tape between the skin and the plaster cast near the knee joint. The ends of the tape should come out above the two parts of the fracture and then wind them around the plaster cast and leg to remove any excess bandage material.
Then place a splint on the skin over the location of that fracture, and attach it with a safety pin to the bone of the plaster cast.
Then fill in the spaces between the plaster cast and the skin with soft cloths, so that the bandage can set properly.
And then start with a firm bandage on the middle of the fracture location with three or four turns. The more you wrap around the fracture site, the tighter and stronger the plaster cast will be. But also make sure it is not too tight or too loose, but rather comfortable and moist.
Then extend both ends of the adhesive tape to the foot and ankle on either side until it reaches the heel of the foot. Then fasten both ends of the safety pin to prevent any movement or slipping of the splint from its position.
Then leave the plaster cast on until it sets properly, making sure that there is no rubbing or irritation of the skin, nor any inflammation, swelling, or redness. If any of these symptoms do occur, then remove the plaster cast immediately and correct whatever has caused them, following the steps outlined above several times.
If there is any pressure on the bone that causes pain during movement, it is important to try and relieve that pressure as much as possible. If this is not possible, then place a pad over that area and remove any excess plaster cast material that may be causing discomfort. Then follow the steps outlined previously for treating a fracture until it has healed properly.
Sometimes the plaster cast on the thigh may cause pressure on the fracture site. If this happens, then make sure to adjust the safety pins on both sides of the plaster cast as described in the previous instructions for treating a fractured arm.
However, when treating a fracture in this way, it is important not to cause any limp or hobbling. If the plaster cast is applied incorrectly and the patient has trouble walking after the treatment, then it may be necessary to apply another plaster cast on top of the first one to help stabilize the leg during rehabilitation.
You should know that the plaster cast remains on for about 40 days or a bit more or less depending on the complexity and other factors of the fracture.
Chapter XV
On the treatment of fractures of the jawbone.
You should know that fractures of the jawbone are quite common and often occur due to trauma or blows to the face.
"Yet if it happens that he has a fracture, then it is but a crack or break in his bones, and this is accompanied by pain or no pain, upon which all depends."
"And the restoration of it is attempted by placing that which is broken of his bones with the said intestines being united and joined together as much as possible, according to what is easy, simple, and convenient."
"And then apply plaster and dressing over that round stone wound if necessary; and strengthen it with a bandage according to what is appropriate."
"And consider all the methods which we have recommended in other fractures, thus as with caution and similar care to those, so that it may be applied to every accident according to what is convenient for him, until he is healed."
"Chapter XVI."
"On the restoration of a fracture of the humerus."
"You should know that in the arm there are two bones of which one is thick and is called by the name of the arm, and the other is slender and is called the radius."
"And it happens that in some species of fracture the two bones of the arm are affected, and for that reason restoration is made of it just like restoration of the arm altogether, and the operation of it is one."
"And if the two bones are broken together, the humerus becomes completely disjointed."
"And if only the slender bone is broken, the arm remains articulated at the front."
"And if only the thick bone is broken, it remains attached to that of below and it is one of those causes which are not easily restored."
"And therefore apply extension, traction, and bandaging of the fragments according to what is appropriate in this case."
"But it happens that if the fracture of the humerus is old and there have been many attempts, then extension should be less and gentler, and alleviate with your skill."
"And in the humerus there is one cause for operation on the arm, and this is when you uncover the fragments and complete all your operation, then you will take pieces of wood from the trunk of a tree which has been placed below the causes which are placed beneath it, and made similarly from branches of palm; choose those which have little thickness, and let them not be thick ones, and let their length be according to the length of the humerus, and from one end to the other."
"And then apply on each splint two wrappings according to its length and place one on the fracture of the humerus on one side and the other on the other side, and they should extend from one end to the other."
"And then bind the two fragments in three places at both extremities and in the middle, because with this structure the humerus is prevented from bending to the right or left, and this is good stability."
"And then apply a splint of wood according to the length of the humerus, and let it be placed on it so that it conserves its movement."
"And more importantly you should do this in fracture, especially when it is properly reduced."
"And also consider each day the humerus and study it carefully, and you guard it from hematoma and inflammation or other similar causes. And whenever any of these occurs, then apply what is necessary until it is healed."
"Chapter XVII."
Of the fracture of the heel bone and bones of the foot.
The heel bone has not occurred fracture at all; but fractures of the bones of the foot have happened some times; and those of the foot rarely happen, and do not occur except attrition in the joints of position.
And if fractures happen to the bones of the foot and some of these bones become elevated above themselves among them, then the patient places their foot on the ground prepared in such a way that they can walk.
And around they pause the one foot on what is elevated of those bones, and around they press them, compressing and squeezing them until it returns to its place.
And around they apply plaster and bandages on top, and place under the belly of the foot a small table with two flat heads.
And around they stretch that member with the foot downwards, because thou hast enveloped it with cloths and for other reasons which thou shalt indicate.
And when three or four days have passed, then thou dost untie the bandage, for thou shalt find the bones squeezed together, or pinched, or dislocated, and the operation in those is thus known.
But if some of them are pinched together, then thou dost restore them and squeeze them thus with oil, and recoat them according to what thou shalt learn in the restoration of these bones of the hand. And around thou dost place the splint on the pinched finger according to its length, and let it be thus on one side a little; and around thou dost place under the foot that table which is recommended to thee, and stretch that member downwards.
But if what is pinched of the bones are two or three or more, then thou dost place on each finger separately according to its quantity, wrapped in lion's cloth, and stretch the table under the foot as far down as possible, and let it stand on one of the heads of the table with the belly of the foot upon it, so that it may have good retention.
And it is necessary for thee that thou dost not forget to not consider all the causes which are mentioned to thee in other fractures of accidents which we have said, and thou dost pause for each accident according to what is appropriate.
Chapter XVIII
Of the fracture of the neck of the woman and of the penis bone and of the phallus of man.
When the neck of the woman is pinched together, then thou dost perform that cut in this manner, and thou dost incline it at the joint of the two a little backwards.
And then the midwife presses the neck with cotton, and let it be done in the neck thus as an arrow; and then the woman is shaken up, and thou dost raise her hips little by little, for all this is forgotten until the neck is before the joint of the bone as an arrow, and the pinched bone returns.
And then thou dost place powder on the hips, and when she wishes to urinate thou dost remove the cotton with ease and let her urinate, and thou dost reduce it and return it according to the manner in which thou didst first introduce it, and then thou dost return it to its first powder.
And she shall do thus for seven days or thereabouts, until that is restored.
If you wish, take an ovine bladder and stretch it over the wound of the patient using a reed cannula; then insert the entire bladder into the concavity of the wound, and immediately inflate it with breath through the cannula so that the bladder becomes inflated within the concavity, for the fracture returns.
And then it should be filled with cotton and left in place for a few days according to what we have recommended, until it is healed.
When the bone of the penis in a man or woman is broken, at that time administer to its restoration and suturing the liquid that we have recommended for the hip bone.
And that which is right is not hidden in these nearby fractures and little endeavors, especially from him to whom some study and use of this my book are given; for that fracture indicates to you the greatest dispositions towards a straight restoration and tightening of it, therefore understand well.
But in the case of a broken penis in a man, take a guaiacum gum, and place it inside the penis; then wrap it with cloth wrapping and leave it wrapped for three days or around that time, and it will be healed.
Chapter XIX
Of the restoration of fractures of the bones when they are dislocated.
It is convenient for him who has suffered a fracture with dislocation, and especially if the bone is large like that of the thigh or shoulder blade, etc., to perform a flebotomy at once if the conditions for flebotomy are present in him as we have said above.
And if the dislocation flows with blood, it is necessary that you attend to its retention in such a way that you powderize over it zeugitris cut, if there is no other cause.
And also begin to restore the fracture on that same day, and do not delay it unless an abscess occurs.
But if an abscess occurs, then you should delay the restoration of it until the ninth day, until the abscess has healed, and do not approach it on the third or fourth day of all, for you will cause bad accidents.
But if the broken bone is prominent above the skin openly, then it is necessary for you to perforate and reduce it with your hands with ease and little extension.
But if extension is not prepared for you and the equating of it with your hands is difficult, then reduce it with this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, its length being seven or eight digits and its width according to the quantity of the dislocation. And for that reason it is necessary for the physician to take three or four of them according to the quantity required in this cure in all kinds of fractures.
And let it be reduced, and let there be little hardness on it so that it is not doubled; then place pressure on it at the time of the operation.
And let there be an acute extremity on which margin is made in its extremities; and let it be thicker above than below, and larger inside the parts.
And this is its shape:
And it is called in Greek "labre volentz atelarem," that is, a little shovel.
For it must be paused on the elevated acute extremity of the bone on which the prominence is made.
And insert it in one stroke until the bone returns and is equated with some pressure.
And then force the ends of the fracture together with some equating, and if the end of the broken bone is thin and does not receive the instrument well, then insert the end of that bone until the instrument has power over it.
But if you cannot reduce the bone entirely with what we have recommended, then cut it with one of the knives which we have mentioned, or saw it with one of the saws in whatever manner is possible for you.
And then rasp that which remains on the bone of its sharpness and small rough edges.
And when the bone is reduced and the pain afterwards becomes very violent suddenly, then you should know that the bone has not returned to its natural place. And therefore do this in order that you may relieve the patient greatly.
When your reduction of the bone is completed, then immerse a cloth in black treacle and apply it properly if it is summer time, and do not put on the dislocation cerote or any other oil lest corruption and putrefaction occur later.
And apply plasters at the time of your completion of the reduction of the bone, and leave the dislocation uncovered enough that you insert the splint with forceps and use bandages according to the quantity of the dislocation.
And beware with all care that you do not stretch the dislocation with the fracture, for many times foolish physicians have done this and caused harm to their patients through death or consuming corruption or sudden death. Therefore be healthy. And if your splint is light, soft, different from the splints of other fractures.
If the inflammation is large or severe, and you fear any of the unfortunate accidents that we have mentioned, and find pain in the area, then do not place your hand on those stones, but instead use a wrap of hard cloth there and press it with those.
When the inflammation has begun to decrease after one or two days and pus has formed there, then remove the cloth that you had placed on it. Then apply compresses, using those with which we usually treat inflammations, such as tetrafarmacon and similar ones.
You should also remove the bandage and examine the wound every morning and evening until it has healed and is firm. And make sure that the limb is positioned in such a way that pus can flow from there to its lower parts with ease.
If several days have passed and the wound has not healed nor has the pus separated from it, then you should know that there is something wrong here. In this case, it is necessary to examine the wound with a tent (i.e., use a probe or exploratory incision). And of those things that are separated, remove and extract them. But if there are some that cannot be separated and they cause the limb to swell and give pain, then proceed to incise them according to what seems possible to you.
And if pus or ichor (blood) comes out of the wound, this is called stomatitis, or another type of corruption and putrefaction. In this case, you should pause for a moment and consider the care of that which has been described in its chapter.
And as to that in which my speech must be concise and you make your choice: when the bone is crushed, it rises above the limb just like the bone of the foot and helper bones, and similarly those of the large limbs. And do not attempt its attraction nor its extraction because many times death has occurred due to this; rather leave that alone until pus forms, for after about 20 or 30 days it will fall out on its own. Then treat the wound if you can see it, otherwise leave it alone.
Chapter XX
Of the treatment of swelling that occurs at the site of some fracture.
This swelling often occurs at the site of fracture healing, especially near joints, and distorts the shape of the limb. It often prevents the limb from functioning properly.
Then consider if the swelling is recent and apply to it medicines that have astringent properties like aloevera (aloe), sage, myrtle, rue, and similar ones. Take some or all of these and mix them with stiptic wine, egg albumin, or vinegar, then spread this on a piece of linen and bind it tightly over the swelling.
And let this dressing remain undisturbed for several days. Then remove it and apply another one until the swelling has been removed. Or place over that a lead plate (lamina of lead) descended in the middle, for lead has the property of reducing all swellings in the limbs.
But if the swelling has already become hard and it is necessary to remove it carefully, then cut it open along its upper surface, excise the excess tissue, or scrape it away with some curettes until it is removed. Then treat it until it heals.
De la curacio de fractura del cap.
"When a fracture has been restored and yet the limb remains fragile and does not follow its natural course."
"When a bone fracture has been healed, and yet the limb remains fragile, this may happen for various reasons. One of them is too much solution in the liquid and ligaments, which do not follow what is necessary; or due to an excess of tension in the ligaments, preventing nourishment from reaching the limb; or due to excessive embrocation; or due to movement at a time other than its usual one; or due to lack of blood in the patient's body and weakness."
"To cure this, feed the patient and make their heart tender so that blood may be multiplied in them; administer baths; and apply gauze and ointment on it."
"And especially avoid applying pressure on the limb, so that the pressure does not draw away nourishment from it; or continue rubbing it with warm water mixed with pitch, until nutrition returns to its natural state."
"Chapter XXII:"
"Of the cure of broken bones that have healed crookedly, and how to operate on them if necessary."
"When it happens to a limb that has already healed crookedly and unevenly at the site of the fracture and node formation, even though the limb is not entirely useless in terms of its natural operation, do not accept the claim of someone who says that limb was recently fractured."
"But many foolish physicians and restorers have done this in our land, and this operation is most reprehensible, leading to great fear among those who bear its mark, which is deadly."
"But if the limpness and node formation are recent, then it is necessary to rub them with warm water mixed with herbs that soften, such as aleatory flowers, rue seeds, mallows, and similar ones; and to make a plaster with a softening plaster like dulled lead well-made; or to take the juice of rue seeds and mix it with egg yolk or olive oil, and apply it on them; or to take fatty figs and grind them with pigeon dung, and similar medicines that are called amulets for consolidation."
"And sometimes it is dissolved with persistent light friction, especially with the most humid ones, and movement of the limb should be administered at all times in every hour."
"But if the crookedness has already become hardened and turned into bone, and it is necessary to operate on it with iron, then it is necessary to cut off what is above it and dissolve the continuation of the bone, and incise whatever is superfluous from the node that has grown there with fine scissors, and facilitate movement in that limb with diligence and care."
"Chapter XXIII:"
"Of discourse on dislocation."
"Dislocation is the displacement of one of the joints of its location, which hinders movement and alters the shape of the limb, causing great pain and injury."
"So when a dislocation occurs, it is necessary to reduce it as soon as possible and not delay reducing it, for if it is delayed, the joint becomes inflamed and hardened, making the reduction of dislocation difficult."
"And for this reason it is not necessary to move or stretch in the hour of inflammation, because many times it brings about spasm and severe pains."
"But when this happens, it is necessary that you go to the surgery of the sick person and let him rest until the inflammation subsides, and then rub the limb with warm water and oil, and reduce it gently."
"And all limbs should be treated with that which brought about their dislocation."
"And I have already ordered the chapters on dislocation according to what has been stated in fracture; from the most superior part of the body down to the most inferior."
"Chapter XXIV:"
"Of the treatment of dislocation of the lower jaw."
"So when both mandibles are dislocated but not displaced; and the dislocation of both is done in one of two ways: either they are moved slightly from their places and softened a little; or they are completely dislocated, until they are softened at the joint where saliva flows, so that he cannot have it nor close his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped in his throat."
"But when the dislocation of him is slight, then with most dispositions it returns by itself without any cause."
"However, if the dislocation is complete and severe, then gentle reduction should be administered promptly, without delay."
"Then, the minister should hold the patient's head, and the doctor should insert their finger(s) into the dislocation of the jaw inside the patient's mouth, either with one finger if the dislocation is on one side, or both fingers if it's on both sides. The others holding the patient's hands outside should support them evenly; then tell the patient to relax their jaw and let go of any tension from each side. The doctor will then gently reposition the jaw until it returns to its proper place."
"However, if reduction is difficult, especially when both jawbones are dislocated at once, then evaporation with boiled water and oil should be administered to facilitate easy reduction without delay."
"Once reduction is achieved and the mouth is closed but not yet softened, then apply a poultice of linen cloth with wax and rose oil on it. Ensure that it's well melted and softened to facilitate easy application."
"And have the patient sleep on their back with their head between two pillows to prevent them from turning their head either to the right or left side. Do not force them to eat anything until they feel better and their jaws are comfortable again."
"And with this treatment, it should be easy for the patient to open their mouth for eating, drinking and speaking until their jaw is fully healed."
"And if the reduction of two dislocated jawbones is difficult and they do not return to their proper places at once, then it often happens that fevers occur and there is frequent thirst. Sometimes the abdomen becomes quite distended, and sometimes vomiting occurs."
"And when this happens, you should know that it is a sign of great danger. Many times the patient dies within ten days."
"Chapter XXV."
"On the reduction of dislocation of the collarbone and the extremity of the muscle."
Fork not displaced from inside due to its connection with the foot; sometimes it is displaced at the outer part, which is evident by touch.
And the restoration of this is for the patient to lie on their back and extend their arms. Next, tightly press the lock with your palm using strong pressure, as it will return.
And next apply this plaster and powders, and then strengthen that area.
But the end of that which seizes the bone and continues with it is not displaced on any day; therefore it must be reduced and aligned according to what we have said, and according to how you prepare it.
And next apply this plaster, powders, and bandage, and instruct the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until they are healed.
And with this same treatment, the end of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its location.
Chapter .xxvi
Of the reduction of dislocation of the muscle.
Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, one of which is that it is dislocated at the departure of the tendon from the bone.
And the second way is that it is dislocated at the upper part of the muscle, and this is rarely done; and it is not dislocated at the posterior parts by the shoulder; nor is it dislocated at the anterior parts by the nerves.
And more often it is dislocated and protruded at the lower parts near the tendon, especially in those with little flesh, it is easily dislocated; but in those with much flesh, it comes out with difficulty.
And sometimes it happens to some men that by a blow or fall, the muscle becomes inflamed with an incurable inflammation, and is caught in such a way that it has already been dislocated.
Therefore you must first prepare for this before you begin treating him.
And the dislocation of it is recognized when it is at the lower parts near the tendon; therefore you must distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the normal one, for there is a clear difference between them. You will find in the head of the muscle a concavity below the tendon, and the touch of the head of the muscle will be like that of a hen's egg, and the patient cannot put his hand to his ear, nor can he move it in any way.
If it is dislocated at the foot or above, you will immediately find a palpable touch, and it is not hidden.
And this dislocation can be easily reduced when it is fresh and the patient is a child.
And the reduction of it is that the practitioner elevates the patient's hand to the upper part; and with his thumb presses below the tendon of it, and elevates the junction with force upwards to its place, and the practitioner elevates the patient's hand, and extends it upwards; and then he presses it down again for it returns easily.
But if it does not return by what we have said, and many days have passed since the dislocation happened, then the patient must be bathed in hot water and administered a liniment that softens and lubricates like this: decoction of comfrey root, althea, fenugreek, and mallow in water. This should be given to drink.
And then the patient is propped up on his back and pressed down below the tendon of it until it is well engaged between traction and compression, and then the physician places his heel on the sphere (i.e. a round object), and elevates the head of the muscle with force, pulling the patient's hand so that it does not hinder from below, and another assistant holds the patient's head so that it does not hinder from below, for immediately it returns to its place.
And if you wish to reduce it in this way: have present a man who is longer than the patient and on the same side of him; let him place his muscle below the tendon of the dislocated one and elevate the tendon upwards while the patient is suspended in air, and another assistant pulls the patient's hand downwards from below his belly. But if the patient is light in weight, then another cause must be suspended from him to weigh him down, for the dislocation returns immediately.
And it is reduced easily in this way: place on the ground a long pole with a rounded head like a pestle, neither too thick nor too thin, and let the patient be placed upon it; then lay him down upon cloths, and let him stand along the length of the pole, and extend his arm below the other side; and stretch out his body from the other side with force, for the junction returns to its place with great speed.
And if it is difficult to reduce it by all the causes that we have mentioned, then use this cure: take a pole of which the length is two braccia, and the width four digits, and let its thickness be level with the tendon in this way:
"And place lion's skin cloth over the head to prevent contagion of the illness."
"And then pause the movement of the illness, and extend your hand or arm inside the joints, and let the hand rest on the helper's chest."
"And then place your arm on the rung of a ladder according to its width, and extend your hand inside it, and hang the other side from the other side, for the junction is almost complete."
"And when the insertion is completed in every possible way, then pause the trembling with wool of equal quantity; and now apply a prepared plaster of powdered myrrh mixed with albumen of eggs over all the muscle, so that it may be turned upwards, and then strengthen the trembling with appropriate bandage; and let the ligament be turned over the plaster, and the hand of him be attached to his neck, and let it be released, and do not move his hand for seven days."
"And the food of the patient should be paused little by little, until the member is strengthened, because it is easier to heal when it is lighter."
"And then gradually increase the food after seven or nine days and exercise the movement; and when it is firm and not softened anymore, then it is healed."
"But if the junction is displaced many times due to humidity that occurs in him or for other causes, then it is necessary to apply cautery with three traughts in that place, according to what was said before in the chapter of cautery."
"And if even so it is done and after seven days the ligament is loosened and the junction is not firm, and the plaster and bandage are reduced upon him several times, and still it is not firm and caught, and he cannot raise that arm above his head, then know that the nerves of him, which are at the head of the muscle, are either cut or stretched or softened, and know that the junction will never be fixed in its place."
"For the dislocation of that which is done, you must place the foot and knee or the buttocks behind, and the reduction is done with impulse and extension with the hands, until it returns."
"And then apply the other bandage to that one, and care for it until it is healed."
"And if it happens that there is heaviness in the member and slowness in its movement during recovery, then the patient should use baths many times until that heaviness is relieved and returns to its first nature."
"Chapter XXVII."
"On the treatment of dislocation of the hip."
"Do you know that the hip joint is dislocated with difficulty and returns to its place with difficulty? And when it is dislocated forward or backward, it cannot be concealed from you if you examine it visually or by touch according to any figure that may have been dislocated. When you reduce the dislocated hip into its place, this is clearly indicated to you because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm nor reach itself with that muscle."
"And you should cut it and reduce the dislocation before an abscess appears because if an abscess appears, reducing it is difficult, and the wound will not heal completely. And especially when it is dislocated backwards because this type of dislocation is worse than all others, causing great pain, and often death ensues from it."
"And the reduction of it, when it is possible to reduce it, is that the hand should be extended with two hands, and the arm should be abducted, and the doctor's hands should be placed on the joint and around it, and he should push the joint back into place with the ulnar sides of his hands together, or with the edge of his palm so that it returns to its place."
"But if the dislocation is anterior, then it returns as follows: by flexing the hand on its own, strike the joint with the edge of your palm."
"And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then apply strong extension and great force."
"And it is that two assistants should extend the arm, and hold it strongly with two hands so that it is not moved back during extension."
"And moreover, let the arm be rotated medially throughout because a rolled-up bandage or cloth, long enough to wrap around the hand of the patient, should be used."
"And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, he should anoint it with some oil so that it may facilitate the causes which help the lubricity of the joint with ease. And moreover, he should push the joint back into place with strong pressure until it returns."
"And moreover, the reduction of it should be maintained by placing pressure on it with a compress in which stypticum and caustic are mixed with albumen of egg white. And let it be fixed with descending suspensory bandage, and let the arm be suspended from the neck for some days."
"And moreover, it should be released. And then if the joint is formed in its place, then release the bandage and leave it alone."
"And if you see that the joint is not strong, then repeat the compress and bandage, and leave it alone for some days until it is extended. And moreover, release it."
"But if there is gravity towards the reduction of the joint and its position is in movement, then apply humidification in bath and gentle friction, compression until it is alleviated. Or else place a compress on the joint that is moistened with olive oil so that it may be a greasy matter. And moreover, let it be wrapped, and leave it alone over the bone during the day and night." "And then remove that compress and place the limb in a warm bath. And when it is swollen, then rub the joint with moderate friction, and again apply compresses moistened with olive oil once or twice or three times." "while in the bath until it becomes flexible."
"And if you wish, apply to it a moistened and heated cowhide with its border thickened and strap it on tightly. And do this several times until that is humidified and reduced to its proper position."
"Chapter XXVIII."
"Of the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder blade, that is of the joint between the arm and the hand."
"The shoulder blade of the hand sometimes becomes dislocated and its reduction is easy compared to other joints, but nevertheless it should be reduced as soon as possible so that it does not become inflamed or infected."
"And the reduction of the dislocation is this: place the joint of the hand of the patient on a table and have the minister extend the hand of that one. And the doctor should place his hand or palm over the prominence of the joint and push it until it returns to its proper place."
"But it should be considered whether the palm has already been opened to the front of the hand. If so, then have the patient place the back of his hand on a table for extension and reduction. And if the dislocation is preceding, then have the position of the patient's hand inward on the table so that the doctor's hand may fit over that prominence of the joint."
"And then if it returns quickly, that is good. And if not, then apply compresses moistened with oil to reduce the inflammation and leave it alone. And do not repeat this unless there are signs of reduction after several days."
"But the joint moves according to its tortuosity. And do not tell the patient any cause other than that the hand is weakened and cannot move for some reason. Then you should know that the nerves are pinched or torn, and then it is not in its proper place but it must be reduced with cautery near its entrance and strongly done several times until it regains strength."
"So when the dislocation is returned to its proper place, then apply compresses as we have recommended and let it be left alone for five days. And then release it and let it be left alone while exercising the hand of that one."
"But if there is loss of movement and some gravity occurs in it, then apply cold water compresses with friction several times until it is alleviated."
"Chapter XXIX."
"Of the treatment of dislocation of these (fingers)."
"Sometimes these are dislocated entirely."
"And when some of these fingers are dislocated on the back or front of the hand, then straighten the finger and reduce its dislocation with your thumb and index finger until it returns to place."
"And after that, support the head of the finger; suspend it from the part where it is dislocated for two days."
"And next suspend that one and extend him so that his right side may be equated in that same day."
"And when it is time, read this second account to him and do not cease to untie him during the day and exercise him with movements, and tie him at night; and do this for a few days until he is straight."
"And do the same if it is dislocated at the navel of the hand, and read this account to that part and make the first operation your initial action until he is healed."
"And similarly do this when other parts are dislocated."
"Chapter XXX."
"Of the cure of dislocation of the vertebrae of the back."
"When dislocation occurs in any of the vertebrae of the back or neck, and some of them are removed from their places, then there is no cure for it because death ensues."
"And the sign of this is that the evacuation of the sick person is involuntary and he cannot retain it; many times some members are softened on one side or both sides of the body, or both arms or one of them; or one vertebra is removed from its place, because many times they are removed and many times their removal is made in four directions."
"Therefore that one is already removed from the parts behind and it is called 'gelbozitat'."
"But the cure for this is to consider if the 'gelbozitat' occurs in childhood, because then there is no cure nor healing of it at all."
"But in those cases that occur by chance or by percussion or by similar causes, the Ancients have already spoken at length about the ways of cure with their words, which is the most profitable; but I have abbreviated that one because a little excused the excess of it, due to my proximity to my intention of exposition, with which I have exposed and formed this from that diverse instrument with which I will show this and explain it."
"And only that one is cured which occurs properly at the back with what I have mentioned."
"And it is that the sick person should lie on his face close to a wall and be extended with his hands alongside him so that his foot is not injured."
"And properly a straight stick should be placed on the ground at the end of the foot near the head of the sick person, and another stick on either side of his feet at the other end of the foot."
"And the minister should hold one stick firmly without letting it go out of place; and another minister should hold the other according to that form."
"And properly wrap the head of the sick person with soft cloths and tie them firmly; and extend one end of the cloth to the stick that is placed near his head and attach it there; and properly stretch another cloth over his hips on either side of him and place it below his thighs; and properly adjust all the cloths and attach them to the other stick that is placed below his feet."
"And properly each minister should extend the cloth to its place on the stick; and let not the two sticks and their cloths be moved from their places where they were placed, but yet not fixed as we have said."
"And the doctor should place his palms on the back with strength until it returns, or he should place one table there and properly adjust his feet on the table until it returns."
"But if it does not return by this method, then take a table whose width or length is about three brazas, and dig in the wall that we have said is near the sick person a place where one end of the table can be inserted." "And properly place the middle of the table on the back; and the doctor should place his feet on the other end and stretch well until the back is contracted and returns to its place."
"And if you wish, open with a turn using your hand; and it is that you should lie on the ground near the head of the sick person between the two sticks at the end of his foot, each stick being one palm long, and already done in each stick a groove where the cord can run through, and each should be firmly planted in the ground so that they are not moved."
"And let there be another round stick on which the cord is placed, and it should be turned in the two grooves of the two sticks."
"And at one end of it is a groove in which the stick is formed, whose length is one palm with what has been turned; and the other two sticks have the same."
"And properly stretch the cloths that you have stretched on the foot of the sick person in the groove that is placed near his head, and the cloths that you have stretched over his hips in the cord that is placed below his feet."
"And properly place one minister on each cord who should turn the cord with his hand; and the doctor should straighten the back as we have said."
"And properly after the back has returned and the place is straightened, then you should put dry plaster with alum of egg white, and also cotton; and properly place it on the plaster like a table whose width is about three fingers or around those, and its length is as much as takes up the place of the inflammation, and on top of the back."
"And properly tie it with cloths that we have mentioned, and use the sick person subtly nutritious food until he is healed."
"And if there is still some inflammation in the place at the end of healing, then medicines that soften and cleanse should be administered with the application of the table for a long time, which we have recommended; and already lead plate has been applied to that place."
"And sometimes inflammation occurs at the end of the spine of the two hips, which is caused by that dislocation; and it is that bone that already inflames so much that there should not be any pressure applied to it with this medicine, for strong force will cause your death."
Chapter xxxi.
Of the treatment of a dislocated hip joint.
Know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the thigh muscle should never be dislocated except in dislocation alone, and it does not happen as those that happen with other joints of small movement and concavity.
And the joint of the hip is dislocated in four ways: it is dislocated inwardly at its inner parts, or outwardly at its outer parts, or anteriorly at its front parts, or posteriorly at its rear parts.
It is most commonly dislocated inwardly and less often anteriorly or posteriorly.
A sign of its dislocation inwardly is that when you stretch the healthy leg against the sick leg, it becomes longer and the knee is more prominent than in the healthy one; the sick person cannot bend his foot towards the shin, and this place where the shin should be pressed against feels numb due to a blood blister having formed there.
The sign of that which happens with dislocation at its outer parts is that the symptoms of it are opposite to this symptom.
The sign of that which happens with dislocation at its front parts is that when the sick leg is stretched out completely, it does not bend again due to pain in the knee; and if he tries to go forward, he cannot do so; his urine is retained and his gait is limping, and his walking is done on the heel.
"He who has experienced dislocation of the posterior hip joint will not extend his leg nor bend it forward without grimacing; the thigh is shortened compared to the other, and the joint is softened, with the head of the bone displaced in that region."
"If you reduce the species of this dislocation by considering whether it is old and chronic, and if you then attempt reduction according to its position, but there is no improvement in that treatment, then further traction is not necessary for such a case."
"If in the case where the dislocation is recent and belongs to one of the four species of dislocation, you will have need to reduce the joint, extend the hip internally and externally, move it to the right and left, for often it returns quickly and no other treatment is necessary."
"If it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare a powerful traction and extend the thigh from its outer side, either by itself or by a band which is tied above the hip joint; and another assistant should extend the arm of that person upwards so that they may grasp his toes with their hands; and finally, strongly pull the band downwards over the sacrum, while another assistant holds the end of the band."
"And let this extension be from the outer side to the angle at the head of the femur, or from behind to the trochanter."
"And let this extension be done all at once while the patient is lying on their back and holding their breath."
"And this type of traction is common to all four species."
"Therefore, if the dislocation returns with what we have said, it is good. But if not, then according to its own nature it will be necessary to apply the specific treatment for each species."
"In the reduction of its own kind, when it is dislocated and the dislocation is towards the inside, then let the patient be placed on their left side. Then place the band over the sacrum at that point where it lies between the head of the femur and the point which is lateral to the greater trochanter. And extend the band upwards from the side of the hip joint to its upper limit."
"And then another assistant shall strongly grasp the thighs of the patient and gently pull on the dislocation towards its outer side with a sudden extension, for that will return it to its proper place."
"And this is the easiest method by which this member can be reduced compared to other species."
"But if it remains on its outer side and does not obey the entrance with this method alone, then both hips of the patient must be tied together with a strong, light band placed above both ankles and knees."
"And let the length of each be four digits, and let the band be extended more on the side of the dislocation by two digits."
"And then have the patient suspended from a beam overhead and let him hang downwards. And let the length of it from the ground be two cubits."
"And then command a strong youth to grasp the head of the thighbone and let him suspend himself with the patient. And let another youth forcibly push on the thighbone, for the joint will quickly return to its proper place."
"But in the reduction of its own kind, when it is dislocated outwards, let the patient lie on their stomach as we have recommended previously. And let the band be placed properly over the side of the dislocation and over the foot."
"And then two beams shall be placed, one at the foot of the patient and the other at the head. And another beam fitted to the middle of the thigh shall be placed upon which wet cloths are wrapped so that the patient is not hurt by it being between his thighs, for otherwise the extension towards its outer side would be impaired."
"And then each assistant shall extend their respective parts and the physician with his hand shall guide the reduction according to the art."
"But when the dislocation is towards its front, then let the limb be gently extended and this is how it is done on the thigh. And the physician places his right palm over the hip joint of the patient, and then grasping that with one hand he extends it outwards to the point where it joins the knee."
"But when the dislocation is towards its back, then let not the limb be extended outwards and let it be raised up from the ground. For it should rest on a hard surface, just as it should if its ankle were dislocated outwards, according to what we have said concerning that joint resting on two ankles; and thus he lies on his face with the bandages extended as we have described."
"And compression must be administered by placing a board upon the place where the joint is dislocated."
"Therefore, when the reduction is completed as it should be - and the sign of its reduction will not be hidden from you, which is when you extend both thighs of the patient, and when you move those joints and the patient flexes his thigh and expands it without difficulty, then you shall know that the limb has been returned properly. And then you shall apply two splints and bind them with a bandage so that the ankle does not move in any direction; and keep the patient at rest for three or four days."
"And then untie the bandages and splints and compare one thigh with the other."
"Therefore, if you move those joints freely, then you shall know that the dislocation is healed, and then let the patient go."
"But if you see any sign of laxity, then return and splint it again, and extend it according to your first method for three days."
"And then untie that and let the patient walk slowly for a few days until he is strengthened."
"Chapter XXXII"
"Of the treatment of dislocation of the knee joint."
"The knee joint is dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated outwards, inwards, and outwards more than backwards; but it cannot be dislocated forwards."
"The sign of dislocation of the knee joint is that when you tell the patient to apply their thigh against it, they know that the knee joint is dislocated."
"And the reduction of all kinds of its dislocation is that you make the patient lie on their right side so that they can extend their thigh if possible. Then adhere your two hands to his face and place his foot between your feet. And then press his knee joint with your palms, retaining it there between your fingers with force, and another assistant shall extend his foot until the knee joint returns to its place."
"The sign of reduction of the knee joint is that his thigh adheres to it with ease and without difficulty."
"And then splint that and make the thigh adhere to it. And then bind them together with a bandage for three or four days, and then untie them."
"And let not the patient walk for several days until he is healed and strengthened."
"But if reduction of it to you is difficult, then apply strong extension with the bandages mentioned in the previous chapter on the treatment of hip dislocation."
"Chapter 33."
"About the treatment of ankle dislocation."
The ankle sometimes becomes displaced by slight injury and sometimes becomes dislocated entirely; this dislocation occurs either inwards or outwards.
And the sign of ankle dislocation is that it often swells at the part where it has been dislocated.
But the treatment of ankle dislocation is easy: namely, that it should be gently reduced and returned to its place without difficulty.
But in the treatment of ankle dislocation when it is entirely dislocated, one should make the patient lie on their back and have someone strong and capable press on the middle part of the heel from behind.
And thus you should hold with your right hand on the upper part of the heel and with your left hand on the lower part near the ankle bone.
And then pull the heel towards you with your right hand and press on it twice with your left hand, and extend it with your left hand; then push the sole of the foot up against your knee without any effort.
And perform this twice as we have said before
Then push the sole of the foot up against your knee for the third time and you are at the ankle bone.
Therefore if the foot returns in one or two attempts by this method, and if the foot swells, that is good; but if not, then repeat the operation until the foot returns.
But if you are unable to perform the reduction of the foot by this method that we have recommended, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground and take a strong stick and place it between the toes of the affected foot, binding the end with cloth so that the foot does not slip.
And then the assistant should hold the patient's toes, and another assistant should extend the foot with their hands or with a bandage placed around the heel of the foot; and each assistant should extend against extension of his own part, while keeping the stick extended between the toes of the affected foot, so that the skin of the foot is not drawn towards its outer parts during extension.
And then the physician reduces the dislocation with his hands, while another assistant holds the healthy foot at its outer parts because the dislocation returns easily.
And when the dislocation returns and you confirm that the reduction is complete, then apply plasters and bind the foot strongly with bandages, and tie it to the knee.
And be careful or guard against the nerves which are located behind the heel bone, because if you bind too tightly in that area it may cause pain and injury.
Then leave him for two days or three; and if the bandage becomes damp, change it.
"And on the third day or fourth, untie it and forbid the patient from consuming wine for 40 days." "But if it is necessary to go before that space, there is no guarantee that the dislocation will not be dissolved and corrupted, especially because it does not receive treatment."
"And if an abscess occurs from the cautery, then you must apply to its cavity what was described earlier in this narrative, namely another place for cure and embrocation, until it is removed."
"Chapter XXXIV."
"On the treatment of dislocation of the said hips."
"It is necessary that one who has been dislocated be laid down gently with little extension without moving him; and that it should not be difficult, bending his knees slightly."
"But if the dislocation is in some of the joints of the thighbone, then you should cause the patient to sit with his bad leg stretched out on the ground or on a table, and he should remain thus as if walking."
"And then you should stand on one leg, and place your thighbone on what seems like the joints, and then press it with your foot with force until it returns to its proper position. Be careful that it has returned correctly and does not appear at the prominence of the joint."
"And then place the thigh of that leg on a table that takes up all the leg, with two ends, and stretch it moderately and firmly for three days; then remove the splint and let him rest from walking for several more days until he is strengthened and his recovery is assured."
"Chapter XXXV."
"On the types of dislocation that are done with pleasure or with fracture or each one separately."
"When some of these causes occur, and you strive to treat the dislocation and restore it, often you will meet with death."
"And therefore it is not fitting that anyone should presume on the treatment of such cases, but rather one who is skilled in the art, experienced, merciful and compassionate, careful, not hasty or presumptuous; and let him use medicines at first that will only draw out putrid matter, and leave the patient to divine judgment, not hoping for health from destruction, but rather alleviation of the disease, where there appears some hope." "And therefore strive at once to reduce it at the beginning of the cause before putrid matter forms."
"And then if the limb returns as we desire, then administer regimen that will draw out putrid matter and cure the inflammation with what is suitable for him of dry remedies."
"And if dislocation occurs with fracture and the bones are separated, then strive to reduce them, doing what we have said in simple cases that precede this."
"And guard and avoid entering into the paths of fear according to what has been preceded by my prediction; for this is better for you that you owe your Creator, and more lasting for your glory, and more beneficial for your true body in its time." "So end the words of Albucasis, may God bless them perfectly." "Amen."
