"Oh, children, since I have completed for you this book, which is the last of the science of medicine, according to its perfection and conclusion, and through its explanations and statements, it seems to me that I complete it for you with this treatise on surgery."
"For the practice of surgery is much neglected in our region and time, such that it is almost lost to science, its traces are obscured; and there remain only a few small descriptions of it in the books of the Ancients, which are changed over time and lead astray those who follow them, because their intentions are unclear and the strength of this art is diminished."
"It seems to me that I should revive this (science) with an ordered treatise, in accordance with the method of exposition and explanation and abbreviation; and that it should come accompanied by illustrations of cautery instruments and other tools used in surgery, for addition to the explanations and preparation of them, which is necessary."
"But the reason why there is no good practitioner of surgery in our time is because the art of medicine is extensive, and its practitioner must first be well-versed in the science of anatomy, which teaches the arrangement of the members and their shapes, their connections and separations; and have knowledge of bones, nerves, muscles, their number and proportion; and of the pulsating veins and quiet ones, and the locations of their outlets."
"And therefore Hippocrates said that 'in name it is great, but in deed small,' especially in surgery."
"But as we have already said at the beginning of this book, whoever is not knowledgeable about what we have said regarding anatomy will surely fall into error, which causes many deaths among people, as I have seen happen too often, since some are formed in this science but depart from it without knowledge or experience."
"For I saw a foolish and inexperienced doctor accidentally cut an escrophilus tumor in the neck of a woman, and cut some arteries in her neck causing her to bleed profusely and die suddenly."
"And I saw another doctor who tried to remove a stone from the bladder of a man in whom it had formed, and while doing so he tore a piece of the bladder, causing that man to die on the third day."
"And I myself had already predicted that this would happen, and knew beforehand that he would die because of the size of the stone and the condition of the patient."
"And I saw another doctor who received payment from one of our dukes to practice surgery, and attempted to reset the thighbone of a black man who had suffered a fracture there. The doctor prepared himself with ignorance, reset the fracture on top of the joint without leaving room for breathing, using pillows and bolsters with great force."
"And he bound him up according to his desires, and applied poultices, and left him thus for several days commanding that he not be unbound. And so it was done until the thigh and knee became inflamed, and this resulted in destruction."
"And I was called to him, and prepared to remove the bandages, and thus tranquility was restored and he was freed from his pain."
"But nevertheless the corruption had already become established in the limb, so that I could not restrain it, and corruption continued to spread through the limb until the patient perished."
"And I saw another doctor who punctured a cancerous abscess and within a few days it became ulcerated and greatly worsened upon its lord."
"This is because the caustic humor of cancer is melancholic, and therefore it should not be treated with iron alone, but rather that part of the body which suffers from it should be cauterized."
"And therefore, my children, it is necessary for you to distinguish between two kinds of operations with the hand: one is an operation that brings about health, and another that involves danger in the greatest positions."
"And I have already mentioned this in every part of this book where operation is associated with error and danger; therefore it is necessary for you to guard against this and leave it alone, so that foolish people do not find a way to speak and dishonor you."
"And therefore take up your weapons with solicitude and protection from God, and approach illnesses with skillfulness and steadfastness."
"And follow the best way by the grace of God to obtain health and worthy success, and leave behind terrible illnesses that are difficult to cure, and wield your weapons against what causes you fear, so that your trust in your faith and in your name does not abandon you: for more remains to your glory, both here on earth and hereafter, and your sanctity."
"Because I have already discussed in some of my writings:" "No medicus medicine malae, ne malignos medicos nominem."
"And I have already divided this book into three parts."
"Beginning of the division of the book, and first of the first part." "The first chapter arranged concerning the head, regarding the forms of instruments and the irons for cauterization, and what is necessary in operation."
"The division of the second part." "The second chapter, concerning incision and perforation, cupping glasses, poultices, extraction of arrows and similar objects, all arranged according to the forms of instruments."
"The third chapter, concerning reduction and dislocation, and the cure of torsion and similar things; arranged according to the headings, regarding the forms of instruments."
"It is necessary for me to say what are the qualities of those who perform cauterization and those who receive it, and in what condition cauterization should be prohibited."
"Therefore I say that the discourse on the quality of the cauterizer and cauterized is long and prolix, subtle by science, and secret; many wise men have spoken about it, and they disagree among themselves, but for me to speak about all their discourses would be too lengthy."
"And therefore I say that cauterization is beneficial for all conditions universally, whether they have matter or not, except for two conditions, which are those without matter."
"In the condition that is dry and without matter, there is disagreement; for some said that cauterization is beneficial in this case, while others said the opposite, that cauterization is not suitable in an illness that is caused by quality and dryness, because fire has the qualities of heat and dryness, and it would not be appropriate for an illness that is dry and without matter to be healed with something that is hot and dry."
"And he says that which contradicts this, that cauterization is beneficial in all dry and hot diseases that occur in the bodies of men, for when you compare the body of man and its humidity to the composition of fire, you find the body of man cold."
"And I say by the speech of that one, that I have already experienced this many times."
"But it is not necessary that there come upon this that which has already been said and practiced in the chapter of cauterization by the last exercise, and to know the diversity of the composition of men and the disposition of diseases in their members, and the causes of these, and the accidents of them, and the space of time for those."
"But in other compositions there is no fear on you, and especially in hot and humid diseases, for all the physicians are agreed about those, and they are not disagreed in the judgment with cauterization in those."
"And know, son, that the secret of cure by cauterization with fire and its goodness is about cauterization with burning medicine, for fire is simple, whose action does not extend except to the member which is cauterized, and it does not reach another member joined with it without little harm."
"But the action of burning medicine extends to that which is near it in members, and often it brings disease into the member which is difficult to heal, and often it extinguishes."
"But fire, because of its sublimity and goodness of its substance, does nothing but superfluously. And it is already known to us by experiment and long service in studying the art about the truth of causes; and for that reason I am excused from lengthening my speech. But if it were not that it was not read in my book in this place to you secretly hidden with fire, and the quality of its operation in bodies and of its expulsion by which it expels diseases, with philosophical demonstration, which would serve to clarify your thoughts."
"And know, son, that they disagree about the time in which it is convenient to perform cauterization, and they consider the best time to be in spring."
"And I say that cauterization is convenient at all times, because the harm caused by the time of accident is submerged in the benefit of what is attracted by cauterization, and especially if the cauterization is for pains or necessary remedies for severe and chronic diseases, which cannot tolerate delay because it is feared that those may come to harm, which is greater than little harm entering through time."
"And also do not think, son, that only the common people and foolish physicians estimate this, for those diseases which are cured by cauterization are not always suitable at all times, and they consider that consequence."
"And the cause is not as they think for this reason, because cauterization is only in place of medicine which alters the complexion and dries up the moistures which are the cause of pains."
"But nevertheless, cauterization is superfluous on top of medicine because of the violence of its power and virtue of its operation and greatness of its lord."
"And it is possible that its disease returns at some hour of time, according to the complexion of the sick and the location of its disease, and the power of fire and what has been prepared in the body from the aggregation of superfluities in it, and what has been acquired by it in its acquisition through foods and similar causes; but the disease in which cauterization has been administered is a subtle disease in a member with few superfluities and moistures, thus as cauterization of the tooth for pain and similar to that one, it is possible that this pain does not return, but it happens rarely."
"And moreover common speech is that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine, and it is true speech, not because they understand in it what they think, for they believe that there is no cure that profits with medicine nor with any other cause before cauterization."
"And the cause is contrary to this; and the intention that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine is only when administering the methods of cure in certain diseases, and those medicines do not help, and therefore cauterization is administered at the end of the cause, and it profits there." "And from now on I say that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the intention which common people and most foolish physicians understand."
"And they said in ancient times that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the sublimity of its substance."
"And they said that the place of cauterization does not matter, which is not absolutely true, because I have already proven and demonstrated that this does not happen except in some bodies without others, and cauterization with it is good and better than with iron as they said; but however when you perform cauterization with fire with gold, it is not declared to you, because it is ignited according to the quantity that you want due to the roughness of gold, and because it prepares to receive friction; and if you adjust it on ignition, the gold melts by the fire, and some sheets fall into the fire so that the artisan does not catch them by his occupation."
"And for this reason cauterization is performed with iron more lightly and more appropriately to the rectitude of operation."
"And I have already arranged this chapter on cauterization according to chapters, and have arranged those of the head within the weights, so that later requesting it you will find what you want from it."
The first chapter
This cauterization confers humidity and coldness upon the affected organ whose two causes are: its sodden nature and abundance of flux called catarrh, flowing from the head down to the eyes and ears, and causing sleepiness, toothache, sore throat, and universally all diseases that arise from coldness, such as paralysis, apoplexy, and similar afflictions.
The procedure for this cauterization is as follows: first, you should command the patient to be purged with a laxative medicine that clears the head, for three or four nights, depending on the severity of their illness, age, and usual habits.
And then you should command him to shave his head with a razor and perform that seat between your thighs on a padded bench, and let him place his feet upon his own chest.
And then you should place the palm of your hand close to the opening of his nose between his eyes. Yet nevertheless, when your hand has reached the middle of the wound, mark that spot with a thread, and then light the olive-oil cautery whose form is as follows:
Then place that upon the spot marked with thread, in such a manner that it descends slowly, so that your hand is gradually constrained, and you turn it around.
And then gently lift your hand up and look at the spot; if you see any of the bone now uncovered, about as much as the grain of an ergot, then lift your hand up again. If it does not return to its previous position with the iron, use another one until such time as you can see that which I have mentioned to you.
Then take a little salt and dissolve it over the spot and leave it for three days.
Then place it on the edge of the wound, folded in half, and leave it there until the fire's crust is destroyed. Then dress the wound with tetrafarmacon ointment until it is healed.
"And it was said that when the plague remains open, it's better to raise the arm for greater healing."
"And some of them said that the backbone should be cauterized inside the bone, and the cautery should be held until some part of the spongy tissue of the bone is burnt."
"And then it should be scraped with something sharp to expose the burnt bone, and then it should be dressed [i.e., treated]."
"And others said that when the cautery reaches the end [of the bone], it should be pressed strongly onto the bone until it cracks, and this is the method of small alveoli:" "And they believe that from that place, the fumes of the head expire."
"And let the wound be kept open for a long time, and then it should be treated until it is consolidated [healed]."
"But I have not seen these two kinds of cautery performed on anyone, except in some cases out of fear; and therefore, it seems to me that it is better with health when it occurs. For the head is weakened by a solution of continuity from this cause, as we have witnessed in other members, and especially when the head of the sick person is feverish by nature."
"And the first kind of cautery seems to me to be safer and better. And that one, with that work, is good for health."
"Chapter according to [Matthew] xxviii, verse vi."
"On cauterizing the head."
If chronic and prolonged pain occurs in the entire head of a patient, who uses various remedies such as ointments, poultices, and bandages, but finds no relief even after cautery treatment has been applied, then consider whether the patient's constitution is strong by nature. If the pain is not severe or troublesome, apply another cautery to alleviate it slightly. He burned him on the horn of his head with a hot iron cautery until the vein was severed. Cut the vein and expose the quantity we have mentioned until it touches bone. Then cauterize it with a hot iron at the back of the head where it is called 'the vessel' â€” which is where a cupping glass is placed. Also alleviate your hand in this manner and do not expose the bone because this cautery causes less pain than all other cauteries of the head.
And I say that this cautery should be applied in its place, for the cautery with which one burns the horns of the head and the back of the neck is more subtle than that used to burn the middle part of the head. This is how it is done.
Chapter Headings:
Burning for old migraine
When there is a sudden pain in the head, or it spreads into the ear, if medicines that relieve headaches are not effective and other treatments have been tried without success, then cauterization should be performed using either an acid cautery or a hot iron.
To perform cauterization with an acidic cautery, take a pennyworth of salt and dissolve it in vinegar. Then make an incision with a sharp scalpel at the location of the pain on the temple, so that it is hidden under the hair.
Next, press on the wound with a clean cloth for several hours to prevent bleeding. Then remove the cloth after three hours and wipe away any remaining salt. Leave the wound uncovered for two or three days until it heals completely.
"Then also cure that wound within until it heals."
"And if you wish, do this: prepare some burning medicines which I have written in the second treatise on burning medicines."
"The manner of cauterization with iron is as follows: ignite the cautery, of which this is the form:"
"And it is called 'closed nails', for its head is like the shape of a nail with some curvature, and in the middle of it there is a slight prominence."
"And then place [the cautery] on the location of the pain, and hold your hand steady so that the fire is not extinguished, and move the iron gently but quickly."
"And if the quantity of fire that is extinguished by the breath is equal to its size, raise your hand so that the artery is not extinguished, so that there may not come a flow of blood."
"And then dip it in saltwater and place it on the location, and leave it there for three days. Then apply a poultice with edges, and also treat it with an ointment until it is healed."
"And if you wish to cauterize the extremity of the wound according to the cautery method, be careful not to cut into an artery in this migraine properly not ancient."
"Chapter Four."
"Of cauterization of an ancient migraine."
"When you are treating a migraine with what we have said about the previous treatment and the divisions of illnesses, and it does not improve, and sometimes because the illness is such that it does not succumb to the first cauterization with medicine or fire cautery, then you must heat the cautery iron until it is red-hot. Then place your hand on the location of the pain with a line of length equal to half its width, or more if necessary; and pause for a while and press that upon the artery so that it enters into the bone."
"But it is necessary for you to guard against the continuation of the jawbone, which is moved by mastication, and that the nerve is not burned nor the nerves that move it, and that there be no spasm."
"And if it is about the care and caution of blood flow from the artery that is opened, because there is fear in opening it, especially for those who do not know what they are doing and are not studious nor experienced; leave the operation to him at the beginning."
"And I will come with a reminder of the method of dealing with accidental blood flow from an artery according to its manner in its place in this book."
"And if you see this illness not abating after this cautery and you see the patient's condition tolerable, then cauterize it in the middle of the head as we have described, and treat the ulcer until it is healed."
"And if you wish to administer the cautery we have mentioned in the chapter on the division of an artery with cautery having two points, it is better and more efficient cauterization."
"Chapter Five."
"Of cauterization of ear pains."
"When there is pain in the ear due to friction and it is treated with laxatives and other methods mentioned in the division, but the pain persists, then heat the cautery, which is called 'puncta,' of which this is the shape:"
"And approximate the cautery to the ignition, and move it around the entire ear as if it were rolling, or in the circuit of each one if the pain is in one." "Go along with the cautery to the root of the ear little by little until you feel the location with your tent."
"And if the cautery is applied at ten points around the entire ear, then press it there and treat those locations until they are healed."
"Chapter Six."
"Of cauterization of torticollis."
"Torticollis that is treated with cautery is only of the kinds that come from a vein, according to what we have said in the divisions of illnesses."
"Avoid cauterization of the kind that comes from dryness or spasm of the nerve."
"When you treat that type of tortoise with herbs and caperberries and garlic, and your treatment doesn't help, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, another a little below their temple, and the third at the junction of both lips."
"And place your cautery on the opposite side of where the wound appears, for healing occurs only where it seems healthy."
"And the method of cauterization is to cauterize with the cautery in the right corner at the tip of the ear, then above it a little on the horn of the head, and on the temple, the length of which should be according to the length of your finger's thickness, and place your hand on the cautery until its heat has burned through half of the thickness of the skin."
"And this is the shape of the cautery, which belongs to the barber-surgeon, whose shape appears before you on this table." "But even more subtly is what you can see here; and sometimes it's better to cut away excess flesh rather than cauterize."
"And similarly treat the location with that which is presented before you until it heals."
"Chapter VII."
"Regarding the cauterization of ancient apoplexy."
"When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it with what we have said but your treatment does not help and the patient has no fever, then cauterize them in four places: on all of their head's horns; and with a cautery at the middle of the head, as we have said; and cauterize behind the ear." "And the manner of cauterization is made according to what has been said above."
"And it should also be cauterized on the mouth of the stomach, and it is more recent; and similarly treated with what you are doing."
"Chapter VIII."
"Regarding cauterization for the removal of a stain."
"It is necessary to give the patient at the beginning large jars and pills made from powdered myrrh."
Approach and shave the head of the patient completely, and place on the crown the plaster described in the treatise of plasters.
Place that one several times, for this is the method of cauterizing And do thus according to the method already mentioned.
And if it does not heal well like that, then do three cauterizations on the final part of their head, which should be descending from the highest part of the head to the lowest part of the neck. Between each cautery place the thickness of a finger, and promptly cover the cautery with what has been produced
But if you add and the illness is tolerating it, then do the cautery in the middle; and if you want more addition, then cauterize on both horns.
Cover that until it heals; and let the cauteries be olive-sized according to the shape given beforehand
Chapter IX
Of cauterization for paralysis and softening of the whole body.
When you are proceeding with moistening the head with herbs and water as we have said, and when you have shaved the head of the patient, then cauterize in this way: cauterize first on the middle of the head, and then cauterize on all the horns of the head, and cauterize on the final part of it, and make three cauteries on the spinal bones of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the illness of softening of the body that has persisted and the illnesses are tolerating and the illness is strong, then cauterize in this way: cauterize with four cauteries on the spinal bones of the back, and afterward cauterize on whatever point has been fought from the liver, and raise your hand. And promptly cover that until it heals; and let this be olive-sized cautery.
Chapter X
Of cauterization for epilepsy
An epileptic is not cauterized unless the epilepsy is due to phlegm.
And therefore it is necessary to moisturize the brain of him at the beginning with herbs and with the other cure which we have said in the division when the patient is great and is tolerating except for the exception of medications.
And if it is a child who does not tolerate medications, then administer gargarisms and mastigators for moistening the brain before, for several days, with moderation of food.
And promptly shave the head of the patient, and promptly cauterize in this way: with one cautery on the middle of the head according to the manner previously described, and with another cautery on the occupit of it, and on each horn of the head cauterize. And if the patient is strong and is tolerating, then promptly cauterize in this way with cauteries as we have said, having paralysis and softening of the body on the spinal bones of the neck and the spinal bones of the back.
And let it be olive-sized cautery according to what has been stated previously.
But if the patient is a child, then pause with subtle cauteries according to this manner.
"Chapter XI."
"On cauterizing melancholy."
"If the causes of melancholy are corrupt humidity and thick phlegm, then cauterize that area with the cauteries mentioned in the case of paralysis."
"And if the cause of melancholy is declining excess leading to it, and the body of the patient is humid, then they should drink what clears the brain according to what has been mentioned earlier in this section."
"Then shave the head of the patient, and properly make a poultice from crow's foot over its circumference, and also apply that poultice in the middle of the head."
"And let the patient sweat profusely, and be held down on all sides."
"Then apply a liniment poultice; afterwards, it is worth rubbing with sheep's fat." "And warm that over the fire with gentle heat for as long as it endures." "Then put that on the middle of the head in a circle and let the patient rest until they feel warmed."
"And do this with the patient once every week until the boil is healed; or if you wish, cauterize it making small punctures according to how large it is, but holding your hand thus arranged: this is a type of cautery that moistens the brain evenly."
"And then apply that poultice wrapped in linen cloth or wool grease."
"Chapter XII."
"On cauterizing descending water in the eye."
"When you have recognized the beginning of water in the eye through the signs that I have mentioned earlier in this section, then begin and give the patient to drink what clears the head, and keep him from all moisture."
"And let him/her sit in a bath of hot water for several days."
"And then command the patient to shave his/her head, and cauterize it with a cautery in the middle of the head; and also cauterize it with two cauteries over both temples if there is an onset of water rising in both eyes, or on one side if it is just beginning in one eye."
"Incise with a cautery all the veins and arteries that lie on the nape of the neck, and let the incisions be of this length in the latitude of the temples."
"And guard against fluxes of blood when cauterizing. And if you see blood flowing, stop it with some medication that is available to you."
"And I will come with knowledge for extracting arteries and for excising them and for cautioning against fluxes of blood."
"Sometimes it is cauterized on both sides of the neck between the two bones with two deeply productive cauteries."
"Chapter XIII."
"On cauterizing old tears."
"When tears from the eyes are abundant and it is verified that this is superfluous fluid blood, then cauterize it with the cautery that we have described in the chapter on the beginning of water rising in the eyes, and also with a cautery in the middle of the head and with two cauteries on either side of the temples, and with two cauteries on either side of the neck." "And if you need to add more, then cauterize it also on both sides of the cheekbone at the end of the eyebrow with a small cautery."
"Chapter XIV."
"On cauterizing foul breath from the nose."
"When you treat it with what we have said in this section and your treatment does not help, then prepare for him to drink the decoction of cochlearia plants for three nights; and also shave his head, and cauterize it with a medium-sized cautery made from olive oil." "And also cauterize it with a clove cautery with two cauteries above the eyebrows on either side of the hair."
"And be careful not to incise the artery."
"And this is how you make the clove cautery:"
"Chapter XV."
"For cauterization of softening eyelids."
When the eyelid becomes softened due to illness or humidity, cauterize that eyelid with this lunar cautery; and this is how it is done:
If you, cauterize that on both eyebrows with a small cautery in every part, and they are elongated from the temples. And the length of each cautery should be according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
"And do not press too hard on the cautery with your hand, but rather according to how much the third portion of the eyelid is adhered."
"Chapter XVI."
"When the hairs on the edge of the eyelid become converted to parts within and stick out, cauterize the eyelid with a hot iron."
"When the hairs of the eyelid become converted into parts within so as to stick out the eyelid, cauterize them in either of two ways: either with a hot iron or with medicine that burns."
"If cauterizing with fire, command the patient beforehand that they let their eyelashes grow out as those who are to be plucked, until they are lengthened and hardened; and if any of them are stuck together at their roots, then afterwards you should bind the eyelids with a bandage so that they may not be harmed until the hairs have grown out."
"Therefore when they are grown out and hardened, then place the head of the patient on a table, raise up the eyelid of the eye to be cauterized with a probe, having made the probe like the shape of a leaf of a mulberry tree, and its beginning close to the hairs."
"And likewise place cotton dipped in alum or in mucus of snail on the eye."
"And now ignite the cautery of which this is the form."
"And now cauterize the figure you have marked, little by little, in several viewings, until the surface of the sinew appears like a leaf of myrtle, entirely apparent."
"The sign of the health of your work is that you see the eyelid of the wound contract and its hairs rise up around the puncture."
"And then lift your hand away and leave it alone for three days. And afterwards pause on the wound's edge until the scar has healed." "Then heal it with unguent until it is healed."
"But if the hairs return for some reason and the eyelid becomes softened again, then perform the cautery once more just as you did initially."
"But if the hairs do not remain on the eyelid, then cauterize it until it is raised to its natural position and covered over so that the hairs do not again touch the wound."
"But when performing cautery with medicine that burns, command the patient to raise their eyelashes until they are extended and covered over. And afterwards a bandage of cloth in the shape of a myrtle leaf should be made."
"And then take some known soap and live wax melted together. And quickly mix those ingredients well and make haste so that it does not cool down. And afterwards spread that over the cloth which was made in the shape of a myrtle leaf and place that on one eyelid or both. And leave the wound's edge wrapped in egg white, and the patient's head should be elevated."
"And leave your finger on the medicine and press it gently without moving it until the patient feels the bite of the medicine, for its bite is like that of fire."
"And when you perceive that the burning sensation has ceased, then remove the medicine and wipe it away with your little finger. And when the burning sensation ceases, then remove the medicine and wash the wound with water; and then examine whether the eyelid is already raised as if it were washed by the contraction with fire or incision, for this is often the case. And if not, apply more of the medicine to the place where the medicine has not yet taken effect until it becomes covered over and your operation is completed."
"And then place on the wound's edge with a border so that it seals the seam of the adhesion. And then dress it with antiseptic or another suitable dressing until it is healed."
"And if you perform this operation, it is necessary that with vigilant diligence you ensure that no debris of the medicine falls into the wound. And if the eyelid becomes inflamed after several days and some cause of the hairs touches the wound, then reapply your medicine to that place on the eyelid which is inflamed. And do so just as you did at the beginning, until it heals."
"And this is the shape of a myrtle leaf."
"And know that the wounds of men are varied according to their size and smallness, and therefore your cautery should be adapted accordingly."
"And this secret of correct practice shall not be concealed from anyone who studies in this art."
"Chapter XVII."
"Of the cautery of a fistula that is in the lachrymal gland of the eye."
When you treat a fistula as we have described in the sections on illnesses, and your treatment does not confirm, then you must cauterize it in this manner: command the patient to place their head on their own knees, and hold their head between their thighs by some servant in such a way that it is neither moved nor agitated with its head.
And then place cotton soaked in alum or wool on the opening of the boil or on gauze over the wound.
And then ignite the cauterizing iron, which is shaped like this:
which has been heated, so that it is hot at its tip where the cauterization is performed.
And if you wish, it can be penetrating into the other extremity. And if you want it to come out like this:
"But that which is concave is better for your task."
"And promptly press the fistula if it's open, and remove from it the dirty and wet one." "If it has not been opened, then open it and remove the pus from it."
"And pause the cautery over it which has been ignited; take your hand with a little caution, and bring the cautery of the wound to the opening of the nose so that neither you nor the patient is disturbed. Then place the cautery in the wound and burn it there."
"If at the beginning of your cautery it goes into the bone, that is good. But if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice as needed; and leave it like this for three days. Then pause over the spot with a border and surround it with drying ointment until it heals."
"But if eleven days have passed and it has not healed, then apply a caustic medicine over it until the bone is exposed and scraped according to what is appropriate in its chapter."
"And there is another method of cauterizing a fistula which some first said: Enter into the location of the fistula and fill it with that subtle camphor of which it has the form; and melt in that amount of melted lead equal to one inch; then take your hand with careful retention, so that the melted lead does not reach the wound of the patient; and cover the spot on the skin where you inserted it with albumen of egg or water, because lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it through marvelous healing."
"And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cauterization and treatment, that is good. But if not, then it is necessary to administer a tractive agent for the nose and reduce the fistula to the course of the nose according to what will come in its proper place."
"Chapter XVIII."
"On the cauterization of the opening of the ears."
"Many times it happens that fissures appear in the lips, and more often in the lips of children."
"Therefore, when you treat those fissures with what we have said in the sections and your treatment does not improve, then apply a small cautery iron according to this form that is shown:
"And let its concavity be according to the subtlety of a needle."
"Apply that iron carefully into those fissures until the cautery reaches the depth of the fissures."
"And then treat it with cerote until it is healed."
"Chapter XIX."
"On the cauterization of fistula in the mouth."
"When an abscess appears in the uvula or palate or roots of teeth and it becomes inflamed, then bursts open, and becomes infected, and pus comes out and a fistula is formed, if you treat it and your treatment does not improve, then you should kindle cautery according to the amount received in the fistula, and melt that heated iron into the tract of the fistula, and hold your hand so that the heated iron reaches the depth of it, and repeat this once or twice; and then treat it with what we have said about treatment until it is healed."
"And then if the inflammation is cut off and it is healed, that is good. But if not, then it is necessary to discover the location and remove the rotted bone according to what will come in its chapter."
"Chapter XX."
"For cauterization of the teeth and softening of the veins."
"When veins are softened by humidity and teeth are painful, if you cure them with medicines without success, then place the patient's head on your thigh, and bring the cautery in this shape near, so that you place the cup over the tooth and quickly insert the cautery into it. Remove your hand a little bit so that the patient feels the heat of the fire reaching the root of the tooth."
"And then remove your hand, and repeat the cautery several times according to what you want."
"Then the patient should rinse their mouth with salt water and hold it for an hour, then spit it out, because the painful tooth is hardened and the softened gum is strengthened and the humidity is dried."
Chapter XX
**On Toothache Cauterization**
When toothache is caused by coldness or worm within, or medicine does not help the cure, then cauterize it with one of two methods: either cautery with cow's dung or cautery with fire.
To cauterize with cow's dung: Take some cow's dung and boil it in a pot of iron. Then take some cotton, wrap it around the tip of the toothpick, dip that into the boiled cow's dung, and quickly apply it to the painful tooth before it cools down.
And repeat this several times until the power of the fire reaches the root of the teeth.
And if you wish, dip some wool or cotton into the aforementioned cow's dung, place it on the painful tooth, and then quickly apply a red-hot iron onto it until the iron reaches the crown of the tooth's concavity.
But cauterizing with fire is that you wait for the coal or iron to become red-hot and glowing, and then carefully apply it onto the tooth without touching the inside of the mouth of the sick person.
And then shape the coal or iron as you wish and apply it to the tooth, keeping your hand away until it cools down. Repeat this several times until the pain is gone, either on that same day or the following day.
And it is necessary that after this cautery, the sick person keeps their mouth closed tightly on both sides and holds it like that for an hour, and then spits it out. This is the form of cautery.
And cauterize in whatever way you wish, according to what you are capable of doing.
And this is how the cautery should be performed:
"Chapter 22."
"Regarding the cauterization of extroflexed organs."
When extroflexion is due to phlegm and humors that are not obedient to digestion despite medications, and you want to induce digestion slightly, then take a hot cautery of this shape (illustration follows), having two extremities opened so that the smoke may escape through one extremity while pausing the other ignited extremity over the swelling once or several times until it reaches the center of the swelling.
And if the swelling is small, then pause the cautery according to its quantity, and leave it for three days, pausing over the wound's edge until what the fire has burned is removed.
Then dress that wound with ointments, bandages, and cloths until it heals.
Here is the illustration of the cautery:
"For cauterization of vocal cords and constriction of breath."
"When humidity comes upon the channel of the lung, and especially when it is accompanied by coldness of temperament, then it is necessary to evacuate the patient at first with laxative medicines, and afterwards cauterize that place behind the uvula in the depressed region."
"And be careful not to burn the uvula or scar the throat with the cautery, but only slightly touch it."
"Cauterize that area with another cautery behind the junction of the neck at the last cervical vertebra." "And the cautery should be applied thus according to the manner previously described."
"Then treat it with what has been mentioned above until it is healed."
"Chapter XXIV."
"For cauterization of lung disease and cough."
"When cough and lung disease are due to humid coldness, and the patient has no fever or spitting, nor is it an ancient illness, then cauterize that area with two cauteries on the furcula at the depressed locations of the throat and lungs; and apply another cautery in the middle of the chest between the two breasts; and let the cauteries be applied thus according to the form previously described."
"And if you wish, the cauterization may also be performed by puncture with the cautery called a punctum, which has been described previously in the puncture of earache."
"And let them be punctured thus. And then treat it with what you mentioned above until it is healed."
"And if the cautery does not have three branches, then cauterization can be performed thus: with one application you can make three cauteries according to this form:"
"Chapter XXV."
"For cauterization of tittillation, which is the head of the helper (i.e., the penis)."
"When the head of the helper is dislocated due to humid slippery moisture and does not remain firm at the time of its return, then reduce the dislocation thus until it is in its usual position for returning, and apply pressure through a slight movement so that it returns thus as it should be, just as we have testified. Then first reduce the dislocation, and apply pressure on the back of the penis or on its side; and raise the scrotum which is at the lower part of the testicles to the upper parts with your left hand if the joint is dislocated downwards."
"And then heat the cautery having two heads; this is its form:"
"Then cauterize the scrotum until it penetrates into that side; and here comes the figure of cauterization with four cauteries."
"And sometimes it is adjusted thus, and therefore there are eight cauteries."
"And then pause on the cautery for several days with salt water, and let the illness adhere thus quietly, so that the member is not moved for some time until it is comforted."
"And if the dislocation is upwards and it happens thus, then cauterize over the muscle with a claw-shaped cautery or several punctiform cauteries, because the joint is confirmed and the humidity is dissipated, and the illness is healed."
"Chapter XXVI."
"For cauterization of the stomach."
"When there is friction and much humidity in the stomach such that it is extracted from its completeness and becomes multiplied with pain, if you continue the methods of treatment without relieving it, then let the illness be raised on its back, extend its hands and feet, and cauterize it thus: with one cautery on the left side of the pit of the stomach for the quantity of a finger's width with a claw-shaped cautery, and with two cauteries on either side of the middle of the cautery until you get the figure of a triangular cautery; and lengthen those which are not adjusted so that they cause purgation."
"And if the depth of the cautery is equal to two-thirds of the thickness of the scrotum."
"And let the figure of the cautery be according to this form without addition. And if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and this is one cautery according to the circular form thus:"
"And the stomach should be punctured according to that which is frightened by this cautery: and you should prick the stomach thus with a tentacle as much as you wish, and then cauterize those points with a cautery; and then treat it with the treatment which is preceding until it is healed."
"Chapter XXVII."
"For cauterization of the fatty liver."
"When there is pain in the liver due to coldness or humidity or excessive flatulence such that it is thrown from its normal completeness by excessive evacuation, and if the illness is cured with what we have said without being relieved, then let the illness be raised on its back over the neck of the liver, and prick with a tentacle three cauteries thus and thus quantity meters thus on the liver to the left of the hypochondria, where the decubitus of a man is."
"And let the space which is between each cautery be according to the thickness of the finger, and let the cauteries be according to the length of the right forearm."
"And do not press too much with the cautery."
"And if the quantity of that which is adhered to is equal to the thickness of a finger's width, and it is not adjusted there; then if the illness stands on its feet; but if it does not stand, let it be seated, having previously extended its legs, and raise its arms."
"And it is possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a knife-shaped cautery if you have subtlety and prudence in the art."
"And be careful that you do not proceed too much in the cauterization, and let the scrotum adhere completely so that all of the body is adhered to and it may penetrate into the bowels, because the scrotum here is subtle; know this."
"Chapter XXVIII."
"For perforation of an abscess of the liver with a cautery."
"When an excavation or abscess appears in the liver and you wish to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the liver or in its tunic, then if it is in the flesh of the liver, the illness will be heavy and painful without sharpness."
"And if it is in the tunic of the liver, then the pain will be sharp and intense, and sometimes the physicians are tired from its treatment."
"Therefore let the illness be turned on its back and prick the location of the abscess with a tentacle and then ignite the cautery which resembles a crowbar, the form of which has been preceded in the other page." "And cauterize with that cautery until all of the scrotum is covered and it has penetrated to the diaphragm and it has become healthy like embers."
"Then treat it with the treatment of other abscesses until it is healed."
"But it is not necessary that this form of cautery be used except by someone whose study in the art of medicine has been prolonged and who has experienced many illnesses. But even with experience sometimes it can be harmful to perform this operation; nevertheless we leave it to those who know better; it is better."
"Chapter XXIX."
"For cauterization of pleurisy."
"The ancients said that cauteries of the roots of arthritis are applied to pleurisy in this manner: and this is that you should take from the dry roots of long arthritis one sharp spike which is found, and it should be as thick as a finger."
Approximately translates to:
"You need not take your hand off the cautery during the operation."
"Ancient authors have said that this is the cautery of men which they use like a ray and ignite it in that place which is between the ribs, until it reaches that aposteme and becomes clean and healthy, as we have said about the aposteme of the liver."
"There is no fear in this perforation with cautery, for it happens suddenly in the location of the fistula which does not heal."
"Chapter XXX"
"On cauterizing the liver."
"When you treat the disease of the liver with what we have said about its cure in the division, and if your treatment does not succeed, then cauterize it there in three ways, all of which are correct. The first way is to make three or four cauteries along the length of the liver according to its figure, as shown previously."
"And the thickness of each cautery should be that of a finger or slightly more, and the manner of cauterizing should be as we have said for the cautery of the liver."
"And do not press your hand with the cautery. And let the disease be on its surface."
"And another method of cauterizing is to heat the cautery over two wicks, which causes us to mention in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle and elevate the chain that is located near the left side where the patient lies."
"And lift your elevation so as to raise the chain along the length of the body, in order that cauterizations may be made according to the width of the body."
"And then introduce the two wicks, already lit, into that space where those wicks entered from the other side."
"Then remove the cautery; and thus four cauterizations are made."
"And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three wicks."
"Then care for the cautery because it has left to give heat for too many days, since it is more effective than other causes precedent in the cure."
"**Chapter XXIX**."
"Regarding the cautery of dropsy."
"No cauteries are applied in dropsy except for certain instances specifically."
"When you treat dropsy with the methods of treatment mentioned in this section and do not cure it, then cauterize with four cauteries around the navel, one on the stomach, another on the liver, another on the spleen, two between the shoulder blades, one on the right side of the buttocks, and another on the stomach." "And the depth of the cauteries should be proportionate to the thickness of the skin."
"And remove the cautery quickly so that it does not burn for too long."
"And do not evacuate the disease from treatment immediately after cauterizing, but wait for two days to allow for healing with the help of nature."
"The shape of the cautery with which the belly is cauterized should be club-shaped according to its previous form, and that with which the back is cauterized should be olive-shaped according to its previous form."
Chapter xxxii.
"Of cauterization of the feet and the thighs."
When the feet are swollen in dropsy and filled with water, it is necessary to cauterize the feet on the back of the foot near where the auricular and annular bones meet, lift your hand up with the cautery but do not twist it; then lift your hand up again, but do not return that same one entirely, for salt water will remain.
Here is how you use the cautery in this manner: "Apply cauteries along the length of the affected area, placing one below the navel and another at the midpoint of the area; use two cauteries on each side."
"And let the wound remain open during treatment for some time so that no fluid accumulates in it."
"And then treat the same wounds as those we have mentioned above."
"Chapter XXXIII"
"Regarding the cautery of abdominal wounds."
"When the abdomen is inflamed and humid internally such that it weakens the vital forces, then the digestive and retentive powers are weakened in the stomach and intestines. This is cured with remedies appropriate for this condition, without mentioning them here, and sometimes a cautery of the vital force is exhibited. Therefore cauterize above the stomach as previously described in the cautery of the stomach, using a round cautery and four small ones around the navel, using a pointed cautery; also cauterize on the bladder over the hip bone with one or two cauteries."
"And if there is an abundance of humidities and the condition tolerates it, then cauterize above the pubis and on the intestines, strongly applying two cauteries near the stomach and close to the groin, for this is a perfect cure that will not fail."
"Chapter XXXIV"
"Regarding the cauterization of old hemorrhoids."
"When there are many old hemorrhoids or one of large size rubbed against by rough humors or corrupted moistures, and they are cured as we have said in the division without conferring their cure, then cauterize them with three cauteries on each side of the pubis below the small triangular bone, and place another cautery above the navel going down two fingers."
"If it is believed that the stomach of the patient is cold and their food undigested, and their face often discolored with spots, then cauterize that area over the stomach with a large cautery as mentioned before; and apply one cautery to the liver, and another cautery to the spleen using a pointed cautery, leaving it there for some time until the wound is healed."
"Chapter XXXV."
"For cautery of haemorrhoids, especially for their removal."
When you remove the haemorrhoid, immediately apply the cautery that is attached to the ray. After placing the hot iron on that removed haemorrhoid, close it tight so that the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood flows.
And do this once or twice, because if there are too many haemorrhoids, cauterize each one separately as explained earlier, and afterwards treat them with what you consider suitable for their healing.
But if you cauterize with a large cautery over several [haemorrhoids], it will cause more harm than good.
Chapter XXXVI
Of the cauterization of fistulas that occur naturally in the parts near the anus
If nature does not obey the work recommended earlier and the patient is distressed by this, it should be healed with cautery.
Therefore, when there is some fistula near the anus that has been there for a long time and is filled with corrupt matter and moisture, it is more appropriate to heal it by inserting a fine probe into it and then ascertaining its depth with the aforementioned probe.
Then heat the cautery which resembles a needle-red-hot. And then insert that heated cautery into this fistula, going in as far as the probe entered.
"Iron the cautery on those corrupted bodies once or twice or thrice according to your necessity."
"Be careful not to burn nerves and veins; if the fistula is on the bladder or intestine wall, then be cautious about all these areas; do this only when the fistula is in a fatty location and you think it's not penetrating."
"And afterwards dress the wound so that it may heal."
"And if the wound is sealed, and its contents have been removed, and it remains thus for some time, know then that it has healed completely."
"And if the contents are not removed from it, then know that it is penetrating or in the bone of the bone that is corrupted, or this happens due to those causes which will be remembered in its place."
"Chapter XXXVII"
"On the cautery of warts."
"When pain in the nostrils is caused by friction or thick windiness, and because of this the patient's heart is afflicted, it is then necessary to cauterize there with a pointed cautery on each nostril using a cautery with sharp points, of which the memory remains."
"And after cauterizing there with the second one, place it aside, so that three cauteries of a linear shape come out, and then put them aside in order."
"Chapter thirty-eight."
"On the cautery of the bladder."
"When there is debility and softness in the bladder due to friction and humidity so that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize on the dividing line below the navel where the pubic hairs begin, cauterizing with a cautery on the right side and another on the left."
"And let the length of each cautery be according to the amount of hair on the pubis; and cauterize there with a cautery at the lower part of the back, or with two cauteries if necessary."
"And let the cautery be pointed, according to what is appropriate."
"Chapter thirty-nine."
"On the cautery of the womb."
"When there is friction and humidity in the womb which prevents pregnancy, corrupts menstruation, delays its onset, and causes pain during menses, then it is necessary to cauterize the area around the navel with three cauteries, as we have described for the bladder cautery. Also cauterize the area below the back where the pubic hairs begin, using a pointed cautery."
"Chapter forty."
"On the cautery of dislocation of the ankle."
"When moist humors have flowed into the ankle region and are the cause of its dislocation, a sign of which is that one bone appears longer than the other when compared together." The place of dislocation is found on his right hip.
Then you must cauterize the patient around the opening of the hernia with a round iron cautery, because once you have felt with your finger in the circumference of the opening as it turns, and thus that the opening falls to the middle of the circle.
And here is the cautery previously mentioned for the cauterization of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize with three olive-sized round cauteries.
And let the cautery be made according to the amount of heat of all the cord, and then carefully heal that part which has been burned.
Chapter XL.
Of the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
When pain arises from the opening of a hernia, and its cause is friction and moisture, the patient is cured with what we have said earlier and not otherwise, then you must release the patient from thick humors with pills made from fetid or artificial substances or similar ones; and then cauterize that part.
And the method of cauterizing that part is done in two ways: either with cauteries using burning medicines or with fire.
Choose one of two known methods: the first is to cauterize that part over the opening of the hernia with three triangular cauteries in this shape, and make them of good depth. And let the space between each cautery be equal to the thickness of a finger, if the cauteries are olive-sized or larger.
But sometimes it may happen that the cauteries are placed over the middle point above the head of the hernia, so there will be four cauteries.
And if you wish, you can cauterize with a circle whose shape is the same as in the cauterization of dislocation of a hernia. Let it be a continuous circle that burns the heat of all the cord.
And this is the method of cauterizing sciatica when pain adheres to the hernia and does not extend into the groin.
But if it extends into the groin, then cauterize that area with two cauteries over the groin above the point where you feel the pain; and one cautery over the knee, about four fingers' breadth down from the left side of that part.
And if using a cautery knife, let the depth of the cautery be according to the thickness of the cord.
And if the pain extends to the area near the left groin, then cauterize there where you feel it with three or four cauteries or more as needed.
And if the pain seems to be beneath the groin, then cauterize that area with one cautery knife.
And be careful in all cauterizations not to end with the cautery burning nerves or large arteries, lest you cause harm or contraction to the affected part.
And I have seen some of those who cauterized over the knee and ended up injuring nerves during the procedure, causing the leg to swell, with tumors reaching up to the thigh. The flesh became inflamed, putrefied, and the whole leg was corrupted. And thus happens a frequent complication of abdominal surgery, often leading to death.
If the pain is in two parts at once, cauterize each one separately according to this method.
The wise have said in the cauterization of hernia that the cautery should be shaped like an iron ring whose circumference is about that of a handspan. And let it be placed somewhat down from its own opening, according to the thickness of a finger bone or less.
And within that circle let there be another third one; and let the space between them be equal to the thickness of a pulse; and let those circles be open at two parts; and let their length be about one or two pulses, and make in those edges decently sharpened iron margins within the circles. This is its shape:
"A large fire should be kindled until it glows and sparks, then placed over the patient's buttocks, with the patient lying on their side." "And therefore cauterize that area three times in one visit."
"And so leave it alone for three days; plaster that area with a border and let the wound remain open too long; and treat that area with egg whites until it is healed."
"Son of mine, regarding this type of cauterization, we have not used it much because of the fear of causing injury to it, and because few cases have been found where it is applied."
"Perhaps from those cauterizations on him who suffered them, you will find one in that area."
"However, cauterization with adherent medicines is to be done by making two circles with a needle perforated in the center through which the hot iron of the door can pass; let the thickness of the wall between them be two nuts or such."
"And if the space which is between each one has the quantity of thickness of a finger; and let them be open below and above, and let them contain themselves between them according to this shape:"
"And then place yourself on the side of the thigh where the illness lies and put your hand on the edge of the thigh; and then take hot water and pour it between two circles, and let its quality be with the fire little by little, and hold it for the quantity of an hour, and suffer the illness to bite and adhere itself â€” for that finds biting thus as if from fire â€” until the biting ceases."
"And then lift your hand with the instrument and cleanse all the hot water from the thigh with sweet water."
"Then leave him for three days and pause on that side where the blackness of the boil is removed, and leave it for a few days, then it will discharge."
"And then treat this wound until it heals."
"If the pain spreads to the thigh or leg, make him sit in warm water, as it is done for equine colic."
"And this is the method of cold water, which I have already written about in my treatise on the correction of medicines." "Take equal parts of alkali and unslaked lime, grind them together, and place them in a new earthenware pot with a small hole made in its bottom according to the amount that enters the ray."
"And place another pot upside down on top of the earthenware pot and pour into it sweetened water containing live alkali and lime, which covers those below by about one finger. Then press those below gently but firmly with your hand and leave the hole that allows the sharp water to pass through from the earthenware pot into the inverted pot."
"And collect all that water and pour it over fresh live lime and other new alkali, because at this hour it will have become very sharp. This water is used in many medical operations and for cauterization of other limbs, as it has a burning effect."
"And this is how some medicines are prepared with which one cauterizes the skin, such as those made from pitch and resin mixed together, and lime with soap."
"And Galen recounts an operation and cure by which sciatica and hip joint pain were healed in someone from the past. He highly praises this treatment, saying that no other cure is needed for it, as it heals with just one application, just as Galen recounts."
"And if you cannot obtain verdigris, then take fresh figs; grind them well with a little niter and apply them to the water in which there is pain, or on the joint itself, or on the muscle, and bind it."
"And let it be left for three hours or for as long as the patient feels relief from the pain."
"And then take that person into a bath and wash their body thoroughly until the pain ceases and they are healed."
"And know that one should not use cautery with these medicines, but only the evacuation of the body."
"However, Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with a goat's-horn cautery, it works very well. And here is how one should do this cautery: Take wool and dip it in old oil, and apply it between the thumb and index finger."
"And then take a dry goat's horn and heat it on the fire until it becomes hot. Then apply it to the wool and leave it there until it has spread." "And repeat this process until you feel the sensation of the cautery reach the hip joint and then stop when the pain has ceased."
"And this method of cautery is called 'ox-cautery'."
"Chapter XLII."
"On the cauterization of toothache."
"Sometimes pain in the back is caused by several reasons, such as by fracture or blow or excessive evacuation, and by causes similar to these, by infusion of hot and humid matter."
"And cautery is useful only in this single case, which occurs from the effusion of hot matter."
"Therefore, it is appropriate to evacuate the pain with pills made from feverfew and similar herbs, which should be made on the back where there is pain, three lines long according to its width, placing two or more cauteries in each line, depending on the amount of tolerance to pain and the strength of the person."
"And cautery should be done with a pointed cautery."
"And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cauteries with a round-tipped cautery in this manner:"
"Chapter XLIII."
"On the cauterization of the beginning of dropsy."
"Very often this illness occurs in young children; the sign of its beginning in children is that they suddenly become short of breath and have difficulty moving."
"And you will find it in the lowest thoracic vertebrae of the back, and on the ribs that are beginning to stick out above the others."
"And therefore, when you see this and wish to prohibit it, at once cauterize there with a circular cautery in this manner:" "That the cautery should take up all of one side of the vertebra evenly."
"And if you wish, cauterize around the vertebra with a pointed cautery two or three lines long." "And let the points be close together."
"And then treat the spot until it is healed with what we have said."
"But be careful not to administer cautery in dropsy that is caused by spasm of nerves."
"Chapter XLIV."
"Of cautery for gout and joint pain."
"When joint pain is caused by bad humors that are stuck in each member of the body, therefore when pains occur in the feet, it is customary for doctors to call this gout properly."
"And thus how is gout caused by friction cured with a manner of cure and yet the pains are not removed, therefore cautery is used."
"And you cauterize there for appropriate evacuation in the circuit of the ankle joint with hot cauteries."
"And this is the form of the olive cautery used:"
"If it is necessary to make points on the skin of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery." "If pains occur within the joints or elsewhere, and this happens often, then cauterize that area with three or four cauteries in total using this olive-oil cautery."
"If you need more cauteries than these, then heat them up first without touching them directly with the cautery."
"If pains occur in both joints, then apply the cautery as described in its chapter."
"If pains occur only on one side and are called 'sucking', then make punctures around the muscles like this: puncture in those two lines."
"If pains remain in these places, then make punctures around the muscles on each nodule and on the palm of the hand."
"If pains occur near the joints of the fingers or toes, cauterize each of all the tendons in that area."
"And do not neglect the treatment and receipt of medicines for this illness, because if good regimen and evacuation are done with this cautery alone without other medicines, God willing, it will heal."
"Chapter 45."
"On cauterization of fractures."
"When there is a fracture in the ankles or shins causing swelling before the thigh at the beginning of the injury, then you should order the patient to abstain from food on that day and use gentle laxatives so that the swelling in his abdomen may subside."
"And then place the patient between your thighs with his back facing you, and order him to keep his knee bent until the swelling is completely gone or appears."
"And then return him with his back facing you again and find the fracture on the bone of the knee joint, signaling the end of it like the middle of a circle."
"And then ignite the cautery which is made in this shape:"
Within there may be much heat and throwing of sparks. Then carefully reduce the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over it so that it does not slip out.
And you have already opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, who holds their hands.
Then place the cautery on that same sign with your right hand, and push this intestine with the tip of the knife into the middle of the abdomen; repeat this procedure again if you have not yet succeeded in doing so.
And carefully observe the sensation of the intestine during your cauterization, so that you do not burn it and cause harm to the patient or bring about death.
Know that if with the cautery you do not seize the intestine, your operation will be futile.
And it is necessary that the cautery for children be thin according to their size and proportion.
Then take care of the burn wound for three days by applying a compress with clean water so that it may heal quickly.
And then treat him with other remedies until he is healed.
And the patient should remain in bed for forty days until the wound and inflammation are sealed.
It is necessary that the patient's nutrition be restricted according to the length of time for his healing, so that the intestines do not prolapse due to the effort of recovering.
And when it is time to get up after about forty days, then administer food gradually and carefully, keeping him in bed for another forty days.
And he should be spared from work and excessive eating and drinking, and loud talking, for if one uses this method of healing entirely without moderation, it will not bring about a cure.
And now I will discuss the treatment of ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and if it happens that they are not detected immediately, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size, and apply water as has been said. And treat him with the same care as mentioned above.
And some early writers have said that a rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery in this shape, for it is marked with an indentation:
"And it is placed a line that goes for the width on the side above the rupture, and another line above; then place your hand with a pointed cautery, but the first cautery should be lighter and better."
"Chapter Forty-six."
"On cauterizing a hemorrhoid."
When pain occurs in the limbs due to congestion or percussion and persists for a long time without being relieved by medical treatment, then it is necessary to cauterize with a pointed cautery.
And let the cautery be applied to every limb according to its size and smallness, strength and weakness, location of the twist and intensity of pain.
Therefore if the first cautery heals it, that is good. But if not, then repeat the cautery; for it is customary with those pains to be punctured in the limb that approaches the affected area, so that you must reach those with the cautery until the illness is healed.
Chapter XLVI
Of the cauterization of leprosy.
Some people view leprosy as benefited by cautery, but there is little improvement if the species of leprosy is caused by putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
And therefore, when you want to cauterize that person, consider whether the leprosy is contagious and treat it according to what has been said in its division. Do not delay if this is present, and fear that corruption will spread throughout the whole body and entire complexion of the patient. Then cauterize him on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, another near it towards the forehead at the end of the hair; and both on the two horns; and one behind, on the nape or servant's mark.
And lastly, press the cauteries slightly into the bone to leave a small impression and remove the scabs, so that the expiration of thick vapors is alleviated from it. And cauterize on the chest as necessary.
And if the leprosy has already spread over the patient and appears manifestly, then you should cauterize him with those cauteries which we have said in the head; and cauterize on the tip of the nose, and with two cauteries on each cheekbone, and two cauteries on each shoulder blade of the neck, and six cauteries on each shoulder blade of the back, and one large one over the shoulder blades near the nape, and one over the nape itself, and two over the ankles, and one over each ankle, and two over the knees and one over each knee, and two over the elbows, and two over the wrists; and cauterize him over all the joints of those limbs and feet, and over each heel of his feet, and over the fleshy parts of his legs.
And beware of the nerves which are on the heel that you do not burn them.
And sometimes it is cauterized with one cautery on the bone of the breastbone and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And know that the more closely you apply cauteries, the greater is the benefit and efficacy. And know that the patient feels no pain from the cautery, as they do with their own sores, because the body of the sufferer has become numb.
And it is necessary that the cauteries be large or small according to the limbs and joints as specified in the descriptions of the instruments.
And afterwards, cure the cautery with powdered earth mixed with honey, and with the other remedy until it is healed.
CapÃ­tulo .xlviii.
Chapter XLVIII: Cauterization for Stupor
When any limb is paralyzed or asleep and is treated with medications, oils, and poultices, but does not heal, then you should cauterize that paralyzed limb with cauteries according to the size of the limb or its smallness.
And let your cautery enter a little into the thickness of the flesh And afterwards, cure it with ointment until it is healed.
And sometimes it is cauterized some paralysis which extends to the arms and legs, and to the shoulder blades of the back and through the movement of the nerves which cause that limb to be paralyzed, and the paralysis is removed.
But let not anyone presume to do this except one who is skilled in the anatomy of limbs and the exit of nerves throughout the whole body that moves.
CapÃ­tulo .xlix.
Chapter XLIX: Cauterization for Morphea (scleroderma)
When morphea is old and does not respond to any medicinal ointments, then you should cauterize it with a hot cautery a little according to the quantity of the thickness of the flesh until the whiteness and color are removed and its color is changed.
And afterwards, cure it with powdered earth and lentils mixed with olive oil and with leaves of mallows, and with pigeon blood or hen blood, giving each one part and mixing them all together, and afterwards a cloth should be placed on it and left to rest until it is healed.
CapÃ­tulo L.
Chapter L: Cauterization for Cancer
When cancer begins and you wish to remove it, then cauterize it with a round cautery around its circumference just as it is encircled.
And the wise ones said that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle of it. But I have not seen this, because I fear that it might become ulcerated, and I have seen this happen sometimes.
It is more fitting that it be cauterized around its circumference using such a circle as we have described, or with several cauteries.
CapÃ­tulo .li.
De la cauterizaciÃ³n de una herida.
"When a beard is slow to grow due to superfluous fat, the state of illness, or old age accompanied by lack of blood, and you wish to hasten its growth."
"However if you want to perform the operation using a cautery, here is its shape and how it should be applied."
"And when cauterizing in that place, let the arm be elevated so that its blood circulation is relieved; afterwards dress it until it heals."
"Chapter 52."
"On cauterization of a wound."
"A wound is corruption moving through the limb which consumes it like dry wood being consumed by fire."
"Therefore if you find a wound that can withstand cauterization with fire, heat some small and large iron nails according to what is appropriate for the location of the wound."
"And then cauterize it thoroughly so that you eradicate all corruption and leave no cause for further decay."
"And then let it rest for three days, and afterwards dress the cauterized areas only with oil mixed with honey so that all scars are eradicated and all corruption is eliminated."
"And then treat it with fresh, living flesh."
"But if after three days you find that flesh has grown healthy and without corruption, good. But if not, then repeat the cauterization over what remains of the corrupted areas."
"And wounds are sometimes treated with sharp medicine instead of cautery, as this is considered to be halfway between cautery and bandaging." "However, cauterization with fire provides the most immediate benefit."
"And I have already discussed the treatment of wounds using sharp medicine in another section, so you may refer to that when you begin treatment."
"Chapter 53."
"On cauterization of closed wounds and similar ones."
"Many times in wounds caused by blows with a heavy, blunt weapon that penetrates the flesh and causes injury, there are two ways to cauterize them: cautery with fire and cautery with boiling water."
"But cauterization with fire involves heating the cautery tongs like those used for branding poultry, which should be made of iron according to the size of the wound and have thin jaws."
"And then place the heated tongs on the wound and rotate your hand with the cautery around the edge of the wound until it reaches its full depth." "And leave it for three days until flesh begins to grow." "And then apply a plaster of wild mallows mixed with salt and leave it on overnight because it will eradicate all inflammation."
"And then treat the area with fresh, living flesh until it is healed."
"And if it has not yet converted, and sometimes this happens on the surface of the body, especially on the breasts and thighs, then you must cauterize those areas with boiling water. And this is done by taking a funnel made of brass or iron or branding tongs and placing it over the wound. Then fill the funnel with a small amount of boiling water and hold your hand steady while pressing the edge of the funnel firmly against the edge of the wound, allowing the boiling water to flow into the center of the wound. Let the wound experience the bite of the boiling water for about an hour, then remove the funnel, because the wound along with its inflammation will be eradicated."
"And do this with those until all of them on the body have been done."
"And then treat those wounds where the inflammation has been eradicated with ointments that cause flesh to grow."
"Chapter 54."
"On cauterization of trembling (tremor)."
"When trembling occurs due to friction in the nerves or fever caused by heat or similar cause, then you should cauterize it with four or five cauteries on the spine of the back, placing one cautery between each vertebra. And also cauterize the foot and stomach area."
"And if trembling ceases, it will hasten recovery from the feverish illness."
"Chapter 55."
"On cauterization of accidental wounds to the body."
"When the body has been wounded accidentally and there are pustules filled with corrupted matter, then at the beginning when it appears, the head of the fistula should be cauterized with a fine cautery made from myrtle wood, the end of which is heated in the fire; or with a long, narrow cautery; or with a lenticular cautery."
"And sometimes it is also cauterized at the beginning of its discharge according to this method; and they are not believed, and the excess fluid is disrupted causing them to heal."
"But however, it should be done near evacuation with phlebotomy."
"Chapter 56."
"On cauterization of accidental bleeding from a vein by incision with an axe."
"Sometimes bleeding occurs from an artery that is cut due to a blow or due to the incision of an aposteme or cautery on a limb, and then it seems difficult to stop."
"Therefore, when this happens to someone, then quickly press your hand over the opening of the artery and hold it there until the bleeding stops from beneath your finger and does not seep."
"And then place olive-shaped cauteries of various sizes in the fire by the hundreds, and blow on them until they are very hot."
"And then quickly take one of those cauteries, either small or large according to the place and size where the artery was broken, and apply it firmly to that vein as soon as you have removed your finger, so that it may be sealed and stop the bleeding."
"And if blood continues to flow from the opening of the artery when you remove your finger and apply the cautery, then quickly take another cautery that has been prepared in the fire and do not stop doing so until the bleeding stops."
"But be careful not to burn the nearby nerves, lest you bring about some other harm."
"And know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to stop the bleeding in those except by one of four methods: either with cautery as mentioned above, or by extraction if it cannot be extracted (because then its extremities are burned and the bleeding stops), or by tying it tightly with flax or linen, or by applying medicines whose virtue is to restrict blood flow. And they should be strengthened with a compress and proper binding."
"But whoever administers proper restriction of it with flax or linen by tying tightly or by positioning causes burning and similar things, does nothing but harm."
"But if something like this happens to someone and there is no doctor present nor any medicine, then apply pressure with your index finger on the opening of that vein as mentioned above, and understand the great constriction of its entrance where the blood is prevented from flowing through its main channel. And do not remove your finger from the artery, and sprinkle over it cold water repeatedly until the blood becomes congealed and thickened. And see if there is a need for cautery or medicine."
"Of incisions and piercings and cuppings and of bloodletting and of plague-like illnesses."
"We have already discussed in the first chapter all diseases in which cautery with fire is beneficial and necessary with medication, and their causes and occasions, and the instruments necessary for them with the forms of cauteries. We have also arranged the chapters on the supremacy of the head over the feet."
"And we will proceed in this chapter in the same manner so that whoever seeks this may find it easily upon asking."
"First, know that this chapter is about cautery with fire, which is in the first chapter of cauterization."
"And it is necessary that great caution be taken in the operations discussed in this chapter, for many lives are lost due to incorrect evacuation using blood with which life resides. Cautery of the vein or incision over the aposteme or opening of fistulas or purification of ulcers or extraction of arrows or incision of stones and their like." "And all these are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in most cases death ensues."
"And we advise you not to fall into that which is doubtful, for sometimes people die from a few movements and mannerisms of diseases." "And among them are some whose death is quick and easy due to the severity of their disease, its duration, and fear which means death."
"And among them are those who give you their wealth and sayings while you wait for their healing, but their disease is fatal."
"And therefore do not consent to those who come to you with this manner, and let your caution be greater than greed and your avarice. Do not presume upon any cause except certain science that proves it, and by which a praiseworthy outcome is achieved."
"And use prognosis and indication in the treatment of all your diseases to turn them into health, for in this lies help for you to acquire fame and memory, praise and glory."
"O, my sons, may God inspire your understanding and not take away direction and protection from you, for this is in His hand."
"And I have arranged this chapter distinctly into chapters according to what has been stated in the chapter on cautery, so that it may be easier for you to understand what you seek and need."
"Chapter One."
"Concerning the treatment of water contained within the head of children."
"You should know that this disease often occurs in children during childbirth when the midwife squeezes the baby's head without lividity."
"And sometimes it occurs for unknown reasons which are not understood."
"But I have never seen this disease except in children; and out of all those whom I saw, none survived, and therefore it seemed to me to be a hopeless condition."
"And I have seen a child whose head was filled with water, and its head swelled so greatly that it could not lie on its back due to the size of its head, and more moisture increased until death ensued."
"And this humidity is either collected between the fontanelle and the bone, or it collects above the bone on the forehead."
"For if the operation is performed when the humidity is between the fontanelle and the bone and the swelling is small, you should cut into the middle of the head with an incision in the width of two fingerbreadths so that it runs along the direction of the humidity. This is the form of the spatula:"
"And therefore if the humidity has increased more and the swelling is greater, then there are two incisions in this manner:"
"And if the humidity is above the bone, a sign of this is that you find the temples of the head open and free from any swelling, and the water is squeezed out when you press on them with your hand between the parts. This should not be concealed from you." "You should cut into the middle of the head with three incisions in this manner:"
"And promptly remove all the humidity through the incision; and then press the incisions with cloths and feathers; and on the fifth day, apply wine and oil above it. And then remove the bandages and cleanse the wound with tenths and eggs, and press the head evenly. And feed the patient dry food of little moisture until the member is strengthened and healed."
"And there is another manner of incision which you should consider according to the magnitude of the swelling and the collection of water, for sometimes it is more in the back of the head, or on the forehead, or on the right side, or on the left side. Therefore attend with your incision where the swelling and the accumulation of water appear, and do what seems best to you."
"And observe that you do not cut the artery, for if it happens that blood flows abundantly and the disease persists due to that flow of blood with evacuation of humidity."
"Chapter Two."
"When there occurs a cataract or ulceration in the eyes or on the feet, and it is of long standing and does not improve with medical treatment, then the last resort in this case is the incision of those two arteries."
"And therefore when you want to cut those arteries which are the cause of the disease, first rub the place with a rough cloth so that the arteries appear. And then firmly tie the neck of the patient with some cloth; and consider where the vein pulses. And the places of each artery above the places which are near the ears depressed are hidden unless in certain men."
"And then indicate the artery with a tent, and then cut each one with a sharp spatula of each party with an incision entering into the bone along the width of the head."
"And if you wish, insert the spatula below the artery and cut it at the incisions above."
"And let the length of the incision be about two fingerbreadths, for when any vein is cut the blood issues with pulsatile exit, which flows forth by frequent spurts."
"But if the artery does not appear to your satisfaction, then you should measure from the ear the quantity of space for three fingerbreadths and indicate it with a tent, and cut into the bone."
"And what amount of blood should be let out is about one pint. But a weak person lets out more or less of it, and all this depends on the quantity that appears of the strength of the disease and the fullness of the artery."
"And then consider the wound, for if there remains on the bone any cause of the forehead, then cut that so that it does not become a hard swelling."
"And then press the wound with feathers and bandages of linen cloth, and then cleanse it with egg whites until it is healed."
"Chapter Three."
"Concerning the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples."
"When some accident occurs such as migraine or sharp pain in the temples due to humidity or quality in the arteries of the temples, or if it is an old and violent one resembling them, and it is treated with medical methods without improvement, then we have recourse in these diseases to the extraction of the arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those as we have shown."
"The manner of operating and extracting those is that the patient removes the hairs which are on their temples; and understand where the artery appears in the temple when it is shown to you by its pulse, and is hidden in few men due to intensity."
"If it is hidden from you, then the patient's neck should be tightened with some cloth; and gently rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until the artery becomes clearly visible to you." "And then you take the scalpel, which has this shape:" "And then you cut the skin with that scalpel gently until you reach the artery; and then tie off where it enters and extract that from its upper parts until you extract that from the skin and expose those of its sheaths which are left, completely cut through."
"But if the artery is delicate, then surround it with the extremity of the needle and cut into that a bit according to how much its extremities are extended and contracted, so that there is no flow of blood, for otherwise the blood will not clot."
"And then evacuate three veins full of blood."
"And if the artery is large, then you should tie it in two places with strong doubled catgut or long sutures, and do not wait for gangrene before consolidation of the wound occurs, otherwise there will be bleeding."
"And then cut off the superfluity which is between two limbs; and do this at that time or some other time."
"And if you wish, cauterize it with a hot iron until the extremities of the cut are sealed, and this will be instead of that operation."
"And it is better not to cauterize if the patient has fever or is of hot complexion; for cautery is one of those causes that increases thin humidities, and therefore it is better to avoid it in such cases."
"And it is necessary that in the extraction of arteries which are near the joint socket, they be dusted with fine powder and then dressed with dry medicines to stimulate tissue growth, and also with poultices so that they may heal."
"And if during the operation there occurs bleeding from the artery, then you should stop it either with cautery or else compress the wound with your hand until the bleeding is stopped." "And if there is no other cause at hand, then press the fingers on the wound until the bleeding stops, and then rinse the wound with water of intense coldness until the heat subsides, and dress it according to what is necessary."
"And what is easier in the extraction of an artery is to cauterize the vein with this hot iron having two notches, because you have cut both ends with a probe, and then deposit it quickly, burning slightly, until it reaches the bone and cuts through the vein at both ends, so that what lies between its extremities is elongated since they are not consolidated by this cautery."
"And this is the form of the cautery:"
"And let the heat of the two notches be equal." "But if the heat is less than the two notches are better, for if they are too hot near each other it does not cut the flesh quickly."
"So that with these being somewhat thick, the heat of the fire is maintained and the flesh is severed easily."
This work is better than all others and more lightweight.
The distance between two ribs should be as thick as a finger.
Chapter four
Of the treatment of acute and acidic tears in the eyes
When there are acidic tears, it is the body of those veins that are above the head's crown that are affected, and no medical cause can be found for this condition. Sometimes the patient's face becomes reddened, and they feel a crawling sensation on their forehead as if ants were walking there. The eyes become weakened and watery to the point where the eyelashes stick together, and the skin around them becomes rough due to the acidity of the tears. The ancient remedy for this condition is as follows, and it should be applied without delay:
"I command the patient to raise their eyebrows that are on their forehead and then incise three equal furrows there according to the length of the forehead." "And if the length of the furrow is two fingers: let one furrow be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length slightly below the movement of the muscles that are in the lacrimal, and the third on the other side."
"And beware of the incision of the arteries that are on both sides, and extend your hand from the continuation of both jaws." "And if the space of each incision is the amount of three fingers placed together."
If you have on hand a sponge prepared with dry cloths to absorb blood.
And then insert the spatula of two pointed extremities, which is shaped like this: which should be placed between the temples towards the second incision. Remove with that all the chain which is between two incisions and place it above the bone, then do this from the middle incision to the second incision. Then insert into this spatula and place it into the first incision again with another instrument called a scalpel which is sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
And cut with that sharp side next to the attached flesh near the chain, and also cut on the inner side of the bone, then employ it so that it reaches the middle fissure, and cut with it all the vessels that descend from the head to the heels.
But make sure that the incision continues until you can see the chain, and then do this in the middle fissure towards the other fissure.
And since some blood may have flowed out, express the places where the blood clots are located.
Then press in each fissure carefully with cotton wool, and apply those powders mixed in wine and oil and vinegar to prevent the formation of pus.
And on the third day untie the ligament and administer a large infusion of cold water or tea. Then cure it with basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil and other remedies so that the wounds are healed.
CapÃ­tulo V
Regarding the treatment of injuries caused by cuts and the descent of parts from inside the head.
When someone suffers from cuts that are sharp and continuous, and sometimes the eyelids of the sick person appear thin and pale, and their gaze is weakened, and the eyelids become ulcerated and in their case the hair falls out, and there is acute painful sensation in the forehead followed by excessive sweating, then you should know that these materials and cuts do not come from outside but from small veins that originate from inside.
And the best treatment for these cases is this: command the sick person to raise their forehead, and then cut a fissure in that middle point of the forehead about half an inch wide (starting from the left temple towards the right temple; and the incision should be between the bones; and remove your hand from the temples' muscles which are attached due to mastication), until the bone is exposed.
Dry all the blood with a sponge or with dry cloth and then fill between the two lips of the fissure with cotton wool or with linen. Then press down from above with powders mixed in wine and oil to prevent the formation of pus.
And when you untie it and see that the pus has diminished, then it is necessary to scrape the bone where it begins to have flesh, and then cure it with a drying regimen which causes the flesh to emerge, as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mix them together to make a plaster and apply it to these wounds until the fresh flesh appears.
CapÃ­tulo VI
Regarding the treatment of cuts on the ears.
There are four causes of cuts on the ears: either it is due to a mineral point like stone, or something similar such as iron and bronze, or it is due to plants such as thorns or beans, or it is due to a flowing cause such as water and vinegar and things like them, or some animal.
And when a stone cut the ear or some other similar cause that does not fit well in the ear and causes pain, then place the ear in the sun, and if it is sharp, then distill into that cause some violet oil or safflower oil, and apply the extract of it, and make them sneeze with some condiment, and plug their nose during the arrival of the sneezing. And then place on the circumference of the ear some pieces of cloth or wool, and stretch the ear upwards at its parts because very often it is forgotten with these causes.
And if it is not removed, then apply the extract of it using the instrument called "gesti epicicarious subtile" which has this form:
"If a birth has been forgotten in motion, it's well. If not, then administer extraction with a subtle hook of little duplication."
"And thus if it has not been forgotten because of that, then make a cannula of silver and insert its tip into the tear of the eardrum, closing around the cannula with wax and softened oil so that nothing gets in except for the cannula." "And then extract [the fetus] with a small windlass with strong attraction, because many have seen this that we have spoken about."
"But if it has not been forgotten in this manner, then take hot pitch or sometimes prepared wax with which the ears are taken a small amount, and pause that on the tip of the arrow, and then wrap it around that gently paused spot." "And then insert that into the tear of the ear with ease, and also remove the ear from its moisture."
"And therefore if it has not been forgotten in all the causes that we have spoken about, then you should cut off that before it becomes an abscess or spasm."
"And the way to cut off that is that you first sanctify the patient with the vein of the head and extract the blood according to its strength, and then make that cheese between your hands and convert the ear to the parts of it, and finish with a small incision in the root of the ear where there is pressure from it." "And let the incision be in the shape of a crescent moon that reaches to the stone, and when the stone is hardened, remove it if you can with appropriate instruments, and then close up the incision at that time with haste, and cure it until it is healed."
"And if the cause of the pain in the ear is one of the hairs that are growing and swollen, then administer the cure and extraction of it. But if it does not obey your efforts, then you should take a fine pointed probe in this shape:" "I will administer to him the removal of that stone which has fallen into his ear."
"And do not do this if you think that the stone has already been moistened by earwax, and pause for a moment, removing it with tweezers or some subtle gesture, or using an incision as described above, because removal will be easier."
"Put water into the ear from which the patient suffers from sneezing at the beginning, and fill their ear with a small piece of cotton wool, and place your finger over that ear into which the water has entered. If it flows out, then good; but if not, then take slender stones or pebbles according to the length of the finger, heat them in the fire for a short time, and let the patient insert one of these into the opening of their ear and jump up and down on one foot over that side, striking with another stone upon the stone which is within the ear." "Then cease this until all the water has been expelled."
"Then cease this until all the water has been expelled." "And if the water is not expelled in this way, then take some paper or cotton wool, and put one end of it into the ear and extend the other end towards the fire until it catches light."
"And then put in another piece of cotton wool and do this as many times as necessary until all the water is expelled, and afterwards squeeze it out with a syringe as mentioned above regarding the stone extractor."
"If something enters the ear, if it is a small object, then do as I have said above regarding pushing it out. But if it is a large object which causes pain in the area of the cheekbone, then extract it with hooks and forceps. The cause of this is usually easier to remove than all other causes that occur in the ear."
"But if a worm has been engendered in the ear, when you are treating it with what I have mentioned above regarding the division and treatise on distillations and yet do not succeed in your treatment, then look into the ear towards the sun."
"And if you see anything here which is the cause of worms, then extract it with hooks or fine forceps. But if you do not see anything, then take a cannula with a narrow end below and wide above, the shape of which is as follows:" "And insert the narrow end of this into the ear according to how much it can tolerate without causing pain. Then suck with it forcefully several times until all the worms have been expelled."
"But if this does not obey you, then plug and close the opening of the cannula with wax as I have mentioned above. Then perform the same distillations which were previously described in the treatment of worms, which you will find in the treatise on distillations."
"And this is your method with which you should pour medicinal oils into the ear using this instrument, of which this is the shape:" "And make it of silver or brass, narrow below and with a small hole in it above."
"And so that it fits into the concavity of the cannula without blocking it where necessary." "And if you wish, take the wand and wrap its end with soft cotton wool, then pour oil into the concavity of the cannula or juice from some herb or whatever medicine you wish in the cannula â€” which is already inserted in the ear â€” and then insert the wand with the cotton wool above it and gently squeeze it with your hand until the oil has been expelled into the concavity of the cannula and the patient feels the oil inside."
"And whatever is poured into the ear should be first warmed slightly over fire." "And make sure that the cause which you distil into the ear is not too hot, for medicines for the ear do not tolerate this."
"Chapter VII."
"Of the treatment of blockage of ears."
Some children sometimes exit from the wombs of their mothers unperforated, and this has happened in some men, opacity in the middle of the ear due to phlegm or flesh undigested in that place; and this opacity is sometimes formed in the front of the opening of the ear which does not hinder sight, and sometimes it is on the outside parts.
And that which happens in its front, which does not comprehend sight, is among the most difficult conditions to heal.
And regarding that one where sight succeeds, it is necessary that you hold the sick person's ear towards the sun and look at that. And thus if sometimes opacity appears, open that with a subtle spatula of which this is its shape:
If the end of it where its width is small, one part is sharp and the other is not; and the spatula should be of two lion's teeth to prevent injury to the ear.
And thus if the opacity is due to flesh born in the ear or in its membrane, then use those with subtle forceps and cut that violently until all the flesh is removed.
And if opacity is in front of the ear, then take a subtle lion's hair and heat it with fire a little, and put that into the membrane of the ear.
And thus if there is opacity with what the sick person finds easy, due to gravity of hearing, forcefully remove that oppression with ease; and make sure not to damage the nerves of the ear.
And then place the ear drop made of it according to the quantity of the width of the tract which you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the healing of the wound; or else take any wax and insert that into water and pulverize it over it three times and use it; and if sometimes the ear is already inflamed, then it is necessary that you cut the wax and replace it with another wax which you will wrap in cerot made with crushed rose oil until the inflammation has been cauterized; and then treat it until it is healed.
But if bleeding occurs, then immerse a sponge or cloth in hot water and place it over the ear, and use the other treatment which restricts blood flow, which is described in the treatise on distillation.
Chapter VIII
Of the Treatment of Swelling Which Occurs on the Eyelids.
"Those who have experienced some moisture on their eyelids occasionally are sometimes dry-eyed."
"Therefore you should have those [servants] ready with towels or cloths, and untie those [servants'] aprons from their waists, and carefully pause over the area as described."
"If pain comes with blood flow, then cauterize it with a fine silver-hot cautery."
"And the best cauterization is close to incisions and wounds that repeatedly return when there remains some cause of their weeping; and when they are cauterized with fire, those causes are burnt up and do not return."
"Chapter Nine."
"Treatment for swelling that comes to the eyelids."
"Many times it happens that in the eyelids there is some cause that resembles hardness and toughness, and for this reason it is called swelling."
"And it is an accumulation of thick humidity in the left eyelid above."
"Therefore, the operation in their case is that if the swelling appears on the outside of the eyelid and extends all around; its cause is light."
"Therefore, cut over that [swelling] with a transverse incision, and carefully explore around it with ease; and suspense it with pressure and cut off that [swelling]."
"And if its size is large, then adjust it with suturing; and cure it until it is healed."
"And if it is small, you will not suffer harm from that because the ointment for it restores it and heals it."
"And if the swelling leans towards the inside of the eyelid below the surface, then raise up the eyelid and suspense the swelling with pressure, except that you do not need to make an incision; and press it all around; and if the eyelid is lengthened by incision, then know there is no cause."
"And when you make the incision, wash the eye with salt water; and cure that place with what heals until it is healed."
"Chapter X."
"Of the treatment of swelling above the eyelid."
"Swelling is a growth that occurs in the tissues of the eyelid above, and especially in children, it aggravates their eyes and affects their sight greatly; and they cannot look at the brightness of the sun because tears flow down to them."
"And therefore they constantly have to keep their heads elevated and sleep with their heads raised; and because of this the eyelids of their left eyes become wet and inflamed, and there is already a threat of swelling apparent in the eye; and when you press that place with your fingers, you feel heat within them."
"And there is some way of operating in that case where the illness causes him to hold his head tilted back with his chin raised up and covered with a cloth; and make a circle around it according to its size, and place that on it and press with your fingers all around until swelling is gathered together in the middle of the circle; and then cut through the middle of that humidity with a spatula incision made transverse, and let the incision not be greater than the incision that is made in trepanation."
"But beforehand cover that you cut through the entire cord until you reach the swelling, because in most cases it proceeds through a fissure according to its form of whitish hardness."
"Therefore extract it with cloths which you have wrapped between your fingers at the outer parts and roll them between your right and left hand until it is completely gone."
"And be sure that you do not adjust in the incision lest with the spatula you reach the eye and damage it."
"But if no swelling appears at the beginning of the incision, then adjust it slightly with ease until swelling proceeds; and then extract it as we have said; and then apply cloths dipped in wine and vinegar to that place and cover it with powders."
"And there are some who throw salt onto it and cover it up in the concavity of the incision so that what remains of that humidity."
"And then cure it until it is healed."
"But if an abscess occurs in the place after, then cure it with cataplasms of Cedar until it is healed."
"Chapter XI."
"Of methods for examining the eye."
"When the eyelids of the eyes are born with adjusted left eyelashes and overgrown eyebrows, then they do not allow light to reach the eye and cause ways of illness such as continuous tears and inflammation of the eyelids and skin, which could be the cause of destruction of the eye that is called 'tactinir' of the eye, and it is cured in four ways: either by cautery with fire; or with acute medicine according to what has been said earlier in the chapter on cautery; or it is done by tactinir through incision and suturing; or by canthotomy as I will say."
"And therefore you should hold the head of the ill person tilted back; then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it is turned, that's good; but if not, insert a needle into that one in which there is fat near the outer edge of the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate through the fat above, and close to the edge of the eyelid where the hairs are located, and pull the thread up with the eyelid folded back using tweezers."
"And then make an incision in the area inside the eyelid near the adjusted hairs with a spatula incision from the greater lacrimal duct into the lesser lacrimal duct; and then extract the thread and put powdered small bits of cotton or cloth under the eyelid, and sew it back together with needle and thread, so that it resembles the shape of a myrtle leaf."
"But nevertheless the shape should be according to the amount of elevation of the eyelid, because that is already diversified in people, since some require a greater incision of the eyelid according to how much it has become inflamed."
"And then make an incision with the spatula along the two lines which you have sewn together, starting from the greater lacrimal duct and going into the lesser lacrimal duct." "And if your incision is close to the natural hairs like the thickness of a barleycorn."
"And then place a clamp on one of the two angles of the cord and then excoriate it completely, and then approximate the two lips with stitches using gut or thin thread of wool, and remove the blood, and make what is superfluous from the threads adhere to both eyebrows with some adhesive agent if you wish to do so, otherwise don't bother."
"And then leave the stitches for three or four days, and then dress it."
"And if you wish, leave the plaster without stitches and dress it with something that dries and constricts, because the eyelid is raised due to the sealing of the plaster and the adhesion of glue; but stitching is better. And this is what the ancients said about taxanir."
"But nevertheless, if there is solicitude over the illness and it is of good operation, then fear should not be present in him."
"And there is another manner in taxanir, which is to sew the eyelid with stitches resembling a myrtle leaf shape, and then lift the eyelid using three separated and gathered threads according to this form:"
"If this is not possible, hold the eyelids open, and if they do not stay open, then take a needle with thread attached and insert it into the center of the eye socket. Insert another thread near the larger lacrimal gland, and a second thread near the smaller one, adjust these threads evenly between your fingers, and raise your hand slightly upward to lift up the entire eyelid."
"And next, adjust both lips of the wound with stitches, and dress the area that is healing."
"If an abscess appears around your incision or wound, drain it with cerote and clean the surrounding area thoroughly."
"And sometimes the eyelid margin turns inward, in which case you should use the technique mentioned earlier for incision; but stitching is usually more effective."
"The procedure for cauterization with hot irons is as follows:" "And if you wish to cauterize the eyelid margin, first turn it inward and then incise along the line indicated earlier; next, prepare two thin wires or rods whose length is equal to that of the eyelid margin and whose width is less than that of a needle." "And once you have incised both ends of each cut, grasp the threads with your forceps."
"Apply each with subtlety beneath this which superfluously flows from the eyelid of the eye, and compress the tubes of each divided part with strong constriction, leaving it so for several days, because the conduit will die and be denied due to the constriction, and it can enter until such time that it falls by itself."
"If it is delayed, break the thread with the tweezers, and immediately cure the ulcer until it is healed."
"Once it has hardened, elevate the eyelid and the hairs will not pinch."
"And this is the form of two tubes which you shall make according to this form:" "and have the quantity of length and width neither more nor less."
Chapter XII
"Regarding the elevation of painful hairs in the eye with a needle when the hair is hard."
"When hairs are unnatural, hard, rough and painful to the eye, then the operation in this case is that you take a subtle needle and place it on that thread of fine silk and lion's hair, and carefully adjust its ends so that it does not hurt." "And let the length of the threads be of the quantity of a palm."
"Then take another subtle thread and tie it below it, and knot its ends if you wish."
"And then place the patient's head on a pillow facing the sun so that your work is illuminated, for this is subtle and delicate surgery."
"And then insert the needle into the root of the hair that needs to be removed, and make it penetrate into the eyelid quickly until you extract it from above the natural hair."
"And then pull out the hair from above and insert that one in its place; let there be one or two or three hairs, but no more than that."
"And then remove your hand with the hair so that it is completely outside of the eyelid along with the natural hair."
"But if the hair is pulled out along with it and the pellet is not removed, you will pull it again on both sides with the thread that you have prepared with it until the pellet comes out from underneath."
"And then close it with the vision of the eye, for then you will remove both the hair and the thread, wipe carefully and close the eyelid, and leave it like that for two or three days until the hair adheres to its place and grows back good flesh."
"And if the hair is too short, then you adjust a long natural hair and lift it with that one; or let it remain until it grows out about some space, and then you lift it."
Chapter XIII
On the treatment of twitching that occurs on top of the eyelid.
When twitching occurs in the eyelid, it is a contraction of the eyelid when it contracts on top, either to the right or left side, due to bad consolidation of plague, section, or cauterization; and this twitching is called "leporina," and this twitching can be natural or accidental, and it is caused by consolidation of plague, sections, or cauterizations, or by resembling those who are afflicted.
The method of the operation for this is that you should cut open that consolidation and separate the lips of it, and place in it a wick of linen cloth dipped in water, and tie those up until they are healed.
And it is not necessary that you use any cure for this that dries or constricts it, because if you do so, it will return to twitching worse than ever before.
Use on it causes that soften it like fenugreek, and soak it with the water in which it is cooked and sown, or with diachylon ointment, which has been liquefied with some of its oils, and dip the wick in that, and cure it with that.
And the treasure of your cure is that you should perforate with everything that is not consolidated according to the form that it had at the beginning.
And this operation that we have spoken of is nothing but some correction of twitching that does not return to its original form again.
Chapter XIV
"Concerning the treatment of blepharitis occurring in the eyelid."
"This blepharitis, which occurs on the left eyelid, is properly called blepharitis. It may be either congenital or acquired."
"Acquired blepharitis is caused by inflammation or injury or burning or other similar conditions."
"The procedure for performing this operation is as follows: Take a needle with doubled thread and insert it into the flesh, then pass it from the left lachrymal duct to the right, so that the thread reaches both ends of the flesh."
"And then extend the flesh at its two ends using the needle and cauterize it with the hot needle, then cut it open with a wide spatula." "And then if the eyelid returns to its normal shape, that is good. But if not, take a splint and place it in the slit of the eyelid, and with that turn the eyelid back into position, and suture the two wounds on the inner side of the left eyelid."
"And if the ends of the two wounds are at two corners of the incision, then make sure that they meet, and that their angle is such that when they come together they form a straight line."
"And this shape is called the Greek letter lambda (Î»)."
"And then remove that flesh on the amount that is equal to the thickness of the eyelid on its inner side."
"And then approximate the separated parts and suture them with linen thread; and then dress it using the moistening medicines and compresses that we have mentioned, until it is healed."
"And if there are any recurrences later due to a wound, suture or cautery, then it is necessary that you make an incision with a flat blade on the skin of the eyelid according to what has been described above." "And then separate with a compress between the two lips according to what we have said."
"In summary of the discourse on the treatment of inflammation when it is above or below, that which runs in the operation according to what has been prepared for the form of inflammation is very diverse."
"And the skilled artisan always prepares everything in every possible way that it is possible for him to restore the figure to its natural form or near to it, and this illness according to what suits him of the operation and instruments in the most favorable circumstances."
"Chapter .xv."
"Of adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea."
When this condition occurs in many men, such that the eyelid is solidified above with albumen of egg white, and prohibited from its natural movement and functions, then you should insert the edge of a knife beneath the eyelid and lift it upwards or stretch it open with a hook.
Next, you should incise the adhesion with a fine spatula, which is not too sharp to avoid harming the tissues. Use one that is somewhat blunt so as not to cause discomfort to the patient during the operation, and carefully move the spatula to avoid damaging the eye.
Your incision should extend just enough to release that adhesion, allowing the eyelid to return naturally to its original form and for all the adhesions to be healed.
Next, you should apply saltwater to the eye, using which you will rinse it clean; or, dissolve sugar of lead in water and use this solution instead.
Then, gently separate the eyelid from the eye using cotton soaked in egg white, and apply a compress made of linen infused with egg white. On the third day, begin applying consolidating ointments to promote healing.
Chapter XVI.
Of incision of the nail and caruncle of the lacrimal apparatus.
Know that there are two types of nail: one is nervous and similar to hard skin; the other is non-nervous and similar to congealed white humor. When the latter is touched by forceps, it may become detached and the forceps may not grasp it properly.
"And both species begin only from the larger tear duct, which gradually covers the eye, prohibiting light and its movement."
"Then the manner of operating in the incision is that the patient holds their head back while you open their eyelids, lift the eyelid with your thumb, and carefully grasp the edge of it with tweezers." "And then you take a needle and insert it into the edge of the eyelid, whether it be that of a horse, cow, ox, or similar, and fold the tip of the needle little by little until it is in the middle of the eyelid, and penetrate it with the needle, and pull the eyelid with thread; extend it to the outer edges and remove excess skin from around the pupil." "And then you follow that thread through behind it."
"And then you incise the remnant in the root of the lacrimal duct with a fine spatula or small forceps, and lift the tissue of the natural lacrimal away so that there is no continuous flow of tears through the incision."
"And sometimes the eyelid is extended with only one edge or thread, as we have said, and then it should be carefully excised with a lion's claw spatula, which has this shape:"
"And be sure that with the spatula you do not touch the corneal tunic and that there is a rupture in it, and that the pupil is perforated."
"Then the incision should be washed with a little salt water or clear honey and left open for another day; and then it should be cured with water until it is healed."
"And if the eyelid is not swollen and you cannot insert the needle or it does not stay in place, then often this type of eyelid is cured with medicines, and is healed by stitching it up again in the division."
"And if you want to incise it, then open the wound of the eyelid and take a fine lion's claw spatula with sharp points shaped like this:" "with fineness." "And if sometimes the eyelid becomes hardened and contracted and stuck in its root, then distill from your mouth into the wound clear honey or rose water or salted water, and close the wound the next day."
"And then continue operating on that eyelid until everything that is of it has been removed, except for the contrary aposteme, which should be left in the wound, for when you close it, cure the aposteme at first so that it may heal."
"And then continue your operation on that eyelid until it is healed."
"If the prominence of the lacrimal caruncle is found in the wound causing great harm, then suspend it with a thread. Incise that from there with one cut, but do not complete the incision so as not to incite continuous tearing."
"Then promptly distill into the lachrymal chief rue and make it saturated so that it may be healed."
Here is the translation of Chapter XVII from "Capitulum":
"Concerning the incision of an abscess and what is born of flesh adhering to a bone."
"Sometimes flesh grows in the eyes of some people, pressing upon it so as to cover the pupil, or approaching or adhering to the eyelids and thus forcing the eyelids apart at their margins like the petals of a flower."
"When operating in this manner, let the patient lean their head back on the table. Then open both eyes of that person and collect all that flesh with suitable scissors, taking care not to harm the eye with them; then carefully cut through all the flesh at its beginning using a scalpel, being careful not to slip during your operation."
"And let your incision be such that you cut through it completely, using either a scalpel or the spathula which we have recommended for nail cutting, or small forceps with which you can collect scar tissue according to what is appropriate in this case."
"After your incision is complete and all the flesh has been removed, then fill the eye with finely crushed salt or drop into it powder similar to that of corrosive medicines. Then place over the eye a bandage of egg-white so as to ensure proper healing of the wound."
"And if there is some swelling and the wound is suppurating with cauterization feared, then leave the eye alone and treat that abscess according to what pleases you. Then repeat this operation until it is healed, doing likewise for any flesh that has grown into the eye of this kind."
"But you must avoid all care of the eye with forceps or any other instrument, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that member can bear such operation."
"Chapter XVIII."
"Of the collection of scar tissue in the eye."
"Scar tissue are veins that become hard on the eye and prevent its operation. They can be removed after several days of using a compress."
"At the beginning it is necessary that you observe whether the eye with scar tissue is healthy and not suffering from any other illness besides scar tissue, then collect that scar tissue."
"And when you command the patient to hold his head steady and suspend those veins with one or two threads according to your discretion, that thread should be of fine doubled silk in this manner:"
"or two threads graduating into one body thus:"
"And then tie those veins with fine forceps carefully and gently, wiping away blood from time to time until you see that those veins are completely removed from the eye and turned back."
"And be careful not to touch the eye with the sharp point of the spathula. Also, if your operation is performed in the middle of the day facing the sun, be very firm in your operation so that you do not scratch anything but those veins."
"And when you have completed the operation, then drop into the eye chief vinegar or rosewater for its sharpness will corrode what has been removed from the scar tissue."
"But if it is not possible to remove everything in that hour, then plaster the wound with whatever pleases you for its pain, and leave it alone for several days until the pain has subsided and it is assured that no inflammation will occur."
"And repeat this treatment according to your best judgment until it is healed."
"Here is the shape of the forceps:"
Chapter XIX.
On the reduction of a fractured nose
"When you treat a fracture of the nose with cautery or irritating medicine according to its narration and it does not heal, then do not try to set it until you have opened up over the inflammation at its maturity and drawn out all the moisture and pus until the bone is exposed."
"And when the bone is exposed and you see corruption or blackness in it, then scrape it with an instrument shaped thus:"
"And it is called the 'sharp head', and should be made of hard steel with a round head thus, having small holes pierced by a file or awl for fine piercing."
"And place it on the corrupted part of the bone and turn it between your fingers while pressing gently until you know that all corruption has been scraped away."
"And do this several times, then restore the place with drying and astringent remedies."
"Therefore if the place is consolidated and good flesh has been produced there, and the skin has separated from the healthy part and remained for forty days without being renewed or inflamed or having any accident happen to it, then you know that it is healed."
"But if not, then do not try to set it but reduce the fracture according to the shape of the nose in this way: first uncover the broken bone with a file or irritating medicine. And when the bone is exposed, then take tweezers shaped thus:"
"The ends of its iron are triangular, and its shaft is thinly tapered towards the end as seen here."
"And then place it on the bone near the lacrimal duct; lengthen your hand a little from the eye and turn your hand with the tweezers until all the bone has entered, and the patient feels pain because of the wind that escapes through there when you move your hand."
"Then restore the place with drying and astringent medicines as I have told you earlier."
"So when the flesh has grown and the place is hardened, then the matter that formerly flowed outwards returns to the nose, which is now easily produced upon the pain."
Chapter XX.
On the reduction of the prominence of the eye
When the swelling has reached its fullness and no apparent harm or reduction occurs, then you should release the patient, and next follow them, and next place cool compresses on the head without scarification and suck with a good suction cup; and next apply a liniment to the swelling made of aloe, acacia, mustard, and sarcocolia, and finally sprinkle the poultice on the swelling with many powders.
The manner of the powders is that you should take cloths of lion's mane mushrooms, each cloth being folded in four layers; and make them from those mushrooms.
And then place those one on top of the other according to the quantity that the swelling has required. And then place on top of those a hard cloth with strong binding, and repeat the suction cups without scarification; and then remove the suction cups and let the swelling rest day and night.
But if during this time the bandage becomes loose, it should be tightened again.
And likewise remove the bandage day and night as we have said.
And if sometimes the swelling has already been reduced, that is good; and if not, then repeat the poultice with powders, binding, and suction cups until it is healed.
Chapter XXI
Of the incision of the prominence of the tunic of the uvea.
When there is disruption in the tunic of the uvea and it becomes prominent and projects outside the eyelids like a grain of mustard seed, and the shape of a human face appears due to this, and you wish to incise that, then the operation in that case is as follows: You should insert the needle into the depression of the uvea from below upwards, and next insert another needle on the side where the lacrimal gland is located, and make that penetrate and leave the first needle according to its position; and next incise the location of the doubled thread and lift up with that the part of the uvea in the circuit of the needle, and pull it tight.
And next remove the needle and place on top a pad infused in egg white albumen and leave it there until the thread with the uvea falls.
And then dress the wound with something that will comfort it until the inflammation is healed.
And sometimes it happens that the entire part is attached with a band of cloth around the wound where there is a prominent swelling, and then it should be perforated with a fine spatula that comes to the front of the wound, and the humid albume runs down, and thus the wound descends and enters quickly.
And then pull it tight until it is healed.
Chapter XXII
Of the treatment of an inflamed eye.
This illness called aconati is naught but phlegm, which collects in the body like descending water.
To treat this illness, make the patient sit on an upright chair and hold their head firmly in your hands on both sides. Then press the area where you see the phlegm gathering until it stops flowing downwards, and keep their mouth closed so that no air escapes while you do this.
And if it does not flow downwards, know that it is water.
"If the descent is not prepared for the patient as mentioned earlier, then hold the patient's hands and carefully take a thin spatula and insert it over the fatty tissue around the corner of the conjunctiva with the tunica cornea at the entrance (into the wound), until the sanies is expelled."
"Then, once it has been expelled, immediately apply lukewarm water in which honey or gruel made from fenugreek and honey has been dissolved."
"And likewise, treat other causes until the patient is healed."
"Chapter XXII."
"On the treatment of watery discharge from the eye."
"We have already discussed the types of watery discharge and which ones are suitable to be treated with speech therapy, according to the patient's condition."
"Then, make the patient sneeze into a handkerchief and have them wipe their eyes with it, using firm pressure."
Approach and place your left hand near the eyelid of the patient's left eye if the eye with water is the left one; otherwise, use your right hand if the eye is on the right side.
Approach and with your right hand take a towel if the eye is left; otherwise, use your left hand if the eye is right.
Approach the tip of the towel near the corner of the eye along the thickness of the eyelid near the inner tear duct, and carefully wipe the eye with the towel using your hand.
Enter the eyelid and wait until you feel that the towel has reached its wet spot.
Make sure the path of the towel is parallel to the measurement from the pupil's edge to the end of the pupil's darkness, which is the corner of the eye; thus you will see the pupil with clarity through the cornea.
Approach the towel to where the water is inside the eye, then gently pull it down once or twice, and immediately if the water flows downwards you will see that the patient's vision improves quickly. Leave the towel in place over the eye.
Then wait a moment; if the water has flowed downwards, then gently wipe once more to ensure that no towel lint remains.
Then, when it is dry and no longer flows downwards, gently remove the towel with ease, turn your hand slowly bit by bit, dissolve a little of gem-quality salt in water, wash the inside of the eye with that, and then apply cotton wool soaked in rose oil and alum water to the outer corner of the eye, and tie it there.
Let us pause here on this subject, as those who are of our time should wait upon that which is written in books about this matter.
And if the towel does not obey you when inserting it into the eye due to its stiffness â€” for some men have eyes that are very hard â€” then you should take the spatula called an "albreda," which has this shape:
Then perform the conjunctival fornix with that [spatula], and do not end your hand in the track, and if you cannot make way for the towel to its subtle location.
Then gently insert the towel as we have said.
And you should complete your work by preparing the patient's sleeping area in a dark room where they can sleep on their back without any movement.
Pause for the nature of the water so that its nature is pure, and do not move your head to the right or left at all.
And let the bandage remain in place according to its position until the third day.
Then untie that [bandage] in that dark room and examine the free sight, show him some objects, then tie it back up again on the seventh day.
And do not perform this procedure during the hours of darkness or immediately after the infusion. Therefore, be careful with this because water can flow easily and abundantly from the eye due to intense gazing.
But if an abscess appears, then you should untie the bandage on the seventh day and correct it with something that will drain the abscess.
Then you should loosen the sight of the eye and pause on the face of it orally for which the gaze of the other eye is guided downwards towards that one for several days while remaining in a dark room.
Then gradually lead him out of that dark room and converse with him about his causes.
Know this: in the art of surgery, the apprentice is not excused from practicing some operations on living eyes. Therefore, you should be bold about performing these operations.
And it has come to our attention that some of those who practice the art of surgery say that fire is made in the eye with a hollow tube through which water is sucked out.
However, we have not seen this done in our land, nor is it written in any of the books of the ancients. It may well be a novel procedure.
And these are the forms of eye medications for those who do not know them:
They should be made of iron or brass specifically, and they should have their extremities cut in this subtle triangular shape, with the point being like this:
Chapter XXIV.
Concerning the treatment of flesh torn from the nose.
When different pieces of flesh are born in the nose that are attached to each other, and one cause of this is the assembly of many heavy scorpions or large polyps, this illness is called "polypus" because it resembles that type of polyp. And its flesh is cancerous and black in color; but it is not that kind of flesh called "lion's flesh" which is not black in color.
Therefore, in that case where it is not fraudulent or cancerous lion's flesh, you should make the patient sneeze between your hands and hold them over the sun, then blow his nose and pinch him on those pieces of flesh. Then remove that [polyp] from its exterior parts, and then carefully cut off with a sharp pointed spatula what you have grasped of those pieces on one side until you know that all the flesh has been removed. But if any cause remains for which excision is possible, then quickly remove it with one of the subtle instruments with ease so that no cause remains. But if it is bleeding profusely or an abscess appears, then pause and do what is necessary. Or if it is one of the malignant abscesses, then cut it out and cauterize that [area] until there is no more bleeding and all the cavities are open.
Then let him be sprinkled in the nose with a mixture of vinegar and water or vinegar alone. But if the nose is open and its moisture extends to the palate, then know that it has already been healed.
But if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then know that there is flesh torn from the upper bones of the nose that has not been removed by excision.
Therefore, you should insert a feather into his nostril with some thickness, and rub it in both nostrils, pausing between each rubbing for the length of one finger or more. Then generate the sneeze and insert an extremity of the feather into the nose with the reed or with another cause that is possible for him.
And after that has been done, let him throw his breath into the nostrils until it reaches the canals of the nose, and let it be exhaled over his throat, because many children at school often do this action, and it is an easy thing to do for anyone who wishes.
Then pause the two extremities of the feather, one extremity that exits over the nose and the other that remains in the nose. Then administer a suture of flesh with the threads on the feather, and do this until you know that the flesh is attached to the threads of the feather.
Then remove the feather and pause in the nose with the abstraction of blood for one day, and do this for three days or more until the ointment has rotted all that is left of the flesh.
Then at the end of the cause, pause in the nose with a lead cannula for several days until it is healed.
But if you desire an operation that dries up, use cautery with it.
And this is the shape of the instrument called "capipurge maker" with which oils and medicines are distilled in the nose:
And make it of silver or brass, shaped like a small open lamp with a small mouth, as shown in the picture.
"If you wish, make a closed cannula like a pipe, with the instrument's funnel-shaped end being flat and open. Hold this at the patient's rear while evacuating oil or water that you desire from their secretions."
"Chapter 25"
"About nostrils that are in the outer parts of the nose."
"It is rarely seen that a nostril appears on the outer part of the nose, and it is much admired and praised in those days when one sees such."
"And for this reason, you should cut off that nostril at the beginning of its appearance, and remove all of it." "And then pause upon the place where you have cut, cauterize or apply a burning medicine there."
"But if its excision is delayed until it becomes much admired, then consider whether it is walled-off, hard, of dark color and has little sensation. If so, do not touch that area with iron for it is a cranky ulcer; many times that which you incise may spread great mischief over the person who had it."
"And if the ulcer is of mild appearance and not dark-colored, sometimes incision may be possible throughout it. Therefore evacuate the disease and incise it without fear, then cure the area with something that dries and constricts until it heals."
"Chapter 26"
"About the suture of the nose, lips and ear when continuity is disrupted by plague or scarring."
"You should know that when disruption of continuity occurs in one of these cartilages (nose, lips or ear), little is gained from that operation except for a few men."
"Therefore, when some cause occurs to those parts (nose, lips or ear), you should consider if it is a fresh plague with its own blood. Then join the two lips of the plague with suture, and afterward cure it until it heals."
"And if the lips of disrupted continuity are already separated, and each is fairly healthy, then you should cut out each section of its apparent path until no blood appears." "And then join the two lips with suture and strengthen them. On top of that, sprinkle dragon's blood powder and heat it three times, then place a piece of diaphoretic plaster or some other consolidating plaster on the wound for two to three days, after which remove it and replace the plaster until it adheres by itself. Then cure with an ointment until healed."
"But the manner of suture is that you approximate the disrupted continuity either with needles as we have recommended for abdominal wounds or use fine thread as you know how."
"Chapter 27"
"For the extraction of those causes that appear in both lips in cases of internal disease."
"Often seen among many men in cases of internal disease are hard tumors resembling gristle on both sides of the lips; some small and others larger."
"Therefore you should turn the lips and split each of those hardnesses on both sides, and after the incision make the wound bleed completely until it stops flowing; then wash the area with vinegar and treat it with an astringent water to heal."
"Chapter XXVIII."
"The Incision of Adherent Flesh in the Gums."
"Often seen is this: over the adherent flesh of the gum which the ancients called albulus. Therefore you should suspend it with a thread or hold it with forceps and incise it down to its root, allowing the wound to drain."
"And then apply a poultice made of healing herbs or sprinkle powder that is astringent or caustic over the wound."
"If that flesh returns, then incise it secondarily, and cauterize it, for it will not return otherwise."
"Chapter XXIX."
"Regarding teeth with iron [i.e., dental fillings or braces made of iron]."
"When on the surface of teeth in places where teeth have been broken off or removed, and between the gums, there are rough, sharp, and sometimes blackish scales, with greenish-yellow matter or fluid that flows into the gum, then the teeth are decayed."
"And therefore you must do this: place the patient between your thighs and press their head against the back of their neck, and scrape off the scales from those teeth where such appearances occur, causing it to resemble sand, so that no cause remains. And this is done regarding blackness, greenness-yellowishness, and other discolorations."
"So if the above is not what you desire at the beginning of this section, then you may repeat the procedure on another day, or on the second and third days until you reach your desired outcome."
"And know that teeth require various types of cutting tools with different shapes and figures according to what is prepared for your operation." "And therefore the chisel with which a tooth is cut from its broken part is different from that used to scrape between teeth in other ways. And these forms of chisels are what you should prepare now:"
"Chapter XXX."
"Tooth Extraction."
"The tooth that you are treating for its pain may grow again and require complete removal because there is no reason why it should not regrow once it has been removed since it is a substance prone to recurrence in its removal."
"Therefore when the patient is forced to have that tooth removed, you must be firmly certain what the painful tooth is because often the pain occurs in a healthy tooth and if you remove the wrong one, the pain will not stop until the actual painful tooth is removed, as we have seen happen during operations by barbers."
"Therefore when you are certain what the painful tooth is and know it well, then you should scarify around the tooth with spathum in which there is some virtue until it dissolves from the tooth's gum completely. Afterwards remove that with your tweezers, or with delicate forceps little by little until it comes loose."
"Then use your large forceps with good traction or sturdy construction, and grasp the head of the disease firmly between them so that it does not slip away from you. Then remove the tooth straightly in such a way that neither breaks nor causes greater pain to the patient."
"And therefore if it is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments and insert it on either side of the tooth with ease and effort for its removal as was done at the beginning."
"But if the tooth is broken or decayed, then you must first cover that break with wax and strengthen it with the extremity of a thin wire so that it may not be further broken during your constriction upon it with forceps."
"And you must work carefully with the scarification around all parts of the gum and guard your strength so that you do not break or tear it apart and return upon the patient for a greater pain than the first one."
"And beware of doing what many ignorant barbers do in their foolishness and boldness regarding extraction without administering what we have recommended. For often they cause great illnesses upon men which are more difficult to treat than the tooth itself, leaving behind roots entirely or partially removed, or removing teeth with some bones from the jaw as we have often witnessed."
"And after the extraction of the tooth, wash out the mouth with hot water mixed with salt."
"And if there is blood flowing from it afterwards, as often happens, then take some quantity of sage and sprinkle it upon the wound. And if this does not suffice, cauterize."
"The form of the forceps and thin tweezers with which the tooth is grasped at the beginning should be long in extremity, short in handle, and thick so that they may not bend when using them."
"And let their handles be like those of tongs inside so that when you squeeze with them they do not bend, and their extremities are short."
"And let them be made of India iron well-tempered and made with straight extremities. And on the extremities of these have teeth which fit into each other and grasp tightly for constriction. Sometimes the extremities of these are shaped like the beak of a bird called the ciconia, which is hooked, and they are of strong constriction."
Chapter XXXI
Of the Extraction of Teeth and the Removal of Locked Jaw Bones.
When you need to extract a tooth that is impacted and there remains some cause for retention, then you should apply heat with hot water or use tweezers or forceps the extremities of which are shaped like the beak of a bird called the ciconia or hooked, in this way:
"The condition of their limbs appears like lime or chalk."
"And if you do not obey the instructions with these forceps or tongs, then you should place your hand on the root and strip off all the skin, and insert this instrument called such-and-such, which is a small lever whose shape is as follows:"
"And it should have a short, thick end that does not extend too far so that it is not bent."
"Therefore, if the root has been severed by this means, good. Otherwise, help yourself with these other instruments, whose shapes are as follows:
"The second instrument's shape should be triangular and have a very sharp tip."
"And here you will find help with this instrument, which has two handles in the following form:" "And there are other instruments that resemble large oyster shells, and this is their shape:"
"of the twisted or short triangular tip, which should be somewhat thick, and not pointed so as not to cause injury."
"And you should know that dental extraction tools are similar in form to other instruments."
"But the skilled and subtle craftsman finds for himself appropriate instruments according to what he understands about the operation and various diseases. For there are diseases for which ancient authors did not give or reserve proper instruments due to their diverse forms."
"But if the bone of the jaw or other mouth bones are sharp or cracked, then it is necessary to carefully use appropriate instruments and forceps for removing dental roots, as we have mentioned earlier. Here is a gesture with this form:"
"And it should be used gently little by little, and held tightly with the mouth so that it does not slip or escape until all of the bone is removed. Then apply medication appropriate to the area."
"But if there is a small hole in the bone, then scrape away that hole and its darkness, and treat it until it is healed."
"Chapter XXXII."
"Regarding the treatment of prominent teeth compared to others."
If teeth protrude beyond their natural course due to that form being disturbed, especially in women and even more so in venerable elders; therefore you must consider: if one tooth is not close to another tooth, and no surgery or splint can help, then that one should be removed; but if it is attached to another tooth, then you should cut that one with this instrument whose shape is like a pig's bristle, made of Indian iron with an extremely sharp point.
And your incision should be deep enough so that you can remove that tooth in three days due to the hardness of the tooth, without damaging any other teeth.
And if it is an erupted tooth that needs grinding, then grind it with an Indian iron file whose shape is like this:
And let it all be of Indian iron and sharp; and have many small pointed teeth like those on a file with which the tooth is gently filed little by little over many days, so that no other tooth is damaged or broken. And afterwards clean it well with thread and scrape it with sharp razors.
And if it is a tooth where one part is chipped and irritates the tongue, then you should grind that edge until its roughness is smoothed out and flattened so that the tongue does not rub against it and speech is not impeded.
Chapter XXXIII
Of the restoration of damaged teeth with gold or silver foil.
When teeth are damaged due to concussion and removal by percussion or fracture, and the patient cannot eat because of it, and you have treated them with astringent medications, but your treatment has not been effective, then for those that are strong enough, they should be restored with gold foil and not silver, because silver quickly tarnishes and turns black, while gold never changes.
And the foil should be in such fineness and thinness according to the quantity that can fit between the teeth; and the method of application is as follows: take the foil and fold it in half between two healthy teeth, and then shape it with two curves of the foil between the damaged ones, or one curve if there is only one, so that the foil reaches the healthy part of the other tooth. And then gradually fill in the space where you started, using your hand gently and skillfully so as not to damage the tooth.
And use a tool with which you press the foil between the roots of the teeth so that it does not shift.
And then cut off the excess ends of the foil with forceps or scissors, and adapt them in each place with gestures, and turn them over and hide them between the healthy tooth and the damaged one, so that they do not cause injury to the tongue. And then press it down as tightly as possible.
But if it comes loose or breaks off, reinforce it with more foil in the same manner at all times.
And this is how you repair two healthy teeth and two damaged ones, as shown in the illustration below:
And when one or two teeth return to their original position after the fracture, they should be repaired as described above, and then replaced.
This is not something that just anyone can do; it requires skill and expertise.
Sometimes it is convenient to use the bones of a cow as a substitute for teeth. These should be shaped like teeth and placed in the location where the tooth is missing, and then strengthened with foil as described above, and they will serve well for a long time.
Chapter XXXIV
Of the incision of the frenulum that extends onto the tongue and interferes with speech.
This frenum that hangs down from the tongue sometimes occurs naturally or is acquired accidentally due to a healed injury.
The procedure is as follows: have the patient open their mouth and hold their head still. Then elevate the tongue and cut through the frenum with a scalpel along its width until the tongue is freed from its attachment.
But if there is some hardness or thickness in the frenum due to scar tissue from a healed injury, then you should first grease it with oil and cut through it along its width until you have completely severed the frenum and dissolved the scar tissue.
Be careful not to make a deep incision in the flesh of the front part of the tongue, lest you cut too deeply and cause bleeding.
Then rinse the incision site with warm water or vinegar or salty water, and then apply a bandage to the tongue. Then tell the patient to keep their tongue out of their mouth at all times for several days to prevent reattachment of the frenum.
But if bleeding occurs, apply a compress soaked in vinegar. If the bleeding continues, then cauterize the area with a silver nitrate cautery stick, which is appropriate for this purpose. And then treat it according to other causes until it heals.
Chapter XXXV
"For the extraction of a ranula from under the tongue."
Occasionally, an aposteme resembling a small blister may appear under the tongue and prevent its normal functioning.
And the operation in this case is to have the patient open their mouth wide before you, and examine the aposteme.
And if it appears dark or black in colour, hard, where the patient feels no sensation, then do not touch that part as it is cancerous.
And if it appears white with humidity, then insert the tweezers into it and incise that little mucous membrane, and cut it completely; and if blood begins to flow during your operation, then pause for a moment, so that it may cease flowing.
And then return to your work until you have completely removed it, ensuring that it is washed with vinegar and salt. Then treat it with the other cure until it has healed.
Chapter XXXVI
Concerning the extraction of an aposteme from both ears, and that which is situated in the throat, as well as other apostemes.
When a swelling appears in the throat, it is called glandular, which are often joined together and located externally, known as the ears. If you treat them with water according to what has been said in this division and they do not heal, then consider whether the aposteme is hard, dark coloured, and insensitive. If so, do not touch it with iron.
And if it appears red in colour and the root is thick, then do not touch it with iron due to the flow of blood. Let it ripen on its own, and then you may remove it or it will burst by itself.
"When it has a white color, consistency, and its root is delicate, then that one should be incised."
"And before your operation, consider whether the abscess has already been opened by cautery and is fully drained or if it has decreased with some decrease. Then seat the patient facing the sun, place their head on a high pillow, open their mouth, and have the servant press their tongue down with a noble instrument, shaped as follows:"
"And it should be made of silver or brass, and it should be thin like a scalpel."
"Therefore, when you press down on the tongue with that instrument and the abscess is exposed to you, grasp it firmly with your thumb and forefinger. Then take pincers and place them on it, and pull it outwards as much as possible." "And after this, if you manage to remove some of the coats, then promptly incise it with that instrument, shaped as follows:"
"And after this, if you manage to remove some of the coats, then promptly incise it with that instrument, shaped as follows:" "And it resembles forceps, but its ends are curved so that the points of each are directed towards the other. It should be made of hardened steel."
"But if this instrument is not available to you, then incise it with a scalpel, shaped as follows: sharp on one side and blunt on the other."
"And having made one incision, make another according to this same method of cutting. Then wash the wound clean with fresh water."
"But if there is bleeding, wash it with water from a decoction of rosehip or myrtle leaves, similar to those remedies that have the power to stop bleeding. And continue treating it until it is healed."
"And sometimes, other abscesses appear on the glands or around those two ears. Incise them in the same manner as I have described for incising two abscesses at once."
"And I was called to treat a woman who had an abscess that had grown in her gland. It was dark-colored and painless, and it had already closed the mouth of the gland. The woman was breathing with difficulty, and she had been prohibited from eating or drinking water. She was close to death if something hadn't happened within one or two days."
"And the abscess had grown so much that it had formed two openings through which pus issued from two ducts."
"Therefore I extracted it vaginally and remained in one of their orifices, and removed that [organ], and a large portion was torn away. Then I inserted my finger into where the other passage begins, then I pressed the mouth closed and held its tongue down. And then I placed the orifice in that abscess."
"And you cut off a large part of it, but there was only a little blood flowing from it." "Therefore it was the death of that woman, and she immediately began drinking water, and ate food. And I kept incising that abscess many times over a long period of time, but another abscess formed in its place, which continued to grow longer."
"Therefore I applied heat and cauterized the wound of it, then added more [material]. And then I wandered around and did not know what God had done to that woman because of me."
Chapter XXXVII
**On Incising a Swelling When It Is Abscessed**
When catarr descends to the lung and is thickened and lengthened, then it is called perpendicular; but if it is at its beginning, thick and rounded, then it is called phlegm.
But if the cure is not achieved with what has been said in this section, and especially when an abscess has already formed but is still hidden and subtle, then you should incise where it becomes rounded; and if it has reached that length and is sanguineous, of dark color or black, and does not cause pain, then you should fear the incision, for there is danger to the patient in this case.
And when you find it according to the manner that I have indicated by its whiteness and length, then you should cause the illness to cease and press the tongue of it with an instrument whose shape is appropriate for this purpose, and then place a new bandage on top of it, draw it downwards and incise it with one of two instruments which are used in the incision of abscesses.
And you should not incise more than what is appropriate to the natural term without addition, for if you incise too much, you will wound it.
And in the incision, use what has been recommended in the incision of abscesses, and heal it afterwards until it is healed.
But if the illness is frightened by the incision of it, then you should use a cautery in its cauterization without fear, and the manner of cautery in it is not other than with hot water, and that is to place the head of the illness on the little finger, and press the tongue of it with the instrument which has been mentioned, and take some of the water which has been mentioned in the chapter of cautery, and apply it with a live coal, and do so neither too thick nor too subtle, and fill with that the concavity of the instrument whose shape is this:
Let the extremity of the concavity in which the medicine has been placed be thus shaped as the concavity of a spoon of ray, and place the instrument with the medicine on the wound, and let the illness drip onto its side so that no saliva or spittle from the mouth of him who receives the internal medicine falls into his throat lest he choke.
And then you place your hand with the medicine on the uvula and express it for about half an hour until you see that it has become blackened and settled by the biting of the medicine.
And if you wish, take cotton and envelop that on the extremity of the ray, and submerge the cotton in the medicine, and insert the ray with the cotton into a cannula from above until the cotton adheres to that cannula, and do this many times until you succeed in what you want from the cautery of the wound, and then leave it alone because it will dry out and fall off after about three or four days.
And if you need to repeat the medicine, repeat it, and then afterwards cleanse the cautery around the wound with cotton dipped in border, and remove with that what is on the circuit of the wound from the medicine, and wash it with hot water, and dress it afterwards with embrocation, and finally with compresses until it has healed.
And this type of treatment was saved that incision and cautery were both long from fear.
Sometimes the uvula is cured with something so subtle that cautery and incision are not needed, because it is treated with sublimation in this manner: take calamint, hyssop, oregano, rue, saffron, camomile, broadleaf plantain, and other similar herbs of the plants, adjust all those causes, or some of them, in an earthenware pot, and let them be immersed with sour wine, and boil; and let the earthenware pot be well covered with dough, and let there be in the middle of the pot a tube over which is placed a concave instrument made of silver or brass.
And let the extremity be inserted into the mouth of the patient until the vapor can reach the uvula above the uvula until the uvula becomes quite obscured.
And then repeat this many times until it has dried out, and make sure that you do not perform this treatment at the beginning of the formation of an aposteme, because it would too much stimulate the aposteme, and you should not do that, but rather await the declaration of the aposteme from the cautery.
But if you do not have this instrument present, then take a cane and attach at its extremity a clod of earth, so that the mouth of the patient is covered, because the clod of earth prevents the vapor from burning the mouth.
And this treatment is good for health.
Chapter XXXVI
Of the extraction of spines and of what adheres in the throat and other causes.
Many times adhesions are found in the peritoneum or spine of the feet or some other cause.
Therefore you must remove that which is visible of those [adhesions], upon which the eye catches sight, because as you press the tongue with an instrument beforehand, it will be declared to you what is in the throat.
And that which is not apparent and is hidden in the throat, you must make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because easily the cause attached to the throat will be forgotten through vomiting; or else have the patient swallow a piece of napkin or a bit of lettuce leaf or a mouthful of dry bread; or take a piece of damp sea-sponges and tie it tightly with flax, and make the patient swallow that, because when it arrives at the place where its spines are extracted, they will be removed then. And also take an eel and tie it tightly with flax, and let it be within the table and softly be extracted; or else take a porridge and softly place it and softly bring it out.
But if those causes which we have mentioned are not forgotten from those [adhesions], then you must use an instrument of lead made in this way:
"It should be larger than a small one, and at its tip there is a concavity which you will insert into its mouth with ease."
"And the patient raises their head upwards, and be careful that the contact of their forehead with the throat causes them no discomfort or pain."
"However, the patient should preferably insert it themselves, using their knowledge of the location of the cause annexed and placing it downwards, then pulling their hand up with the instrument, all according to the quantity that has been prepared so as not to forget."
"The chapter is thirty-nine."
"On the extraction of a blood clot annexed to the throat."
"When the sanguissuga is medicated with what we have said in the division of cure with medicines and does not succeed, consider the hours when the throat of the patient is towards the sun, because you will then be able to grasp its tongue with the instrument which we have recommended to you."
"Therefore, if you grasp the sanguissuga, extract it either with a small hook or with subtle gestures appropriately."
"And if it is not possible for you to extract it with that, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the throat of the patient, and appropriately place in the concavity of the cannula an iron wire heated on fire, doing this several times (until the sanguissuga is dead and removed from the throat), and abstain from giving the patient water all that day."
"Then appropriately take a vessel full of warm water and apply the mouth of it to that (the patient's mouth), and wash the mouth with that; and do not allow any cause or water to remain in it, but remove all the water after an hour again with your hand, for the sanguissuga immediately begins to feel the water."
"But if it is not forgotten what we have recommended, then fumigate the patient with cinnamon or asafetida through the instrument which we have recommended for the fumigation of the uvula."
"Do this, and then in a quarter of an hour you may give him something to drink."
"Ignite some coals in a bowl covered with cloth pierced at its center. Place the tip of your instrument through this hole and begin inhalation. Position the patient's mouth over the tube's end, sealing it to ensure steam enters their body until you feel the blood vessels dilate."
"If not, you should repeat the inhalation several times, refrain from letting the patient drink or eat salted foods and fruits, avoid drinking water, and ensure they follow this regimen diligently."
"This is the shape of the instrument used to remove blood clots from veins. It resembles forceps but has some curvature:" "...and its tip resembles the beak of an ibis, serrated like a rasp to prevent it from slipping when grasping vessels."
"Chapter XL"
"This chapter deals with the treatment of boils and their incision."
"Abscesses are various types, having many forms, according to their memory recalled in this book."
"And they differ in perforation and section of their form by two methods: one is for the species of abscesses within themselves; and what we learn about humidity."
"And the second method is near the places where accidents happen to the body, because an abscess that occurs in the head differs from one that occurs in the buttocks; and an abscess in the fleshy place differs from one that occurs at the joint; and each of them has its own treatment through surgery."
"And more about abscesses, some of which should not be perforated but rather await their natural ripening or completion."
"And there are other abscesses that must be opened when they are hard and not ripe according to their completion, such as those that are near the joints. For an abscess when it is near a joint, its essence extends into what is in its circuit, and often its ligaments or nerves of that joint become corrupted, which causes contraction of that member; or it is near a main member, and if you delay its opening until it is ripe, it can harm the main member; or it is near the buttocks, therefore open one that is not fully matured. And do not perforate it in crude condition with incomplete digestion, but rather that which is near the buttocks, so that it does not corrupt the anus and extend into the inner parts of the buttocks, and cause a fistula to be formed, or else let it heal without being opened." "And so you should know the time for opening an abscess, and that is when it has ripened."
"And you should know that an abscess is ripe when there is cessation of pain and fever, and around the decrease in redness and swelling, and the sharp point of the abscess, and other signs."
"And because you should know that the opening should be made where there is purulent matter, away from the abscess itself, and coming from the summit of its swelling."
"And always make the opening along the length of the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in the regions of the thigh or calf, and in locations of the sinews, nerves, arteries; and finally, in all locations where it is suitable; for those that are reflected, use reflection in opening them."
"But when the abscess is in a fleshy location, it is better to leave its opening until digestion has fully confirmed its completion, as we have said; for if you open it before that time, the wound of the abscess will lengthen and become very dirty, and often its lips are hardened and the depth of it increases."
"But some abscesses must be opened across the width of the flesh or body due to necessity, or according to what that member requires."
"And you should make a small opening for large abscesses and wide or multiple incisions according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses."
"And there are other abscesses in which it is necessary to make an incision with a curved blade and cut it when it has been made, as soon as it has reached its completion, such as those that happen in cases of dropsy and buboes."
"And there are those that are incised with three angles of sectioning; and there are those in which it is cut like the figure of a miter leaf, such as the abscesses of the anus."
"And there are some in which round sectioning and crescent-shaped sectioning are used, similar to those."
"But for those abscesses that do not present themselves as deeply seated abscesses, you should open them with a superficial or flat opening only."
"And when the abscess is large and has collected much pus, you should open it but do not try to remove all the pus at once; take out a portion of it, then pack the abscess again the next day, gradually removing larger portions each time until it is completely emptied."
"And especially if the patient is a young child, woman in labor, infant, or elderly person in a state of decay; for many times the vital spirit is resolved along with the exit of the pus, and often the patient dies while being operated on."
"So be very careful with this chapter, and especially when opening these abscesses, you should clean the wounds and consider whether the wound of the abscess is small or a flat section; then administer the proper dressings or old rags. And if the abscess is large and the incisions are wide, then you should pack each wound separately until they heal together."
"And if a portion of the blade or curvature is cut off in the abscess, you should fill it with old lint or thread made from linen cloth, just as when dressing wounds without moisture. Then tighten it on the third day and proceed to treat it with what is appropriate for wounds until it heals."
"But if blood flows during your operation, then administer water boiled with vinegar in which a linen cloth has been soaked, and place it on the location of the bleeding many times."
"But if the bleeding persists, then you should administer remedies and treatment, using the powders that I have recommended in many places throughout this book and its divisions."
"But if it is wintertime and the location of the abscess has many nerves, then you should sprinkle powders made from hot wine and oil on that location."
"And if it is summertime and the locations are fleshy, then you should apply powders moistened with water and oil or wine and oil, all of which has been heated until the third day, as we have said. Then drain the abscess, clean it, and administer whatever is appropriate for its treatment until it heals."
"And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of treating abscesses in general; but according to the method of distinction, I have already mentioned how each type of abscess should be treated individually."
Chapter XLII.
Chapter XLII: Incision of Abscesses that Occur on the Neck
In the neck, small abscesses occur, and they are of a type that contains tunics that are made from them; and there are many species of them.
And among them are pimples, and some contain moisture like lime. And among them are those that contain moisture resembling dust, similar to them; and some are stony and hard.
In the incision of all of them, and in their extraction, there is nothing to fear, for you should know that their extraction does not cause great injury.
The operation for incising them is that you express them with an instrument called the trephine, whose form is shown below, until you know that it contains.
For if what it contains is moisture, then cut it open with a longitudinal incision using a superficial incision according to this form:
And begin the incision along line BG until line FG. Then, once the moisture has been evacuated, strip away that which contains this moisture, leaving nothing behind, for it often returns if some cause remains.
Then immerse the wound in Egyptian ointment, if available, or else in water and salt. Fill it with this and leave it for another day, for with this you will corrode all that remains of its film.
"Then repeat this operation on that area with Egyptian ointment secondly and thirdly if necessary, ensuring there is no remaining cause of that inflammation; then treat the wound until it is healed."
"If an abscess contains fat knots, then you should cut into it following this shape:" "The section should have the shape of a cross, and cut incisions between its two lips and tear it apart entirely, exerting your strength to extract the tunic that contains it."
"But if your attempt fails, then do what I told you first."
"And similarly perform the operation and treatment on an incised abscess according to what I have told you; incision over an incised abscess is easier because it contains little blood and humidity."
"And sometimes there are cases of these abscesses that occur on the head in some people who have little humidity; this is why you should not cut into an abscess on the head of an elderly woman and tear it apart like a deaf, rough, white stone which cannot be broken down, otherwise she would be harmed by it."
"But in other accidental abscesses on the head that are not mentioned here, such as those that appear on children's heads or behind the ears, their incision should be a superficial one."
"And leave the perforation of those whose bottom is lower so that the body may be relieved from low-lying inflammation."
"And then treat those with what is suitable for their treatment."
"Chapter XLII"
Scrofula section: Those that occur in the neck.
Many times these tumors appear on the neck, armpits and groin; sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
And those that occur in the neck are many and are often engendered between them, and all scrofula of these is within its own tunic, as in the nodes and tumors of the head, as we have discussed.
And the types of these scrofula are many; for some are lapidary [hard and stony], others contain moisture, and some are malignant that do not yield to treatment.
Therefore, in that which is seen to have good disposition at the Touching, whose color appearing is somewhat like the color of skin, and is swollen in every part, and not annexed with the nerve of the neck, nor with the veins, nor with the artery; and is not tender; you should incise it with a superficial incision from above downwards on the line G.B., and cut out all that is swollen, and extend the lips of the skin with forceps, or with many forceps if necessary, as we have said in tumors of the head, and extract it little by little.
And it is more caution that neither vein nor nerve be incised.
And let the spatula not be too sharp, so that you do not hurt yourself with the incision, or worsen the illness, and incise only what is necessary to incise; for if you should incise a vein or artery and hinder your operation, then apply immediately to the wound powdered vitriol trisulphate or other powders which stop bleeding, and press the wound, and let it remain until the swelling of the tumor has ceased and the wound has begun to be mollified and healed. When blood is absorbed.
Therefore return to your operation before it is completed.
And therefore ask him about his teeth if there is any cause of the other little sores; then cut those and cleanse them.
And if it is on the right side of the scrophulus, cover that area so you do not cut into that scrophulus itself. Then cover that with a cloth doubled over tightly and let it fall by itself without hurting him.
"Then fill the cloth with hot old urine that you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then wash it."
"And if you cut into that entire boil, then immediately adjust the two lips of the cloth and bind it tightly so that there is no excess."
"But if there is still excess after cutting into the boil because of its size, you should then widen the incision and draw it out, apply stitches and do what has been said."
"And for those boils that contain moisture, pierce it with a superficial perforation where the point of maturity appears, and pause the perforation so that no pus escapes from underneath."
"And after piercing, apply ointment and compresses like those mentioned earlier, so that it burns what has come out of the boil." "And when you see that the wound is already clean, then apply ointment made from powdered guaiacum wood until it is healed."
Chapter XLIII.
Of section of the boil of an accidental aposteme within the scrotum.
The ancient ones called this section in the epilogue, and we have not seen anyone in our land who had it done.
And this is the inscription of their speech.
But in men there is danger of injury to the epididymis, which should be avoided, because if it is cut, there will be harm since all the veins and major blood vessels are located here.
However, in those who have scars on the mouth or cheek or two ears, when the illness is not on the canal, it is necessary to avoid the section of the epididymis to escape the damage that is caused by perforation.
Therefore, when we want to do this, we should incise the epididymis at three circles from the circles of the epididymis, or four with a small section across its width in those that are between two circles in quantity. The incision should be made in the skin, not in the cartilage, and this place is convenient for the section because it is devoid of flesh and blood vessels.
And if the physician is afraid [of causing injury], then he should extend the cheek ligament with one hand and carefully cut the ligament towards the canal, but avoid the blood vessels if there is any cause for that.
And then incise the epididymis according to what has been recommended above; this is indicated by the swelling that appears on the canal, which is due to its rupture and the absence of voice.
Leave the wound uncovered for some time.
Therefore, when the hour has passed in which perforation is feared, approximate the two lips of the wound's ligament, and then sew only the cartilage.
And then apply medications that promote wound healing and tissue regeneration.
And Albucasis says that the sum of what we have recommended is that there are some apostemes that have closed off the throat of the patient, and the illness has come on suddenly and the air passage is obstructed. Some people go to incise the epiglottis so that the patient may breathe through the wound for a little while and thus be saved from death.
"The patient should be commanded to let the wound open until the evil of the illness is consumed; and this will take three days. Afterward, command it closed, and care for it until healed."
"I saw that a servant had taken a knife and stabbed herself in the collarbone and thereby caused injury to part of the lung. I was called upon for treatment, and when I arrived, she groaned like one dead, and I uncovered the wound and drew out blood which was flowing from it."
"So I confessed that she had not injured any vein nor artery, and the wind came from the wound, and I treated her until she was healed."
"And it did not happen to the servant that she lost her voice; however, some days later she returned for further treatment of her condition."
"Now you say that in the section of the epilogue there is no fear."
"This is Chapter XLIV."
"Chapter on aposteme which occurs in the collarbone outside, and is called hernia of the collarbone."
"This aposteme, named hernia of the collarbone, is a large aposteme according to the color of the skin, and is more common in women."
"And it occurs in two ways: either naturally or accidentally."
"In nature, it is not born to cure."
"And accident occurs in two ways: one is similar to fatty tumors, and the other way is like an aposteme that is formed by the rupture of an artery, and this is feared." "And only those who are skilled in medicine should use cautery, not those who presume to do so without being asked." "And if you find that it is similar to fatty tumors and not attached to any veins, then incise it like nodes and remove it with water and a scalpel from the skin and bursa; but if not, then examine its entire nature and apply appropriate treatment until it heals."
Chapter XLIV
"On the sectioning of kinds of nodes."
"I have already mentioned all the kinds of nodes and their divisions in this chapter."
"And it is necessary that I explain again the difference between a node and an abscess, so as to avoid confusion."
"Therefore I say that in an abscess there is heat and fever and intense pain until the effusion of superfetation is calmed; but it becomes complete putrefaction which then stops the fever, the pain, and the heat."
"But a node does not have heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains cheylymph or the liquid that is in its proper sac."
The skin appears dark and the onset is sudden like lightning, it occurs thus suddenly, greater or lesser, there are two species: some are fat and contain moisture, and the colors of the moisture are diverse as I have described in the division.
Therefore, when you arrive at the treatment of a nodule, examine it and ask what instrument is called "intromes", according to which its form will appear in the chapter that follows.
This is the method of inquiry for apostemes and all kinds of nodules: take this instrument and insert it into the moist place that you find in the aposteme, and rotate your said instrument slowly until you know that it has penetrated the bone.
And finally, move your hand according to the size of the aposteme, and then withdraw the instrument and observe what is issuing from its trace.
And if the flowing moisture has been forgotten, regardless of its color, then you should incise it with a superficial section as I have said for other apostemes.
And if there is no moistness issuing from the trace of the instrument, then you should know that it is fat.
And dry it with a section having the shape of a cross according to this form: "Thus as you have instructed, suspend that with tongs, cut the chain from all sides with ease, and guard or preserve the skin or bag if possible, then extract that stone."
"However, if it has broken during the operation, it is not possible to extract that stone, therefore many times we leave it there, and afterwards you can crush it into pieces so that nothing remains."
"For if nothing remains of it, few or many, the knot will return according to its nature."
"And if some small part remains of it, then complete the wound with some powders of sharp and strong corrosives, clean the wound, and place over that which sits in cautery, and cure that with another cure until it is healed."
"And if the knot is large, then cut both lips of it and cure it with what encircles it."
"But if there is a pulsating vein on the opposite side, or non-pulsating, then tie it and empty that place of zigzag which is vitriol, leaving it so for two days or three until the wound dries up and the ebullition of blood ceases; and afterwards return to cutting what remains of the knot."
"Chapter XLVI."
"Concerning the forms of the instruments necessary for section and perforation."
"Of those are the forms of the intestines, and they are of three species; of those is large, of them is medium-sized, and of them is small."
"The large intestine has this form:"
"The form of introducing little ones is this:"
"Let them be made of iron, of alloy, of pointed extremities skillfully crafted, so that they may quickly penetrate into the wounds."
"And these are the forms of the experienced ones, and they are named Alberich, and one of them is called Berengar."
"Among those three spices, some are great, some are moderate, and some are few in number."
"Great experiment, form of it:"
"The shape of a mule, shaped like that"
"The shape of little experience, shaped like it:"
"This applies to those cases where there are bone spurs and exits and fistulas and boils due to such causes as this or others."
"And also make them redonts, thick ones like lions, just like big needles with which the seams are stitched together, and they are made of citrine, or iron, or lead, or silver. And the best ones are those that are made of citrine."
"And they are made of black lead, which is said to open the fistulas in whose concavity there are reflections, reflected with its levitation with those reflections."
"And they come in three sizes: some are long, others medium, and still others short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and the tightness of it."
"Form of large lead experient:"
"Form of medium lead experient:"
"Form of small lead experient:"
"The forms of the cones are of many kinds, for some are simple ones which have only one curvature, and they come in three sizes: large, small, and medium."
"And among them there are horned ones, and they come in three types."
"And among those there are some which have two curvatures, and they come in three sizes:"
"And among them there are some which have three curvatures, and they come in three sizes."
"And nonetheless all these things are necessary for their use."
A simple remedy for warts: Their form
Appearance of large warts having two curves Appearance of medium-sized warts with two curvature Appearance of small warts with two curves
Appearance of large warts having three curves
Appearance of medium-sized warts with three curvature
And these are the forms of the knives with which the warts and boils are cut and scraped, and there are three kinds: large, medium-sized, and small.
Shape of a large knife
Medium-sized knife shape
Small knife shape
The edges of those with which sectioning is performed are sharp and the other edges are not sharp, and they are not blunt in such a manner that there may be fear of cutting into a vein or nerve during the scraping of warts, and so that the disease may be healed and tranquility obtained by a little from the cauterization which ought to take place after the excoriation of the boil.
And these are the shapes of spatulas (almagidas), and they come in three sizes: large, medium-sized, and small, as you can see.
They are made of iron and resemble rods with which alcohol is made.
And they have a lateral edge pierced with a spatula hidden inside it, and in that part there goes from within outwards, whenever you wish, as you see.
The shapes of spatulas (spatimis), which are hidden among the aforementioned devices for the perforation of boils and are not perceived by patients, come in three sizes: large, medium-sized, and small. And these are the forms of those
The shapes of forceps with which the flow of blood is cut off and come in three sizes: large, medium-sized, and small. Here are their forms:
There are made of lemon peel, round with some length, and they are thin.
You should use these types of cupping glasses that are large, medium and small in number, so that by those removed the flow of blood can happen quickly when necessary, but otherwise they are not medicine.
Do not use these for removing blood from any part of the body, and only use them on fleshy areas such as the thighs, buttocks, arms, breasts, abdomen, and groin, similar to other moist fleshy areas.
Sometimes these instruments are made of small ones similar to forceps in this form; through which blood is removed when it is done by phlebotomy or incision of a vein or artery.
And sometimes they are made round like this:
Chapter XLVI
Of the care of the breasts of men, which resemble those of women.
Sometimes the breasts of some men become enlarged and puffy during sleep, and they are also large and resemble those of women with prominent nipples.
And if anyone has what was said above, it is necessary to make an incision in the shape of a crescent moon like this, from line B to line G, and then remove all the thickness, and then fill the wound with medicinal powder, and then close the two lips of the wound with stitches, and cure it until it is healed.
But if the breast is declining towards the sides and becoming softened by its size, like those of women that are hanging down, then it should be cut in two on both sides, with two incisions like a crescent moon shape, each containing the other at their end so that the larger line contains the smaller one, like this from line B to line G. And then remove the chain which is between the two lips of the wound, and reduce the swelling, and apply what we have said about stitching and powders as necessary in the care until it is healed.
But if you do not make the incision that is necessary because of the restlessness of the illness and the flow of blood, then it is necessary to fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment and leave it until what has been corrupted has rotted away, and then cure it until it is healed.
Chapter XLVIII
Of the perforation of abscesses that come from the glands under the armpits.
"These are boils that come from beneath the skin, of a type similar to scrofula, hard, containing pus that can be extracted."
"And of those that contain moisture; and those that contain moisture should be incised with a crescent-shaped cut according to this figure: from line G to line B. And when all that is inside the boil has been evacuated, then fill it with cotton wool and leave it for another day."
"And as long as the cotton remains, it should be dressed with an appropriate ointment until it heals."
"And if the boil is of the kind called 'nodes', or scrofula, then incise it as we have said in the section about scrofula."
"And if the boil has spread to such an extent that it becomes gangrenous, then apply a cautery as we have said before."
"Chapter .xlix."
"Of the incision of boils that occur by chance or by vein."
"When an artery is broken and the blood coagulation is above it, then often a boil occurs. And the signs by which it can be known whether inflammation and boil are due to an artery or vein: for when a boil is due to an artery, it is long and adheres to the front of the chest; and if you press on the boil with your fingers, you hear stridor."
"And that which is due to a vein returns towards the centre of the body."
"And the incision of this boil is an error, especially in those that are on the sides of the hips, and in the armpits, neck, and many other parts of the body; and if it is large, then its cauterization with iron should be avoided, and if it is on the extremities or head, it should also be avoided."
"However, regarding that which occurs due to inflammation of the mouth of an artery, incise in the direction of the cord at its length; and then make a small opening with a knife near the artery, and remove the tunics until it is exposed."
"And then take that needle and make it penetrate into the other side; and tie the artery with double thread in two places, â€” which causes you to have this evidence in the extraction of both arteries which are in the temples."
"And then punch the place that is between two ligaments with a spatula until all the blood there has been extracted and the boil dissolved."
"And then apply a dressing in which pitch is generated so that the ligaments fall down; and also treat it with appropriate ointments until it heals."
"And if it is a boil due to the section of a vein, then you should hold with your hand what you can of the boil with the cord; and then insert the needle on the side of the place that you have held with your hand, and make it penetrate; and tie it with double thread so that you extract it from the other side, and then ligate the boil with two strings according to what I have told you in the liament of grape 4 of two parts with two extremities of the thread."
"However, if you fear that the thread may be extracted, then insert the thread with that needle on both sides of all the boil near the first incision of the needle, and tie the threads in four places."
"Then dry the boil in its middle until it is completely dried out; and then incise the cord's superfluity, and leave what remains tied."
"And then pour over it the powder that you have submerged in wine and oil; and then apply the dressing made with calves and ointments until it is healed."
"Chapter on the boil that occurs due to torsion of nerves."
"Just as a boil can occur in an artery and vein, similarly, a boil can also occur in nerves when they are struck or due to excessive effort, and for similar reasons."
"And it usually happens in the places of the tendons or the heel, or in any place where the joints are strained."
"And it is a severe boil, and it resembles the color of another body, and it is in its greatest expansion without any opening when it is strongly stretched; then there is pain like stupor in it."
"And it is not aggregated in the front of the body; rather it is on the side of the cord, and it is swollen throughout its entire extent without going before or behind."
"Therefore, those that are in the joints should not be wrapped with iron, for it would cause great contraction."
"But those that are on the head or forehead can be incised with a spatula." If the abscess is small, then treat it with a lancet and cut it open lengthwise.
But if it is large, then suspend it with a hook, cut it open, and drain it; then approximate the edges; and close it with sutures, and dress it until it is healed.
Chapter .li
About the incision of an abscess that occurs on the cheek which happens in the belly.
Henceforth, I have seen many similar abscesses in the bellies of people and in other parts of their bodies which are called "fungal" because of their similarity to fungi; they have a thin stalk and a large head; sometimes the lips of these are turned outward, and they are either small or very large.
And I have seen one like this, in whose belly there were two parts which resembled fungi very much; and they had no difference between them in color or thinness of stalk.
And the lips of these were turned inward and opened, and moisture flowed from them continually.
Therefore I incised those abscesses and drained one which weighed eighteen ounces and the other which weighed six ounces.
And the operation in the incision of these is that you should consider the hours if the illness is humid, and if the color of the abscess is white, humid, with a thin stalk; then you should incise it with a broad spatula, and have cauteries ready by the fire, for often much blood flows out at once; and if blood appears, cauterize that.
And if the illness is afraid and trembling, beware of incising with iron; rather take fresh lead foil and stretch it over that abscess, in the manner which we have said; and leave it for two days.
And fit it closely to the narrowing of the lead foil; then do not cease stretching the lead gradually until it is completely cut and falls away by itself.
But if the abscess is of thick stalk, then its incision involves some cause for fear and trembling, especially that which is in the belly.
But it is possible to incise the majority of them, and immediately cauterize them so that they do not return.
And then treat him until he is completely healed.
And beware that you do not presume to incise an abscess which is of dark color, with little sensation, and of regular shape; for that is a cancerous one.
And I bring this up in memory of cancer.
Chapter LII.
Of the treatment of prominence of the navel.
Prominence of the navel is caused by many causes: either by fissures of the skin which is on the belly, and they come from it the tissue or bowel according to what happens in other ruptures; or by blood which flows from a vein or artery according to what has been said before, or by obstructed wind in it.
But if it is due to a fissure of the skin and escape of tissue, then the color of the abscess will be similar to the color of the body; and it is painless, and appears in various locations. And if it is due to an extrusion of bowel, then its location will be similar to what we have described before, but with greater diversity; and when you press on it with your fingers it disappears, and then returns; and there is a loud sound with it, and much swelling occurs at the entrance of the bath and violent turmoil.
But if it is due to humidity, then it will be painless and will not disappear when you press on it with your hand, nor will it become constricted or distended.
And if it is due to blood, then the abscess appears blackish declining.
"If it's flesh, then it's a severe, large, hard boil that is formed in abundance."
"If it's due to windiness, then its touch is painful."
"And its operation is that if the prominence of the navel is due to arterial or venous blood, or windiness; then you should refrain from treating it, because in this case there is fear and dread, as I have taught you in the chapter where I discussed boils caused by arteries and veins."
"And if the prominence of the navel is due to an abscess or tissue, then you should order the patient to hold their breath while lying down on their back with their arms extended. Then, feeling around the entire circumference of the navel with your thumb, order them to face upwards between your thighs but resting on their shoulders. Then circumcise the area around the navel using a broad spatula, as you had previously felt with your thumb. Next, extend the upper part of the boil using a large hook. Finally, ligature the area with strong flax or thread in a proper manner."
"And then cut the center of the extended boil from its base and insert your finger into that opening to search for the abscess. And if you find it adhering to the membrane, then carefully extract it and push it towards the inner parts of the abdomen."
"And if you have found tissue, then grasp it with a hook, and incise its excess."
"But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then circumcise that spot and return to your operation. Then take two needles, tie strong threads on each one, and insert the needles into the circumference you have made around the boil in a cross-like manner, penetrating them deeply. Finally, stretch the boil in four directions over the needles."
"And if you wish, remove the needles and leave that space open so that the stretched skin may fall back into place by itself. Or incise that area when it has become sufficiently softened and then falls back into place, and finally cure that area with whatever is appropriate for wounds until it heals."
"And if the prominence of the navel is merely an accumulation of flesh due to moisture or humidity, then it is necessary for you to cut into the boil as we have said and drain out the blood or moisture that you find there. Then cure the area with whatever is appropriate and promote healing."
"And if there is any remaining fluid in the navel, then evacuate it with a broad spatula, and then ligature the area with strong linen thread."
"On the treatment of cancer."
"We have mentioned in the division of species of cancer and its manner of approach to cure it with medicines, and that surgery is avoided for fear of ulcers; and we have said that cancer is generated in the greater and lesser omentum of the abdomen."
"And ancient authors have said that sometimes cancer can be in places where its eradication is possible, such as cancer located in the breast or the skin and its surroundings, which should all be removed."
"But when it is advanced and grave, nothing should be done near it because it cannot be healed from that place."
"And the operation on it is when located as we have said, to first alleviate and leave behind black bile for some time, and then drain that if there is an obvious tumor."
"And then prepare the patient for surgery in the location where it is located, and also prohibit during the operation some things that are harmful to him; and also remove everything from all parts with good careful excision so that there remains no cause of relapse of cancer." "And let the blood flow, and do not remove it lightly, and squeeze the places, and absorb the thick blood all with your hand or with an instrument which is within your power of the instruments."
"But if it is difficult for you to absorb thick blood from the incision of a vein or artery, then cauterize that until the flow of blood stops, and then treat him with other remedies until he is healed."
"Chapter 54."
"On the Treatment of Hydrocephalus."
"We have already explained, in the division, the types of hydrocephalus and the symptoms of each type, as well as their treatment with medications."
The one that is treated with iron is only the species of arthritis alone, and it is not approached with iron to the species of tympanites or the species of dropsy, because this is deadly.
And when you have treated this species of tympanitic dropsy with medicines and your treatment does not confer, then consider whether the patient has already attained debility from another illness, such as if it is in their lungs or intestines and similar ones. Then beware that you do not treat them with iron, for there is fear concerning this.
But if you see the illness of excessive virtue and in it there is no other illness but dropsy alone, not child nor old, then the manner of operating on it is that you raise the patient between your arms, and the servant presses their stomach with his hand, expelling the water from below their navel towards the right side of the abdomen, and then take a sharp-pointed spatula according to this form:
Let it be double-pointed long and pointed at both extremities like a spatula, but nevertheless let there be some shortness little by little in the middle of it, so that in the operation you do not go inside the belly with it, and wound him.
And then consider whether the generation of dropsy is from the bowels, for then it is necessary that you with the section make an incision along with the navel by about three fingers' breadths on the sides, on the right side above the pubis.
But if the generation of dropsy is from an illness of the liver, then your section should be on the left side of the navel by about three fingers' breadths.
And if the generation of dropsy is from the spleen, then your section should be on the left side.
And do not make your incision above the side towards which you wish the illness to go, so that the superfluities do not flow to that place freely.
And then pierce with the instrument all the way through the canal, and enter that section with it, elevating your hand with the spatula between the canal and the siphon, and you will expel it; and if the amount is like one fingernail or more.
And then pierce the siphon inside so that the spatula arrives at its desired place, and this is the place of the water. And then extract it and insert an instrument whose form is thus: and it is similar to a silver cannula; it is made of silver or iron or latten lion, at which on the lowest part there is a small hole, and on the sides there are three holes: two on one side and one on the other side; and its extremity is cut like this, thus like a feather:
"At the outer end of him, there is placed an armilla, because when the instrument reaches the water, then that immediately descends upon the instrument, therefore it evacuates as much water at once, for if you evacuate more than what is necessary at the moment, it may cause the patient's death by resolution of his animal spirit, or bring on a convulsion close to death."
"Evacuate that according to the quantity of its virtue and according to what you understand about the dispositions of the patient's virtue, pulse, and complexion."
"And when you remove the instrument, then retain the water which is retained by the cord that retains the tube that is over the siphon of which you are to pierce it in that manner."
"And if you repeat the procedure on another day if the patient can tolerate it, then extract a small quantity of water, and do this for several days continuously, being careful that there remains little or no water."
"But if you extract too much water from the patient, then treat him with earth burial, and much sweating in baths, and await him long in the sun; and treat him with drying medicines until he is healed."
"And cauterize over the stomach and the liver near the extraction of the water according to what I have recounted in the above mentioned."
Chapter 50.
Of the treatment of children who are born with the urinary openings unperforated.
Some children sometimes are born from their mother's womb with the head not fully pierced (or born feet first or in an incorrect position).
Therefore, it is necessary to quickly perform a perforation as soon as the child is born with a very subtle opening according to this method:
And then tie off the cord with a thin lead clamp and leave it for three or four days.
When it needs to urinate, remove and place it back again after it has urinated.
And if you do not tie off the lead, it is possible that urine may escape from around this opening and prevent it from closing.
"Yet that one whose wound is narrow should be treated with a leaden clave, as we have said, for several days until it widens."
"Among those in whom the wound is not in its place, it should be treated by lifting it up, which happens because some men are born with the opening of the urethra at the end of the glans penis, preventing urine from flowing properly inside. During urination, they must lift the glans with their hand to direct the stream outside; this is not natural, as sperm cannot flow correctly and it is a very serious condition."
"The manner of performing this operation is as follows: the patient should lie on their back. Then, with your left hand, grasp the glans firmly and stretch it outwards. With a sharp spatula, make an incision in the glans at the location of the urethral opening, taking care not to cut any other part, so that the midpoint of the urethra resembles the glans itself and the wound falls into its proper place."
"And be sure in your operation for the flow of blood that many times it happens thus: pause the bleeding with what you have cut off and dress the wound until it is healed."
"Chapter .LVI."
"Illness of the foreskin, occurring on the head of the penis, characterized by whiteness, corruption, blackness, and adhesion of the foreskin to the glans."
"Often this illness occurs on the penis, appearing as a fleshy growth."
"And of those, one is malignant and another is nonmalignant."
"Not malignant: when you have suspended it with a fine hook and cut around it until it is entirely freed; then press on it gently with Egyptian ointment; and afterwards dress the wound daily with clean linen until it heals."
"But if the illness is malignant, of dark color, then you should apply a caustic remedy around its opening and around its root."
"But if the illness is on the foreskin of an uncircumcised penis, and part of the illness is inside the foreskin and another part is outside, then you should remove the illness that is inside at the beginning until it is consolidated; then you should treat what is outside afterwards, for when you treat both together, it is not certain that the foreskin will not be injured."
"And if such sores occur on the genitals and foreskin which are black and inflamed, then you should remove all that is already corrupted or about to corrupt or has already begun to corrupt; and apply a plaster made of honey mixed with finely ground millet flour, barley flour, and salt."
"And treat it with another cure until it heals."
"But if there is a flow of blood, then apply cautery according to this method:"
"For cautery is of two kinds together: one for the flow of blood and one for the plague when it has corrupted."
"And if the head of the penis is completely destroyed at once, then you should insert a lead cannula into the meat of the foreskin so that urine may flow through it."
"In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion occurs only in those whose foreskin is too tight, and no circumcision is required over it; but when adhesion occurs due to a plague or an aposteme), you should cut with a blunt spatula until the adhesion is dissolved and the head of the penis is completely freed from all parts."
"And if it is difficult to separate them carefully, then you should cut some of the skin from the head of the penis and foreskin with a sharp spatula, for the foreskin, when very thin, can easily be pierced by its own thinness lightly."
"And then separate the foreskin from the head of the penis with a thread made of silk, which has been previously moistened in warm water so that they may not adhere again."
"And then treat it with styptic wine until it is consolidated."
"Chapter 57."
"On the cleansing of children and the treatment of what may occur during their circumcision."
"Circumcision is not a solution for continuity like other plagues. But since it is our operation and our will, and especially among children, it is necessary that we assign to it the best method and easiest path for preserving health."
"The ancient ones did not say circumcision in any of their books, because they did not use it in their laws. And it is only because we have acquired knowledge through experience that most artisans and barbers use circumcision and cleansing with a razor and cloths. They also use lime for binding and the nail for incising."
"I have already tried all these methods and found that the best cleansing is done with forceps, using lime for binding, and incising with a nail. For often times it escapes cutting too high, as the foreskin has two tunics, one of which remains beneath. It is therefore necessary to perform another incision and cause certain pain." "And in the cleansing performed by apothecaries, which is done digitally and used by barbers, it is not safe to incise the tip of the member, for often times it enters into its own track."
"But in the operation performed with a nail, iron may be encountered and corrupt your procedure." "And the foreskin of children is naturally short, and many times it appears in such a way that there is no need for cleansing. I have seen this myself."
"But in the cleansing that is done with forceps and binding with lime, its goodness has been experimentally proven to me, because the forceps are of proportional incision, so that the sharpness above is equal to the sharpness below. Therefore, when you press your hand proportionally with two sharp points, it cuts according to a comparison in one time; and there is compression of the lime with a figure containing the foreskin of the whole part without any error at all."
"And the first manner of operation is that you should make the child remain as still as possible if it understands a little, so that you only apply the lime to its foreskin and leave it on for another day."
"And appropriate for this manner is that you do everything possible to make the child happy, considering its intelligence." "And it is appropriate that you keep the child between your thighs and hold it firmly prepared, so that it is not centering. And hide the forceps in your hand or behind your ear, so that the child does not see them nor anyone else of the instruments."
"And appropriately, place your hand on the child's penis and blow on the foreskin. Then pull it out until its head appears, and properly cleanse what has gathered there of dirt."
"And the shape of the forceps used for cleansing is as follows:"
"They should have one side not-cutting and the other cutting, so that the tip of the nail does not come out, and let the length of the two points be equal to the length of two clenched fingers."
"But the error in cleansing is when you remove the foreskin entirely or cut it off unevenly."
"So you should stretch it out with your nail at your leisure in front of the inflammation, and cut it evenly."
"And if you cannot hold it with your nail, then pull it out with tweezers and cut it."
"But if three days have passed and there is still inflammation behind the penis, then leave it until the inflammation is softened. Then carefully remove it with your nail and cut it according to what you have prepared."
"And protect the head of the penis so that nothing sticks to it."
"And then care for it with whatever plaster consolidates from the powders that have been recommended in the treatise on powders."
"If you cut too much of the foreskin and follow the cuts above, it will not heal properly."
"And more care should be taken by whoever performs this treatment that it is cured."
Capitol .58.
Of the Treatment of Retained Urine in the Bladder
Retention of urine in the bladder occurs due to obstruction caused by stone or sand concretions, or by poverty, hardness of flesh, and similar conditions as those mentioned earlier regarding the methods of treatment in this division.
And if the stone is not dissolved with what has been said above, then it is necessary to administer an extraction using the instrument called a "syringe," which has this form: it should be made of silver and carefully worked like a quill from the feather of a bird, thin as a ray about a palm and a half long; at its end there should be a thin tube.
And the manner of extracting urine with this is as follows: take a doubled-up feather and tie it securely at its end with wool or cotton; insert the ends of the feather into the back part of the syringe, and if there are any superfluous causes of wool on it, cut them away with scissors, then insert it forcefully into the tube. Then insert the syringe vigorously with forceps, making sure that the edges are properly aligned and the opening is well lubricated with oil.
And make the patient lie on their side, bend them over at the hip, and insert the syringe into the bladder and the urethra with olive oil and warm water.
And insert the syringe gently until it reaches the root of the urethra; bend the urethra upwards towards the navel; then push the syringe inside that; continue pushing until it reaches the bladder, and when it enters the bladder, you will feel that the patient has reached their goal. But if this order is not followed, it is because of a twisted passage in the body.
"Then gradually extend the bile using wool."
"Next, apply a catheter for urine collection and use a syringe; continue doing so until the bladder is emptied and the patient's condition improves."
Chapter LIX
Of the quality of catheterization of the bladder with instruments made of glass or similar materials that are suitable for this purpose.
When ulcers or abscesses occur in the bladder, or blood coagulates therein, or it becomes obstructed with stones, and you wish to instill waters and medicines thereinto, then use an instrument called a catheter, and this is its form:
that at the extremity of it is rounded, so it is closed. And in that there are three holes: two on one side, thus making six altogether.
At the beginning it is concave, into which is inserted that which is expelled; and let it be according to its quantity added, so that whenever any cause draws forth the humidity from it, it may draw it out; and when it is expelled with this catheter, by means of which naphtha is burned in naval battles.
Therefore when you wish to introduce humidity into the bladder, insert the extremity of the catheter into the opening, and draw with that which is expelled into the holes above, for the humidity is drawn into the concavity of the catheter.
And then insert the extremity of the catheter into the urethra according to what we have recommended in the circumference; and then expel the humidity with that which you expel, for that humidity will quickly reach the bladder and relieve its affliction.
The form of the fine catheter with which the bladder is catheterized is as follows:
"Silver or lead should be used, its head resembling a small feather, inserted carefully inside."
"Then take a bladder of an animal, place in it the moisture that you wish to crystallize in the bladder, tie it tightly with two strong threads doubled over, and heat that moisture over the fire."
"And then insert the tip of the crystal into the vessel."
"And then stretch your hand over the bladder containing the heated moisture until the patient feels that the heat has reached the bladder."
"If you don't have a bladder present, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle from it; pierce it all the way around its circumference; and then insert a strong thread through those holes, so that it rotates; and then attach the circle in such a way that it is attached like this, because you place inside it whatever water or liquid you wish."
"And then tie that to the instrument and proceed in the same way as you have done with the bladder, until the moisture reaches the bladder."
"Chapter LX."
"Of removing stones."
"We have already discussed in the division [of urine] the types of stones and their treatment with medications, and the difference between stones generated in the kidneys and those generated in the bladder, and their symptoms."
"We have said that in this stone, operation can be performed with hand, and section."
"This stone properly generated in the bladder is the one still present in it."
"And you are thus recounting this with clear exposition and abbreviation."
"So it is said that stone generated in the bladder mostly affects children. Among its signs are: urine exiting from the bladder resembles water in its fineness and appears cloudy in color; the patient frequently scratches their genitals, sometimes even with a pen, and often has an erection. And with this condition, the anus is also affected in many cases."
"And it would be easier to heal children of that disease who have attained fourteen years of age; and difficult cure in the elderly." "But among the young, it is more moderate than in older individuals."
"And for that person from whom the stone is large and the cure is harder to achieve. But if it is small, then it is favorable for that condition."
"So when we come to the treatment of this condition, it is necessary at the beginning that we cleanse the patient with a cautery which extracts all the opening present in his testicles. For that opening sometimes hinders the expulsion of the stone during its investigation."
"And moreover, let the patient be taken with his feet and shaken up in such a way that the stone descends to the neck of the bladder, or what is left of it."
"And furthermore, let that plaster be prepared between the thighs, and its parts applied to its things, in order that the bladder may become entirely inclined towards those parts."
"And apply that remedy and all remedies for this condition."
"So if you feel the stone in the space, then quickly cut open over it."
"And if you cannot grasp it with your fingers completely, then you should anoint your left index finger with oil if the patient is a child, or your middle finger if they are a grown-up man. And introduce that [finger] into his anus." "And search for the stone until you find it with your fingers." "Little by little, turn that [stone] towards the neck of the bladder."
"And then press upon it with your finger, and expel it outwards from the place where you made the incision."
"And command the minister to press upon the bladder with his hand; and command another minister to extend the scrotum upwards with his right hand, and with his left hand pull back the cord that is below the scrotum, on the side where the incision is being made."
"And then introduce a spatula through the incision of which this is the method:" "And cut through that which is between the anus and the scrotum, not in the middle of it, leaning towards the left side; and let the incision be over that stone and your finger be inside the anus. And let the incision be transverse so that its exterior opening may be wide and its interior opening narrow according to what is possible for the size of the stone, and no more than that. For if you press too much with your finger which is in the anus during the operation, the stone becomes forgotten without difficulty."
"And know that among stones there are some which have angles and edges, for their expulsion is made difficult because of that."
"And regarding those which resemble an acorn, being round and small in size, their extraction is easy."
"So if it is that one with angles and edges, adjust it into the fissure."
"And if it is not thus extracted, then you should press upon it, or exert pressure upon it gently using the end of a suitable tool like a file with which you press upon the stone, and do not let it escape from there; or introduce a thin curved instrument through that [stone]."
"But if you cannot press upon it, then widen the passage a little, and if you see blood flowing, cut that [stone] with dissolved vitriol."
"But if there are more than one stone, then at the beginning you should press your hand against the mouth of the bladder and cut upon it. Then gently push a little further down towards that [stone]; and do likewise if there are many."
"And if there is a very large stone, it would be ignorance to cut upon it with a large incision, for the patient encounters one of two outcomes: either he dies, or he suffers from continuous dripping of urine afterwards because that place does not heal properly."
"But once expulsion has occurred, remove the stone from there with forceps, or use tongs to extract it in pieces."
"So once you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with ointment made of aloe and dragon's blood, and press upon it." "And apply a dressing soaked in oil and wine, or in rose oil and warm water, so that the wound may heal without inflammation."
"And then have the patient lie on his back, and do not remove the stitches until the third day."
"And when that [wound] has healed, wash it with warm water and much oil, and then dress it with ointment made of diachylon and ointment made of diaphoretic plants until it is completely healed."
"But if inflammation and corruption occur in the wound, and it appears as if blood has congealed there, then urine is forbidden for him (and this is known by the exit of blood mixed with urine). Then introduce your finger into the wound and remove that blood, for if it remains it causes irritation of the bladder and putrefaction."
"And then wash the wound with sour wine, water, salt, and with anything else that is appropriate for its cure until it is completely healed."
"And it is necessary during all the time of the treatment that you lie on both sides and apply the medicines prescribed upon the wound."
"And if the stone is small and located in the middle of the urethra, and its expulsion causes difficulty with urination, then treat it as follows: use what I have mentioned before that you should do before resorting to cutting, for many cases are cured by this treatment; and here is how you should proceed:
"From triangular exterior part, sharp, fixed in wood."
"And then remove the stone, and tie that ligature around the bladder to prevent it from returning to the vesicle."
"Then carefully insert the iron into the urethra, gently piercing until the sound reaches that stone." "Then rotate the sound gently with your hand within that stone little by little, and continue the perforation until you feel it penetrate to the other side; for urine is now being released."
"Then press your hand over that which remains of the stone from its beginning outside the urethra, because it is crushed, and is forgotten with the urine, and the patient is healed."
"If this procedure cannot be completed for any reason that prevents it, then ligate one side of the stone and another above it." "Then cut the stone in that urethra between two ligatures." "And then extract it." "Then untie the ligature and cleanse the congealed blood that has formed in the wound."
"It is not necessary to ligate one side of the stone except to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and the other ligature above is only to ensure that when it is untied near the exit of the urethra, the thread returns to its place and closes the wound."
"And for that reason, it is necessary when tying the thread above to elevate the thread towards its beginning above, so that it may return completely and close the wound as we have said."
"Chapter LXI."
"For removing a kidney stone from women."
"A kidney stone in women occurs rarely."
If a stone appears in any of those (places), then the cure is difficult, and it is prohibited by various methods.
One of these is that when a woman conceives while she is menstruating.
And the second one is that you cannot find a virgin maiden who discovers if she has sex with her husband when she is menstruating or is married.
The third one is that you cannot find a woman who knows this art, especially the operation of the handmaiden.
And the fourth one is that the place of cutting for a stone in women is far from the stone itself, so that a deep incision is needed, and this causes fear.
But if necessity drives you to this, then you should take a woman midwife who is very skilled and not afraid.
But if you are deprived of that, then look for a doctor who is skilled and subtle, or present a woman midwife who is experienced in the matter of women's diseases, or a woman who has been trained in this art.
Therefore have that person present, and command her to do everything that you order her from the examination of the stone at the beginning. This is so that she can check if the woman is a virgin, and then put her finger in the woman's anus to feel for the stone.
Then if she finds it, make that person leave her finger there, and then command her to incise on top of that place.
But if she is not a virgin, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the sick woman's vagina and examine for the stone. For she should place her left hand on the bladder and grasp it with good precision.
"Therefore, if that is found, then carefully remove that from the opening of the bladder to the parts of its exit with a summons of its power until it reaches the root of the thing."
"And also insist on that opposition of the might of the eye near the root of the thing, wherever it may be stopped and especially keep the stone in that part, so that it is not removed from the stone by some servant."
"And the section should be small at the beginning. And also introduce the probe into that section and if you feel the stone, then adjust in section according to the quantity which you know the stone will pass through."
"And know that species of stones are many: some are small and large, lion-shaped and sharp, long and round, and have branches."
"So you should know how many species there are of it through what you indicate about what you want to do."
"And if you see flow of blood, adjust in the location of vitriol stone and let it sit there for an hour until the blood is absorbed, then return to your operation until the stone is expelled."
"And be sure that you prepare for yourself the instruments which are mentioned in the extraction of stones in men, so that you may be helped by them in your operation."
"And if you see flow of blood and know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery which is incised, then you pause powder over the location and strangle that with pulverized oak bark and stricture descent, but do not repeat it; and let the stone be and do not extract it, for greatly the patient will die." "And also cure the wound."
"Therefore when the sharpness of the blood has diminished somewhat over several days, and the location becomes painful, then you should resume your operation before the stone is expelled."
"What follows is chapter sixty-two."
"Regarding hernias that occur suddenly."
"A sudden hernia is nothing but an aggregation of moisture in the white coat which is left by the cord of the genitals containing the intestine, and it is called a white coat."
"And sometimes it occurs in the proper pancreatic tissue which nature prepares at the opening of the intestine, before it has any connection with the other intestines; and this is the cord of the genitals between the white coat which we have mentioned, and nothing more than a kind of bag."
"The cause of this hernia is weakness in the genitals which allows the aforementioned matter to protrude and sometimes occurs due to a sudden blow on the genitals."
"And this moisture has many colors, for its color declines towards yellowish or reddish or brown, or black and earthy, or it is watery white, and this is the most common."
"And the signs by which it is known where this aggregation of water occurs are as follows: if it is in the white coat mentioned above, then the swelling appears rounded and elongated like an egg shape, and the genitals appear because the moisture contains them on all sides."
"And if the moisture is in the proper pancreatic tissue, then the swelling appears rounded at the opening of the intestines, and for this reason it is estimated to be another hernia."
"And if the moisture is between the cord of the genitals and the white coat, then there is a sensation of pressure from both sides."
"If you wish to know the color of the moisture, then expose the color of the moisture in the swelling with thin membranes whose form is preceded; and according to what is expressed in the traces of these membranes, judge what is inside it."
"Therefore, when we come to the treatment of this with iron, then it is necessary to command the patient to be flebotomized if possible, and let the body of the swelling be filled."
"And also let him lie on his back slightly elevated for a little while, and apply moist cloths to it."
"And also sit on the left side of it, and command the ministrant to stand on the right side of it; let him extend his hand towards one or two fingers' breadth from the cord of the genitals and the opening of the anus."
"And also take a broad spatula and cut through the cord of the genitals at its middle point for some length towards the penis."
"And let the incision be made according to a straight line equidistant from the skin that covers the genitals, until it reaches the white coat encompassing it."
"And remove that, and observe it, and take care that you do not incise it; and your removal with which you remove it should be done gently as if it were suspended with an egg and carefully examine it according to its quantity as much as possible."
"And also pierce the full coat of water with a wide perforation, and remove all the water."
"And also separate the two lips of the incision with forceps and extend the coat at its sides; do not touch the cord encompassing the genitals, and incise the coat in this manner as much as you are able." "And incise it with its entirety or in pieces, especially on its left side more subtly; for if you do not examine the incision of it diligently, there is no certainty that the water will not return."
"But if the swelling proceeds from that outside its cord during your operation, then when you have completed the incision of the coat, return it inside that, and also join the two lips of the cord of the genitals with sutures, and also dress it as the other wounds until it is healed."
"And if you find the swelling corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary to ligate those vessels that are near the suspenders, and remove the swelling, and also dress it with what we have said."
"But if water accumulates in two places separately, then know that there are two hernias. Therefore incise that part according to what you have done in the other equally, and if it appears to be an operation, then do it."
"And also you should wipe away the blood, and then enter into the incisions wool immersed in oil or rose oil. And pause outside with other wool that you have immersed in wine and oil, and spread it over both genitals and the opening of the anus; and place doubled cloths and powders on top, and bind them on according to this form:"
"and also two cloths should be taken and filled with wool carded in this way; and their extremities where they are bound with cotton or wet wool should be made, and they should be tightened with a strap in the breeches of the trousers, and one extremity should take hold of the buttocks inside to the other, and the second one should take hold at the opening of the anus, and two extremities on both sides and two others on both knees, and all tightening should be adjusted in the breeches of the trousers."
"And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with a cautery instead of an incision with iron; and it is that you take a subtle knife-shaped cautery and incise the cord of the genitals with it, and it is ignited according to what we have recommended until the white coat containing the water is discovered, and then you take a cautery in this way:" "And it resembles the Greek letter lambda."
"Then pierce that coat with it and ignite until all moisture is evaporated."
"And also extend the coat with forceps and remove it with forceps, and burn it with an ignited subtle cautery. And incise it as much as you are able until you eradicate all of it. And take care that the swelling is not touched by the fire."
"And know that this operation is safer and more distant from bleeding than an operation with incision, and it is better."
"But if you encounter difficulty with aposteme during incision or cautery, or bleeding occurs, then it is necessary for you to treat the difficulty that occurs according to what is said."
"But if the disease is fearful and does not wait for a second operation due to its horror, then administer perforation according to what I recommend. And this should be done when you are certain, according to what we have said about the indications, that that hernia is hydrocele."
"Then it is necessary for you to make an incision on some elevated swelling. Then pierce the aposteme in its lowest part with a wide spatula and continue the perforation according to the length of the body."
"And let the aperture be wide enough to drain all the water."
"And also pause on the site of the incision and bind it and leave it, so that the remaining water may flow out." "And dress it until the wound is healed."
"But if there is difficulty in the evacuation of water at that time, you should pierce it. And this happens only when the white panniculus in the opening of the wound obstructs and prevents the exit of water. Therefore, it is necessary for you to insert into the wound a trocar or instrument with which water is extracted from hydroceles, whose shape is described above; or adjust a small tube in the aperture of the wound."
"Know that water returns, and is gathered around about six months or thereabouts; and when it is gathered, then it should be pierced according to that manner, for the patient will thus pass their days."
Here comes another sentence:
"Chapter on Fatty Hernia and Its Treatment."
"You should know that in cases of this type of hernia, there is great danger of death in the larger displacements. Therefore, it is better to dismiss the operation and save the patient by other means."
"And you remember the operation in that case and the appearance of the gangrene."
"Therefore, it is said that gangrene occurs in the bodies of those whose veins are compressed and this happens for many reasons: either from acute severe inflammation, which flows into the veins, or from injury."
"And the color of gangrene follows the color of the body, and it is not accompanied by pain. It is severe gangrene."
"And pale, dry gangrene is lapidified, whose color is dark and insensitive to touch."
"And sometimes it occurs from obstruction of the arteries or from inflammation of those arteries, as soon as it is perceived by memory, or from inflammation of veins."
"But what occurs from inflammation of the arteries is known by the dispersion of gangrene when you press on it with your fingers, and there is no need for that touch."
"But what occurs from inflammation of a vein does not disperse due to compression with the aforementioned fingers."
"And it is possible that on this type of flesh, sectioning may be done, and also on other flesh; and if you incise the cord of veins, extend the wound upwards to its parties, remove the cistern white matter and free the suspensory ligaments of the vessels, tie them off and incise the suspensory ligament entirely from all parts of the wound."
"Therefore, if the flesh is already consolidated around that wound, then you should remove it and incise into it."
"And if there is adhesion within some cause of the cistern or between what is between the vessels, then you should free all that adhesion and incise it with a rounded cut."
"But if there is new flesh in the location of the adhesion that is behind it, then you should incise all that which belongs to it and remove the wound as we have said."
"So when your operation is completed, then fill the wound with lanolin infused in rose oil and wine; and apply that cure with another appropriate one until it heals."
"Chapter LXIV."
"Of the treatment of a hernia that is from the gut."
"A hernia is gangrene wrapped in some wrapping resembling a bud with softening of the testicles. It is difficult to perform movements and walking because of the illness."
"And in the treatment of this condition, it is done by fear of what preceded it."
"Nevertheless, we should speak operation on that according to what was said before."
"I say you should place the patient upon an elevated cushion. Then peel back the scrotum from the testicles on both sides. Next, tie the cord of the genitals with your fingers and bells that are proven on the rope."
"Then incise with a sharp lathe knife through a transverse section on the right side of the vessels where they are uncovered."
"Next, carefully extract from each part as we have told you in the case of removing an arrowhead, which is located on the temples."
"Then insert in those places a double-threaded needle, tying the first thread at the initial point where you saw blood, and tying the second thread again at the last point." "Then cut that place open in a straight line along the length of the body and remove what has accumulated there from the putrid and corrupted moisture."
"And then treat the wound with remedies for other wounds where you wish healing to be produced, because it is not harmful if some vessels that are not essential to either of the testicles are cut."
"But if blood flows from all the vessels, then the testicles must be removed or they must be cauterized along with the vessels, so that they are deprived of all nourishment due to the cutting of the vessels. And they must be stitched up or cauterized so that there is no further harm from them."
"Chapter LXV."
"Of the Treatment of Intestinal Hernia."
"The occurrence of this hernia is due to a rupture that occurs in the groin extended over the abdomen, on the side of the ring of the navel of the belly, through which some of the intestines descend from that opening."
"And this rupture is either of the groin itself or of an excavation made therein, and these two types occur for many causes: either from a blow, or from a fall, or from hard labor, or from heavy lifting, or from some other cause."
"And the sign of this is that when it occurs from an extension of the groin, it happens little by little over a long period of time and does not happen suddenly. And it appears as an abscess enclosed within the belly because the groin squeezes the intestine."
"And the sign of this is that when it occurs from a rupture of the groin, there is suddenly violent pain at first; and it appears as an abscess different from the usual one near the groin, and this is due to extrusion of the intestine. And the body of the hernia extends towards the outside of the groin."
"And sometimes the intestines are forgotten within the hernia and this is called an incarcerated intestinal hernia or 'umbilical hernia'."
"Sometimes it occurs with flatulence, sometimes it runs in the split intestine, and here it is retained, causing great harm to the patient; sometimes it causes severe pain, especially when pressed."
"It is feared in the treatment of this illness with iron that cauterization should be avoided in that area."
"In performing the operation on that area, command the patient to reduce the intestine with their hand into the hollow of their hip if they obey the return movement, and promptly place your elbow on their thigh between your hands, elevating their hips."
"Then pull the cord that secures the cord of the testes upwards, and incise the cord of the testes entirely along its length; then insert two hooks on both lips of the incision according to what you may need to open the incision with those."
"And if during the incision, it is possible for you, that part should be forgotten by the hook."
"Then strip that sheath which is on both sides of the cord of the testes until the white fibrous membrane of each part is uncovered."
"Then insert your finger in that place where the testes are located, between the white fibrous membrane which is on both sides of the hook, and between the second sheath, and remove any adhesion that may be there behind the hook."
"Then hold the cord of the testes with your hand on both sides, and at the same time extend the white fibrous membrane upwards with your left hand, elevate the hook with the sheath to the part of the incision; and command the assistant to extend the hook above, and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind it with abundant saline solution."
"And check carefully with your fingers that there is no cause of the vas deferens enclosed in the white fibrous membrane." "But if you find any cause, then immediately ligature it on both sides."
"Then cut in the part below the cord of the testes through an incision where blood and serum can flow out, as we have mentioned before."
"Then apply lanolin immersed in oil to the wound; then tie the ligature that we have mentioned (and sometimes cauterize the white fibrous membrane which we mentioned near the incision of the bleeding point, because sometimes it happens like this); and leave the ligature until it falls off by itself."
"But if the ligature does not fall off, then hot water should be applied to it and paused until it falls off according to what we have said."
"And then treat the wound with other treatments for wounds until it heals."
Chapter LXVI
Of ventral hernia.
In this hernia, none have been cured by burning it with an iron.
"Firstly, it was said that this is done as we have recounted in the case of a hernia with wine; namely, to tie the vessels near the section with gentleness, and then dry in the middle part around the abscess using what operates that."
"And cure the plague as we have said until it is healed."
"What is Chapter 67?"
"Regarding the dissection performed on eels."
"Sometimes there are divisions or ruptures in eels as we have mentioned, and they become prominent at that location."
"And give no reason for the intestines to the gene (horse), and if you do, it is little; and it returns at all times."
"But if the time is prolonged with this, there will be an adjusted fissure in the caecum where the intestine enters the caecum; and this occurs because of the extension of the caecum which is present in eels as we have mentioned. This causes the caecum to become stretched, softened, and a swelling appears."
"And its treatment is with cautery as described earlier."
"And sometimes it is cured with iron in this manner: the sick eel should be placed on its back between the two thighs of a man, and then dry the location of the ruptured swelling with a section made along the width about three fingers wide."
"And then strengthen the white caecum which is below the backbone so that it becomes visible."
"And then take a reed and place it on the prominent location of the caecum, and press it against the front of the belly."
"And then cut the two prominent locations on the extremity of the reed over the caecum, and adjust them with a suture one to the other."
"And then remove the extremity of the reed, and do not insert it into the caecum completely, nor extend the wound, nor other causes such as those which you should know about in the treatment of intestinal hernia."
"And then treat it with the treatment of ulcers, and when you incise the membranes, clean them and restore the ulcer so that it is consolidated; for the caecum contracts and the prominence of rupture is not adjusted."
"And cautery is better in this location because it is closer to health."
Chapter LXVIII
Concerning the softening of the backbone of the testicles.
Very often, the backbone of the testicles in some men is softened because the flesh that is between them is also softened, and this condition deserves attention.
Therefore, it is necessary for someone who wants to treat this condition to make the patient lie on his back and cut all the softened backbone that is over the natural backbone, and then adjust two lips with a suture.
And if you wish, cut at the beginning of the softened backbone's excess with three or four cuts and close it with firm sutures.
And then incise between the sutures, and treat it with the treatment of other ulcers until it heals and the membranes fall off.
De la cusida de la codena dels testiculs.
Castration
Know that castration is forbidden by our law, but for some reason I remember it in this book; and it is not necessary to remember it except for two manners: the first is so that it may be known in the science of medicine when one asks about its treatment; and the second manner is because we often have need of castration in other beasts for our benefit, such as with mules, oxen, pigs, and similar animals.
And thus it is said that castration is done in two ways: either by incision or by cutting open.
But in that which is done by incision, the method of operation is that we make the beast lie down in cold water until its testicles become softened and relaxed, and then they may be cut off. And therefore take those [testicles] with your hand before they are resolved or appear outside the touch of the skin.
But in castration done by cutting open and removing, you should hold the beast and press on the cord of its testicles with your left hand.
And then cut the suspension ligament, and make an incision above each testicle with one stroke so that both emerge at once.
And then cut those [testicles] off as soon as they have emerged. And do not leave anything on the scrotum except for a small piece of skin over the veins.
And this method of castration by incision is better than that done by cutting open and removing because it leaves some cause of the testicles so that the beast desires copulation.
And then dress the wound until it heals.
Chapter LXX.
Of the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermaphroditism in men occurs in two ways. The first is when something appears like a female vulva between the testicles in place of the space that should be there.
Sometimes urine flows from that place where the testicles are connected.
But in women there is only one kind: it is when the vulva appears on the pubis like two testicles of a man, with a little opening towards the posterior, just as the male penis has and two testicles.
And there are three types of treatment for this condition: two for men and one for women. And it is necessary to cut those joined flesh parts until the flow of that emission stops, and then dress them with the treatment for other wounds.
And in the second kind in men where urine flows from that place where the testicles are connected, there is neither treatment nor operation to be done there.
Chapter XXI.
"Of lentils and flesh, prominent are those of women."
"Lentigo is often adjusted onto natural causes which are expressed and made legal by the regard; sometimes it is magnified in some women to such an extent that it spreads like in men, especially during coitus."
"Therefore you must remove the excess of lentigo with your hand or with ointment and rub it in."
"And do not forget to finish by rubbing it especially on the forehead, so that there is no bleeding of blood."
"And finally cure that with a remedy for boils until it is healed."
"But born flesh is flesh that grows in the horror of the mother's womb until it fills it up; therefore it often appears outside according to the similarity of coal (and for this reason some first called it â€œlizard diseaseâ€); therefore we must rub it like lentigo, and cure it until it is healed."
Chapter LXXII.
Of the remedy for alopecia.
It is advisable that the womb of the woman is not pierced or drawn out. And whether it is a natural or an accident.
An accident is when the illness has preceded it, and that is done either by flesh not properly adjusted, or by a thin or thick skin.
And it is done either in the front of the mother's belly, or on her sides, or above or below the navel, and it inhibits conception, pregnancy, and childbirth; and it particularly inhibits menstruation.
And the knowledge of that is made through examination of the mother's womb, if the dilation is apparent; but if it is not apparent, then you will search for it with your fingers or with a speculum.
But if the dilation is due to thin skin and it is apparent at both lips of the vulva, then you will cut and tear that.
And if there is pressure on both labia majora, then you should apply pressure with your fingers at the thickest part of each one.
And when the woman is on her back with her legs spread wide, then you will spread both labia majora with force until that thin skin is broken and the dilation is opened.
Then take some linen and oil and place it on the location, and press gently with your hand for a little while so that the incision does not close up.
But if the skin is thick and hard, then you must incise it with a broad knife or with a myrtle leaf.
But if the dilation is due to inflammation, then suspend that with an ointment and incise it.
"And if you have medicines that stop bleeding without biting, such as achachatia and dragon's blood, use them mixed with egg white."
"And then insert a wide lead cannula so that the wound is not lightly sealed."
"Keep it on for a few days and apply boiled water to cleanse it."
"And then treat it with another consolidation cure until it is healed."
"Sometimes, especially in the case of other flesh wounds, this method should be followed." "But if it is a hard boil, make sure that there is no contradiction with iron in any way."
Chapter LXXIII.
Of the treatment of hemorrhoids and prolapse of the rectum that occurs in women's genitals.
Hemorrhoids are a condition of many veins around the anus, from which much blood flows continuously. And when old hemorrhoids form clots, they become hard.
"And as I have already said in the division of species and symptoms of these, I will say here which ones receive treatment and which do not."
Therefore, I say that hemorrhoids and hard clots when they are at the entrance of the anus and cannot be felt, in those cases there is no treatment with iron.
But those that are at the opening of the anus and can be felt, those are the ones that can be treated.
And you must make the woman lie on her back and extend her buttocks with both hands or a rough cloth, and then incise them with scissors.
And then sprinkle on it the flows of blood from one of the incised powders without biting it, such as cassia and similar drugs.
Then make her fast for an hour, and then apply a hot compress to that area.
And if the bleeding persists, then make her take a decoction of sumac and oak bark and cranberry seeds and walnut shells and similar drugs.
And then take some barley flour and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a plaster with that mixture to apply on the back of her.
And if the blood is cut off, it's good. But if not, then adhere with two leeches and scarify the breasts without bloodletting.
And then take some wool and soak it in juice of cilantro or in juice of sage or in juice of agrimony with red wine, and apply it to the location; and then dress the location with a poultice until it is healed.
And dress it until it is healed.
Chapter LXXIV
Of the perforation of a haemorrhoid accidentally in the anus.
Many species of apostumes happen accidentally in the anus, such as cancer and stone apostume and ulcerous and adherent and creeping and fistulous hemorrhoids and raw ones and hard clots and others. And I have already spoken of these illnesses and their species and their symptoms, and the treatments for them in the division.
And it is necessary that I say in this treatise about the cauterization of a cauter that appears in the anus when it comes from those apostumes that are curable, and if you want to know how the operation of it is done with iron.
Then you must consider if the pain of the aposteme at its beginning is sharp with percussion and swelling and fever, and if it becomes reddened and if you can feel it, then do not cut it open with a perforation, but dress it with what helps with ripening until the sharpness of the symptoms ceases.
And then you must make the woman lie down on two pillows; and she should recline on her back and adjust her feet towards the side of the bed below the belly, and spread out her thighs, and pause her arms away from her breasts, and tie each thigh with a cloth in an appropriate manner.
And then the midwife should stand on the right side and administer the instrument with which the incision of the anus is made, whose shape will come in those cases that are mentioned below.
And it is necessary that when you want to administer this instrument, you should stand at the back of the woman's buttocks, and that only as much of the instrument enters into the anus as the width of the anus, so that it does not enter too deep and harm the illness. But if the instrument is larger than the width of the anus, then you must pause powders on the texture of the anus so that it hinders the entrance of any instrument into the anus.
And it is necessary that you pause the lever that runs in the instrument on the right side and above, so that the one who administers the instrument holds it and turns the lever until the incision of the anus is opened.
And when the excision appears and is touched with the hand and it is loose and moist, then you must dry it quickly with the head of a spoon.
And when the sickness is evacuated, then you must pause in the wound a wick soaked in rose oil or verdigris oil, which has some astringency, and pause the cloth on the section in the width of the anus.
And then cover the anus with clean wool immersed in water in which mallows have been boiled.
And then it should be dressed properly for two days with a poultice suitable for that purpose until it is healed.
And sometimes the anus and the wound are washed in this way: they are washed with water and honey, and sometimes with water in which rose leaves or long-stalked comfrey have been boiled, and then it returns to the poultice.
And if the wound is deep in the anus and swollen, then it is necessary that you abstain from the cure of it with iron, but dress it with what we have said in the division.
Chapter LXXV.
To teach midwives how to treat the breech births when they come out in an unnatural position.
It is necessary that the midwife knows at the beginning the figure of a natural childbirth by its signs, and it is that when you see the woman pressing down below and desiring to smell the air, and then she is relieved by what comes out above her, and rushes quickly to expel the child, then you know that this birth is according to nature, and it is the expulsion of it with its head coming out first, and the second one hanging or suspended from the navel.
Therefore, when you see those signs, then it is necessary that the belly of it be pressed so that the child comes out lightly when its head comes out first and thus the second one comes out clean from all impurities with good cleansing.
But that which is otherwise than this birth is unnatural and blameworthy, for when the child comes out with its feet first and its body comes out before its head and its feet, and one of its hands or even one of its legs or its belly comes out first, and thus it turns with its back upwards, such figures are blameworthy.
Therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and skilled in all these matters and to guard against error and deception.
And here I show you all figures of those and what kind they are by which it may be understood through this and be placed on this.
When heat is exhaled upon the head due to natural greediness, and it is strong in women and difficult to bear, especially when their virtue has already weakened, then they become feverish. This occurs because women hold on to resentment, and they evaporate the congestion from their chest with fenugreek cooked with oil.
Then insert the syringe between her thighs and fill it with that second liquid or else dig with your nail into that which is inside her and remove whatever humidity there is. And press on the woman's belly until the fetus emerges.
But if it does not come out, then it is necessary that the woman be smeared with dough made from chickpeas and dough made from fenugreek with cumin.
And then command it to be smeared on her and have her sneeze with conditions; and cover her mouth and nose with something for an hour, because the fetus will soon be forgotten.
And if both hips of the fetus are forgotten at the beginning, then you must reduce them little by little with ease. But if it does not obey the instrument, then place the woman on a chair and lift her legs up, and strike the chair against the ground; and the woman must be held so that she does not fall due to the shock.
And if the hips are not turned correctly and the fetus dies, then cut them open and remove the remnants of the fetus or else tie its body with cloth and remove it gently, because it will soon be forgotten.
"When the sheet is on his feet, then you must push those up and soon turn the sheet small, and soon tie that, and soon take one foot of him and stretch that little by little."
"After he has entered between the sheets, then you must command him to expel his breath, and make him sneeze if possible, for sometimes he may forget it if God wills."
"And if he does not forget what we have recommended, then you should slowly return the sheet between his legs until you cover him according to nature's figure, because sometimes he will now forget it with a light sigh."
"And if it is forbidden to do all that we have recommended, then take some gum arabic and dissolved gum, grind them well in the mortar with good percussion, and soon line with that the mouth of the woman, lower down on his belly." "And soon make him drink hot water, until he reaches the hypochondria [i.e., the area below the ribs]."
"And when the parts of his body are anointed, then make him inhale the vapor of myrtle and soon cover him with that." "And when the sublimation has lasted an hour, then place it on a sieve, and soon make him sneeze and stretch his mouth open, and take that away, and press the lowest part of his belly with light pressure, because he will soon forget it."
"The sigh comes out laterally from one of his mustaches." "Let him be inserted into the reduction of his hand, but if you cannot reduce it, then raise the woman up and let her go."
"And if she cannot go, then let her lie on the bed, and strike his sides with violent percussion, and soon administer to him remedies which are sweet and moistened with mucilages."
"And if childbirth has come, then let her sit on a sieve, and soon study the reduction of the hand, and swallow what comes out according to its natural form, and make the woman sneeze, and order him to press himself until it is forgotten."
"The sigh comes out over his neck with his mustache expanded and his face turned towards his mother's side." "It is necessary that the midwife hold the hand of the child and soon turn it little by little, and bring it out with ease."
"And when it is out and how much has been swallowed, then pause on the child's head what we have recommended of oil and mucilages."
"And soon order him to move little by little, and when you have done that, then let her sit on a sieve, and command her to be inclined towards the right side, and soon order him to be pressed; and make her sneeze with condition." "Exit of the prepared fetus onto the side."
"When they horrify from the mother according to this manner, consider, and soon insert your second nail into it until it is evacuated of humidity."
"And if the child is suspended on his face and neck, then insert your second nail into its belly-button, so that it is not retained and dies."
"And soon push the child into its parts inside until you pause it where necessary, and order the woman to press herself several times, and he will forget it with light sighing, if God wants."
"Exit of twins or multiple fetuses." "Know that very many times twins are born, and sometimes three or four, but this is strange and difficult to endure. But such things happen naturally, not by chance."
"And count those [fetuses], whether they are multiplied or not, one second nail for each one, and separate them by the navel cord. Distinguish them by the ligaments in the umbilical cord of each one. And sometimes they are forgotten like this as if there were only one fetus with a light natural sighing, but sometimes they are expelled with an unbearable sigh like we have recommended."
"And if some of them are difficult to deliver and arrive at what we have said about the unnatural figures, then care for them as we have recommended."
"And if the midwife is subtle and does what she does with ease and subtlety, but also with tardiness, and inserts it according to all its figures as it was prepared for her by bringing about salvation."
"Remembrance of that which is formed in the womb from embryos and aborted."
"Sometimes one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and even ten are formed in the mother's womb, and it has been verified that one woman aborted seven, and another threw out all ten, which was caused by the measurement of the glorious sages."
"And therefore it is necessary that the midwife know how to discern this small semblance, and thus pause when it is necessary."
"Chapter Seventy-Six."
"Of the extraction of the dead fetus."
"When you care for the dead fetus as we have said in the division of medicine and it does not come out easily, and you are forced to use an operation with your hand, then consider whether the woman is of sound virtue and is not affected by any of the accidents that cause harm to her."
"Then let the woman be placed on her back with her knees raised and her head leaned downwards, and her hips lifted."
"And the minister should hold her from both parts or have her tied on the bed so that her body does not extend beyond the extraction of the fetus."
"And soon you moisten the mouth of the mother with warm oil and mucilage of marshmallow, fennel, and linseed."
"And soon the midwife anoints her hand with these oils and mucilages, and soon inserts her hand gently into the womb, and soon seeks with her hand where the nails are in the fetus."
"And locate it conveniently there: then consider if the fetus is prepared to be removed from its head, and soon you place your nails in its eye sockets or neck or mouth or palate or beard or collarbone or near the ribs or hypochondria."
"But if it is to be removed from its feet, then in the groin or the middle of the back."
"And hold the nail with your right hand and place its curve in that location between the fingers of the left hand and insert your hand gently and place the nail in one of those locations we have mentioned until you reach the cause of the obstruction."
"And soon place and keep another nail, or the third if necessary, so that there is equal traction and not excessive extension according to its rightness alone."
Answer: Then it is necessary that all parts be opened, so that the discharge of the fluid may be eased as it is done in tooth extraction.
Answer: And it is necessary that the water which is between them be softened; and if any part of it is retained, then the midwife must anoint some of her fingers with oil and carefully insert them and turn them in order to remove what has been retained.
Answer: Therefore if the birth of the child is delayed, then the hands should be washed with clean water and dried well; and do this until all the child has come out.
Answer: But if the hand is extended beyond the other one and it cannot be reduced by pulling it back through the narrowness of the opening, then cloth should be wrapped around that one; and carefully cut off that one until all of it has come out, and cut it at the junction of the hand or at the elbow.
Answer: And do the same for the other hand and both feet.
Answer: But if the head of the child is large or the opening is narrow at the time of birth, or the head is in the watery cavity, then it is necessary to insert between those parts the spatula bone with its sharp edge and cut the head open and remove the water, or use an instrument called "alundat" whose shape will be shown along with other instruments in the chapter which follows this one.
Answer: And do the same if the child has a large head by nature; and then it is necessary to cut that with an alembic or use the alundat as we have said before, and especially remove the bones with forceps.
Answer: And if the head is extended but stuck below the forklike bone, then it should be cut until the moisture in the pit has drained out.
Answer: But if there is nothing complicated or obstructing the exit, then you should cut the head until you can easily get it out.
Answer: And if the left side of the belly is inflamed or in a dropsical state, then you must perforate it until the fluid inside it has run out.
Answer: But if the child is lying on its feet, then its attraction [to come out] will be light and its direction towards the mother's mouth will be easy.
Answer: But if it is stuck below the belly and the pit, then you must remove it with cloth which you will have wrapped around your hand, and cut the belly and the pit until that water has run out.
Answer: But if the other members are stuck and the head turns back, then insert the left hand; but if the mother's mouth is blocked, then insert the hand into her throat, surround the head with it, pull that with those parts towards the mother's mouth, and especially insert a hook or two hooks and pull it with those.
Answer: And if the mother's mouth is obstructed by an ulcerous swelling that occurs at childbirth, then do not be troubled about it; rather you must administer evacuation of thick humid causes. Answer: And apply poultices to her; and follow the patient with waters that soften and moisten.
Answer: And if the child is lying on its side, then if possible turn it around; and administer to it what we have said for a living child.
Answer: And if that is not possible, then cut through the tissues and remove it.
Answer: And you must not leave any cause behind in the secondine [afterbirth].
Answer: And when you have completed all your operations, then administer what we have said about the cure of the ulcerous swellings that occur in the mother.
Answer: And if there is a flow of blood, then apply lint soaked in astringent waters and administer the other cure.
"I have seen a woman whose belly was already dead, yet she became pregnant again afterwards." "It happened that a long time after an ulceration appeared on his belly; it swelled up from what had been opened and began to emit pus."
"I was called to treat him and treated him for a long time, but the wound did not heal."
"Then I carefully examined the causes of this strong attraction and extracted from him a bone, but after some days passed, another bone was extracted from him; this greatly amazed me because there are no bones in the belly."
"And then I realized that they were bones of the dead fetus."
"So I cleaned the wound and extracted from it many bones, for the woman was in her best condition, and she lived this way for a long time without any trouble."
"And I did not think it was strange, because in this there is science and help for the physician who uses his hands for healing."
"On the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus."
"The form of a vise with which the uterus is opened:"
"This is the form of the strengthener in which the threads are tied up, for tying the knots there should be two vises on both ends of the two threads." "But this vise must be more subtle than a strengthener and made either of ivory or bone or boxwood wood."
"And each stick should be two fingers wide and the edge of each about one finger; the length of each is one and a half palms. And in the middle of the two sticks there are two adjustments of that same stick which are already fixed, of which the length is more than one and a half palms and the width of each is about two fingers or a little bit more."
"And these two adjustments are inserted into the mouth of the uterus so that it is opened with them when you turn the two aforementioned vises."
"Another form similar to this, but more subtle and lighter:"
"It should be made of ivory or boxwood sticks according to the shape of forceps." "But however at the end of it there are two adjustments like vises, and the length of each adjustment is about one palm, and the width of each is two fingers."
"And when you want to open the uterus with these, then make the woman lie down on her back with her feet hanging down, and open what is between her legs." "And properly open your hand with the instrument as you do with forceps, according to how much you want of the opening of the uterus entrance, until it reaches what you want."
"The form of a vise that they said in ancient times:"
"The form of an impeller with which the fetus is pushed:"
"The form of an amoebid with which the large head is crushed"
"And it is similar to forceps at whose end are teeth like vises. And sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form with teeth like the teeth of a saw with which it cuts and crushes." "The form of a small amoebid:"
"The form of an awl having one spine:"
"The form of an awl having two spines:"
"The form of spatula having two extremities with which the head is cut off:"
"The form of two flat spatulas:"
"Therefore all these instruments are practiced, and when more species of them and more prepared ones are multiplied, then it is lighter in its operation and better for men because of their quantity."
"And do not use these instruments without good reason, because the necessity of them is not excusable."
"Of extracting the secondine."
When the second stage of childbirth is delayed, you should command the patient to hold her breath and then make her sneeze with some conditions, and stretch your hand over her mouth and nose. If the child exits through this method, that's good.
"If not, then take an egg and pierce its shell with a hot poker, place it on those herbs that have been burned together with the mouth of the mother, thus like calamint, rue, and fennel, camomile, Arabic sickle, lignum cassia, and Saint John's wort." "All of these herbs or some of them should be submerged in water inside the egg, and then place it on the fire."
"And also place a reed tube made of cane into the mother's mouth, and hold it there so that the steam coming from the egg reaches the concave part of her womb."
"And then make her sneeze like we have said, and the second woman should quickly step aside."
"But if this remedy does not work and the woman is still not delivered, then command the midwife to immerse her left hand in olive oil or a mixture of marshmallow root, and then carefully insert it into the womb and search with it for the second woman. When she has found it, then slowly pull out that hand little by little. But if the woman is stuck in the pelvis, then carefully insert the midwife's second hand as previously recommended, and when she has found the second woman, extract her gently according to the correct direction so that the mother does not suffer from violent attraction." "It is necessary that she be turned on her right and left sides with ease."
"And if the mother's mouth is obstructed, we have already recommended the cure with sneezing and medication with olive oil with herbs."
"But if the baby is not delivered even after all the causes we have recommended are used, then be careful not to tire yourself out with repeated attempts at traction. But it is necessary that whatever comes out of the mother's womb be placed in a container for the woman, and then cauterize it with fire and tetrafarmacon; because this will cause it to shrink and become dissolved and will be expelled."
"But when it is extracted, it causes a bad smell in the head and stomach, which causes illness. And then it is necessary to administer fumigations and appropriate remedies for that."
"But some of the Ancients already used fumigation with Nazareth and dried figs."
"Method of using an instrument to fumigate a woman for retention of menstruation and the second woman:"
"It should be made of ivory or brass."
"And its thin extremity should be placed in the womb and its wide extremity over the fire, and fumigation should be performed on the embers of the fire."
"And have that vessel ready to replace it when this fumigation is consumed and repeat another one."
"Remedy for the cure of the unperforated anus of a newborn child:"
"Some children are born and their anuses are not perforated, which are very thin and closed." "Then it is necessary for the midwife to perforate that opening with her finger; and if not, then perforate it with a sharp probe, but be careful not to touch the rectum."
"And also put over that wool soaked in wine and oil; and also cure it with ointment inside which has been boiled."
"But if you fear that it is closed, then place a catheter in the anus for several days and remove it when the child wants to defecate."
"And sometimes occlusion of the anus occurs due to a hard mass or abscess. Then it is necessary that this hardness be incised and also cured with what we have said about treatment and lead."
"Treatment of fistulas that are formed there:"
"The fistulas that are formed in the lower part of the buttocks are usually large and thick, which are formed near the anus outside or in the space between one buttock."
"And it is one fistula or many."
"And with this thickness being old and running with moist, thick white humors or thin pus, and sometimes there are penetrating passages in these fistulas."
"And these passages are known by what comes out of them through discharge and through windiness; and sometimes the disease is from discharge, and it often comes out of those worms."
"And sometimes there are penetrating passages from these fistulas into the bladder and into the meatus of the penis; and some of those passages are into the junction of the vulva and into the notch of the scrotum."
"And what is known as a penetrating fistula that enters the anus and is not penetrating is this: you put your finger inside the anus, and then insert a thin probe made of brass or iron into the fistula where there is no turning."
"But if there is a turn in that place, then insert into it a thin probe made of lead or horsehair until you feel the probe or hair on your finger."
"And if you do not feel it at all and there is no cause of discharge or worms or windiness coming from the anus, as we have said, then know that it is not penetrating, and then proceed to treatment."
"And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the meatus of the penis, then its meaning is the emission of urine from there and prohibition of it until that place has healed in medicine."
"But if it is penetrating into the junction of the vulva or into the bone and causes pain in the area, then its sign is that the probe enters there if there is no turning inside the bone, and there is pain in the area of the joint; and that pus always comes out from there; and that medicine and ointment are ineffective, nor does it heal."
"And in all those penetrating fistulas, there is no complete cure, and the cure of those is labor and futility of the foolish physicians on which we are firm."
"But in that one which is not penetrating and not ancient, cure with iron can be hoped for according to what I will recommend to you, and what I have already said and proved."
"And it is that the disease runs between your buttocks and above your two thighs, raising their folds inside them; the vulva being inclined towards its belly; and then insert a probe of lead or brass if there is turning in the fistula, until you know where the probe passes."
"And if that disease feels around the anus, then it is necessary for you to insert your finger inside the anus."
"And if you feel the probe already entering penetratingly with your finger inserted inside the anus, other than what you feel between your finger and that opening or flesh, then know certainly that it is penetrating; and therefore do not work on it, because there is no cure for it, as we have said."
"But however some say that it is cured in some men."
"And about the treatment by which help is hoped for in this, it is that you ignite a cautery probe according to the width of the fistula, as it is precedented, and insert that burning probe into the fistula until it reaches around the anus; and then repeat it twice or thrice until you know that all those flesh tissues that are fitted together like chicken feather quills are already burnt."
"And then cure it with hot compresses wrapped in linen until all those burnt flesh tissues are softened; and then cure it with medicines that generate and consolidate flesh; and if it is healed, good; but if not, then it will never be healed by any other treatment."
"And if the probe enters but does not penetrate within your finger which is inside the anus, and between that finger and the probe which is covered with skin or flesh tissue, and the fistula seems to be closed at its surface; then cut the skin of the beginning of the fistula, and you will see it cut with the probe, and it should enter into the fistula until the cut reaches the place where the end of the probe arrives, and by the probe it is freed and healed."
"Then cleanse those fleshy fistulas which resemble a bird feather quill, leaving none unaddressed."
"If blood often flows between you and your operation when incising those flesh parts, then it is better to cauterize with fire or sharp medicine, for cautery with fire has two good habits: it adjusts the flesh and dries up the blood and excess humidity."
"And also cure those wounds wrapped in a border or treacherously hidden where the arm meets the body, and also sometimes cure hard gangrenous flesh that generates and solidifies plague."
"And such medicines are styptic and drying; when the wound is restored, it is healed and fears no recurrence."
"But if the fistula has already entered into the anus and is elongated from its surface, then insert your thumb into the anus and search with it."
"And then if you find the bowel and there is a veil of skin or flesh between it and you, it is appropriate to attempt penetration, but this is not an operation performed through an incision, but rather through trust and hope."
"And this is accomplished in one of three ways: either cauterize it as we have said; or cut it so that the concavity of the bowel can be achieved such that you are able to insert some dressings and promote healing; do not proceed with an incision so that you do not wound the lacertum containing the anus, which would accidentally cause injury to the intestines without consent. And also cure it with water as we have said because it will heal quickly; or elongates that veil and clean out that pus by cutting into the bowel properly from behind, as we have said, either with a tent or another sharp instrument, and then cure those fistulated flesh parts which are in the section through cauterization. And also strive to perform the entire operation with an incision, if the opening above is not consolidated, and the fistula remains open at the junction of the anus, it will be easier for healing." "And thus the fistula is finished in this manner: when you insert the tent into the fistula and it is on the side of the anus around its surface with the cord and at the margin of the anus, then take a tent with a perforated extremity, which is like a needle for preparing hearts in this form:"
"And insert the tent into that file wrapped with fine threads or around those [threads]; and then insert the tent with the file into the fistula until it achieves its concavity."
"But if it is penetrating at the margin of the anus from behind, then you remove the thread from that track so that you can insert your finger into the anus; and remove the extremity of the thread and tie the two ends together with a knot, and leave it for one day or two. And when you notice that the thread is becoming embedded in the flesh, cut it there where those flesh parts are incised which are between the two ends of the thread."
"And also cure the wound until it is consolidated and healed."
"But if the opening of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate in whatever manner you are prepared, but take care that it does not penetrate too far into the front, so that you do not wound the anal sphincter muscle. And then cure it until it is healed."
"The shape of the spatula with spines used to probe the fistula is thus: its curvature is very sharp while the other end is not sharp, so that you do not wound what is not necessary, as sometimes happens."
"Regarding the suturing of hemorrhoids in which blood flows through the incision of those [hemorrhoids]."
"Hemorrhoids are of two kinds: for some are between the buttocks resembling coal, while others are fatty like the fat of bacon." "And among those some are small and large; and blood flows from them constantly, they are many in number, and they are outside the anus, at its extremities."
"But those hemorrhoids that are outside the anus are due to little moisture, from which flows citrine water or a small amount of blood continuously, and they are classified according to the color of the body."
"And the treatment for that which is inside the anus is that you command the patient to sit and express until the anus prolapses and the hemorrhoids appear to you." "Then you grasp with forceps or with your fingers those that have prolapsed and cut them at their roots."
"But if the forceps do not hold those [hemorrhoids] due to their humidity and softness, then grasp them with rough cloth or with cotton or with a wool wisp, and remove them with your fingers. And cut them at their roots and sprinkle some powdered myrrh on that incision so that they are cauterized instead of cauterization; or cauterize them according to what is described in the chapter on cauterization." "And then cure those with another treatment until they are healed."
"And if the anus does not obey to evacuation, then use a clyster on the patient with a small mouthpiece that has been washed with water from the anus and which facilitates evacuation when the patient strains."
"But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then their cause is slight. And you grasp them with your nail or with forceps and cut them. And then cure them with what has been said until they are healed."
"And if you have made an incision, it is necessary that you administer a suture of those [hemorrhoids] as follows: take thread wrapped and insert it into the needle. And remove the hemorrhoids at their roots above, and make the needle penetrate into the root of the other part. And wrap both extremities of the thread in the party below the needle laterally. And tie the hemorrhoid with a tight knot, and then cut the thread and remove the needle."
"And do this to all of them, leaving one intact without tying it, so that the superfluous blood flows from that [hemorrhoid]."
"And then apply over the anus a cloth dipped in rose oil or wax, and have the patient remain lying on their back and command them to retain it." "And then leave that one until it protrudes. And when it has prolapsed, cure it with an ointment or with another treatment until it is healed."
"And if these are very old and cannot be cured by that medicine, then you must remove those with the point of a spatula or your fingernail until they are moistened and scrape off the yellowish pus on top which prevents them from solidifying; and carefully cleanse them so that they may become solid."
"Then take away those with great violence until the first blood comes out and they are scraped; and carefully cleanse them so that they may be healed."
"Know that leprosy is a key disease and it is not if not redondos according to the color of the body like a head of a nail, and it happens throughout the body but more especially in the parts below the elbows and knees, where pain often occurs."
"And then it is necessary that this is incised where the key is located, and removed with forceps or tweezers, and eradicated from its root; and carefully cleanse it."
"If you want to, cauterize the second one that comes next in its chapter."
"But a verruca is a small rough fistulous elevation on the surface of the body and many are often seen in children."
"And its treatment is that you stretch it out and incise it, or scrape it with a file or razor within so that it falls off." "And if you want to, cauterize it as we have said with fire or with an acute medicine."
"But a formica is a small felted or fistulous elevation on the surface of the body, occurring frequently in the forehead, and when it is scratched it feels like the bite of an ant, and it becomes red around the body."
"And its treatment is that you take a quill of an owl or eagle feather, and it should be hard, and place it on the ant so that it contains it within the circle of the quill; and carefully turn your hand with the quill so that you incise what is around the ant, and press it onto the skin of the forehead, and eradicate the ant from its root."
"And if you want to, do this with a needle made of brass or iron according to this method:"
"Let the point of the needle be subtle, blunt (so that it is not perforated), wrapped with a thread so that when you press on it, its revolution becomes easy."
"And if you want to, cauterize the ant according to what is mentioned earlier in the chapter of cautery under the heading of cauterizing a carbuncle."
"Regarding the shapes of instruments that are used for giving cautery."
"Some cautery irons are made of silver or brass or molten lead or hammered ones, and some are made in small and large sizes according to those that they are used for, because the one used for treating young children should be small; and those whose handles are twisted or rounded, their cautery irons should be small."
"The shape of a large cautery iron with few points:"
"The head of the needle at its tip where the bag is tied should be wide in this manner, and it should have such distinction that when the bag is tied, it remains like this."
"And the lower extremity of it, which is inserted into the buttocks, should be blunt (so that it is not open) rather than pointed to subtlety; and on one side there should be two holes, and on the other side one hole, and the width of the holes should correspond to the thickness of the rays or hairs, one large and one small."
"And let the bag in which medicines made from bladder of a beast or wool of sheep are placed have a root that is one hand's breadth."
"And let it be pierced with many holes as it revolves, and if the space between the holes is equal to the thickness of the finger."
"And then insert into those holes a strong thread of raw flax which is made from ten threads, or wind it around them; and adjust the bag with that; and when you have placed the bag on it, let it be tight at the head of the cautery iron between two distinctions with firm constriction, and then cauterize each hole: But the quality of cauterizing in this manner is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be warmed according to the quantity of the tolerance of the illness; and take care that it is not too cold nor too hot."
"And then let the patient lie on his back, elevate his hips up and place under him either a sheet or a blanket. And then anoint the extremity of the cautery iron with oil or egg white or fenugreek mucilage or something similar; and then insert it into the buttocks gently; and then the assistant takes the bag and squeezes it twice hard so that everything inside the cautery is evacuated from the bowel; and then remove the cautery iron, and let the patient lower his hips to the bed."
"And if the medicine forces him to excrementation, let him retain it as much as possible; and if he sleeps with that throughout one night, it is better for healing."
"But if you cauterize him in cases of diarrhea and loose bowels and excrementation comes out from there, then repeat the cautery until he is healed."
"And if in the buttocks there are hemorrhoids or painful fistulas, then let the cautery iron be very subtle and pointed, those with which children are cauterized."
"Regarding the treatment of plagues."
"I have already stated in the division of the treatment of plagues that which was appropriate for this book, and I now state the treatment of those with medicine according to their completeness."
"I say that plagues are differentiated according to what they are made from, and according to the place where the plague occurs."
"And the causes why many times plagues are made are such as: wounding by a stone, or incision with scissors or knife, or percussion with lance, or club, or arrow, or something similar to those of many causes."
"But the plagues that are in the places of the body are such as: plague which falls on the head, or neck, or foot, or belly, or thigh, and similar to those of the limbs."
"And I am recounting the treatment of some plagues because this reasoning and rule apply to other plagues as well."
"And I will begin with simple head plagues, for the memory of the compound ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter."
"So I say that when a simple head plague occurs and it is not a fracture, then consider: if it is from wounding by a stone or something similar, and the chain has already broken only on this side and the plague is large, and you fear that an abscess will form there, then immediately perform cephalic phlebotomy and do not delay; and extract blood from him according to the quantity of its virtue if no other cause prohibiting phlebotomy exists, especially if the blood that comes out from the plague is little."
"And let the phlebotomy be on the opposite side of the wounded part, and keep the patient from getting drunk and from wine and from heavy foods."
"But if you prohibit some cause because of its minuteness, then let the food be diminished and do not approach meat or wine."
"Place your hand on the wound; if it happens to be cauterized, apply olive oil usually heated or wine in which it has been steeped."
"If you are sure that the wound is cauterized, then place your hand on it; if it is fresh apply the patient's blood and the air has not changed what was put on the powder which I will recommend to you in a moment."
"And if the air has already changed it, then place your hand over the wound until it is healed."
"But if the wound is large or caused by an incision and its lips are not properly adjusted, then adjust those with stitches according to what I will recommend about the stitching of them."
"But if the wound is already exposed to the bone and does not involve retention of it but only a small suspension, then cut that and cure the wound with medicines and restore the flesh properly in place of sinew. Command the patient to be fed on foods which are coarse: heads of cabbage and turnips and things like them until they are convalescent."
"And if you find putrefaction in the sinew and it does not adhere to the bone, then cut away all that is rotten and cast it out, and cure it."
"But if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which blood flows and it is not severed by medicines, then inquire about the artery. And if you find that it is not cut, then cut it with a scalpel or ligate it. And if necessity requires that what has been said does not help, then cauterize until the bleeding is stopped."
"And if these wounds are simple and small, then the cause of them is light. Therefore you should powder those with this powder, so that it may consolidate them before the air changes them."
"And the manner of making the powder is this: Take oil of sesame one part, dragon's blood two parts, unburnt sulfur three parts. Let all be well ground and sifted, and let the wound be filled with it, and let it be pressed on by good pressure until it adheres to it, and let it be coagulated with the blood."
"And properly press that upon it with powders and leave it alone. Do not remove it while it is like this until it is completely adherent, for the medicine will not abandon it until it is healed."
"And sometimes one does only cauterization when oil of sesame and dragon's blood are not at hand."
"And this is the same operation performed on large wounds when it is necessary to press upon them and bind them tightly, especially fresh wounds with their blood still flowing, which the air has not yet altered."
"But if the air has altered them, especially in summer time, then it is not suitable to use this powder. But at such times treat those wounds with what has been said, thus: you should apply upon them some of these ointments digested, or you should apply upon them flour of barley mixed with water and honey until they are freed from putrefaction; and properly cure them with the other treatment until they are healed."
"But if a fracture of the bone occurs in the wound and it is small, then treat it with this."
"And I direct you to the treatment of fractures of the head in that which follows."
"Of wounds on the neck."
"But if a wound occurs on the neck, there is no difference in treatment between that and a simple wound of the head."
"But if the nerve of the neck is cut or an artery, then if it is a nerve, there is no other remedy but to avoid carelessly treating it with something that causes violent astringency, such as vitriol and similar things which burn nerves and cause contraction." "And do not apply any hot cause upon the wound, for the substance of nerves is hot and their continuity is with the brain, which is the first part of all members."
"And if it is treated with mild medicines such as washing the wound with sweet water, sometimes infused in rose oil or not, and aloe when washed with sweet water and other soft minerals according to this manner, and humid ointments."
"But if the wound is large, then perform suturing or bind its lips together and properly treat it with powders until it is healed."
"But if the wound has depth or occurs in the lower part of the belly with putrefaction, then perforate it in the least depressed place."
"But if an artery has been cut in the wound and bleeding occurs, then separate it or bind it off, ligature it, or cauterize it if necessary."
"But if the spinal cord has been injured or completely severed and the veins of the neck are preserved, then approximate the lips of the wound over the spinal canal with sutures without touching it; afterward extend it evenly and reduce it to its natural shape. Then properly stretch it with decent bandages and leave it alone for a few days. And properly treat it with ointments that have astringency and excitation until it is healed."
"But if the wound has reached the bone and penetrated it deeply, then curette it, and afterward remove all fragments of bone that you can. And what you cannot remove, leave it alone until the wound putrefies and separates itself, and its inflammation is alleviated."
"And if the wound is fresh, then powder it with that powder which I have recommended to you." "But if there is a deep fistula in the wound, then treat it with that of which the memory will come later in its proper chapter."
"If it is a wound from a lance or knife and its depth is uncertain, then consider whether there is wind in the wound when the sick person exhales. If so, know that the wound is mortal."
"And if it is not deep and the wound is fresh with its own blood, then apply to it in the first hour that powder which I have recommended to you. And do not compress it so that the blood is not retained in its depth and returned to the heart, which would aggravate the illness, but rather apply an attractive ointment twice a day."
"And if the ointment is not available, then apply a cotton wick moistened with honey around the wound so that it may suck up its moisture. And make sure that the sick person sleeps on the side of the wound so that what is fitted in it runs."
"But if three days or more have passed since the wound and there has been no spasm or trembling of the heart nor constriction of the lungs and other good dispositions of the sick person occur, then know that the wound is saved. And then treat it with dressings and the other treatment until it is healed."
"But if its healing is delayed and much time has passed, then know that a fistula has formed. Therefore treat it according to the chapter concerning fistulas."
"And if the wound is from a cleaver or knife and is simple on the surface of the foot or back, then treat it with what has been preceded about suture if it is large, or with powder if it is small."
"But if there has already been injury to the bone and pieces of it have already grown into the wound, then turn the wound over and try to remove those pieces if they are detached." If they are not separated, then leave them inside until the plague can improve, for their extraction is alleviated.
And for other accidental plagues in other members, the remedy in treatment is the remedy that we have said.
Of the plagues of the belly.
The indigestion which occurs in the belly is either great, small, or moderate.
And small disruption is done more difficulty by another manner, and therefore the reduction of it is more difficult if you do not promptly introduce them to their proper place, for they are open and enlarged so that the introduction of them is made difficult.
And therefore the best disruption is moderate, for in that one it is not difficult to reduce the belly, as it is in the two species mentioned above.
And know that there are four ways of suturing the belly, but two of them are common and suitable for sutures of other plagues of the body.
And two others are proper to other plagues, but especially proper in suturing the belly.
And I will recount to you each one with exposition and explanation.
Therefore I say that when the plague is small and some cause of the belly is exited by it, and it is difficult to reduce it, then this is in one of two ways: either by the smallness of the disruption as we have said, or when the belly has become inflated by the coldness of the air.
And therefore when it is thus, then you should scalp that in such a way that you submerge a sponge or wet cloth in water alone or squeeze in hot water cumin, parsley, and broth with that the inflation may be resolved.
And sometimes you will find it useful to use wine in which there is astringency, and it is better than water alone in the resolution of inflammation.
And therefore when you see that the inflammation is resolved, then you should moisten the belly with water in which is cooked mallow and mallows, for by this it is alleviated from within with little cause.
But if the intrusion of the belly has been removed by this remedy, then you should cut through the disruption a little with an instrument with which you can excise the hemorrhoids.
And the first remedy is better when it is suitable that it not be cut and there is no need to cut unnecessarily or rashly.
About the instrument, see its shape:
The one part of it is cut sharp and the other not-sharp, and the extremity is subtle, but not as subtle as a spatula, rather let it be somewhat obtuse.
And therefore when the plague is enlarged and goes out from the belly, then it is necessary that its reduction be according to its natural form in its own proper place, if this is possible about this, for this is better.
But when the disruption is wide and is in the lower part of the belly, then you should make the sick person lie on their back and raise their buttocks as high as their head; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, then you should raise the head of the bed and place the feet higher than the shoulders.
And similarly if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, then always keep your intention and consideration on this so that the part in which the plague is may be higher than the other.
And thus you should administer this in large plagues and medium-sized ones.
And in small plagues, keep this that is prepared by you and especially make sure that the person administering it is among your closest friends, who should hold the disruption entirely with their hand and adjust the lips of it, and especially uncover from here to there so that no stitching occurs unnecessarily.
And this is the common manner of suturing: you take a needle or count of needles according to the quantity of the breadth of the plague; and then lay aside from the extremity of the disruption the finger of the ring finger, and stretch the needle once, but do not put thread in both extremities of the cord with two extremities of the ciphac that is left behind the cords of the fingers inside, until you make it penetrate this part; and you have now added two extremities of the cord and two extremities of the ciphac, and so you have made four orders.
And then stretch with doubled thread around the needle, and sometimes from two parts together, and then join both lips and the plague by a decent joining; and then leave the thickness of the finger and put another needle in that, and then join this with thread thus like feast with the first needle; and do not cease doing this if it is necessary with needles until you have completed all the contraction of the plague.
And let the needles be medium in thickness and subtlety, for thin needles easily cut the flesh; and thick ones are difficult to put into the cord, therefore they should be medium in thickness and subtlety.
And it is not necessary that the needle be put in both extremities of the cord very much, lest the flesh be easily cut and the plague open before its consolidation.
And do not prolong the suturing so that the plague is not prohibited from consolidation.
And then cut the extremities of the needles so that they do not disturb the sick person during their sleep; and you will sprinkle powder on the suturing from every part, which holds the extremities of the needles; and leave them until you know that the plague is already consolidated.
And these kinds of suturing with needles in what manner are more convenient for small plagues, for there is enough in the suturing of them with one needle or two or around those.
But the second kind of suturing is common: it is that you administer with suturing the four extremities, of the cord and two extremities of the ciphac, in one go, with a needle on which there is thread wrapped around it subtly and thickly.
And then when the needle has penetrated these four extremities, reduce the needle from that same part where you began, so that the thread draws back and goes from the lower part of the plague to the higher one, so that the suturing is according to the sewing of cloth with which the cloths are stretched.
And pause between each suturing the quantity of the thickness of the little finger.
And this kind of suturing is known by men.
And with such suturing I healed the plague that had been cut in a man's belly, which had been struck with a dagger, and the disruption of the plague was more than a palm wide, and it had issued from the bowels around two palms of the bowel of the middle place, and the disruption was in the middle of the member; and then I reduced that after the bowel had been forced by the plague for twenty-four hours.
And the plague was consolidated in the space of fifteen days or around, and he was cured and is healthy; and thus he lived for many years, and is converted in his dispositions.
And the other doctors had judged that he would not be healed; and by miracle it was done, for I did not cure him with ointment, because there was a place where ointment was not found nor any medicine, but only paused over the plague twice a day and washed it diligently with water of honey until it was healed.
"I say there are two kinds of stitches that are proper according to the narrative of the Word."
"And you begin with the closure of the cord, and insert the needle from outside to inside."
"And then with the needle penetrate into the cord and in that manner insert the thread lengthwise along the entire body, leaving the end of the thread out which you have inserted the needle; and make the needle penetrate from inside to outside on the other end of the mesh."
"And then when you have made that penetrate, now make it penetrate again in the same manner on the other end of the mesh from outside to inside; and leave the end of the thread which is on this side, and make the needle penetrate into the other end from inside to outside."
"And make it penetrate with that penetration in which you make it penetrate into the thread on the end of the mesh which is on the inside where all that penetrated."
"And again begin from this side and take that with the end which is of the thread on the other side, and remove the needle from the cord which penetrated, and again reduce that into that cord and tie the end of the thread which is on the other side with this end of the mesh; and remove that from the cord which is on its part."
"And do this once and again, and do it once more afterwards inside where you will close everything that is outside according to that example."
"And the sum of this manner of suturing is that you close with a skin suture in such a way that you sew the thread once from the end of the cord and leave it again inside so that it is completed."
"But the second type of suture which is particularly recommended by Gulia, and this concerns the inside and its recommendation, is that you sew it according to semilunar fashion in such a way that some surgeons sew it like that, thus joining together each part with its corresponding part conveniently by nature; and they apply the end of one side and the end of the mesh on the other end of that; and this is done as I recommend."
"You should keep the needle at the end of the mesh close to the outside part, and make it penetrate into the inside part in that sun, and leave two ends of the thread; and again turn the needle around and make it penetrate from outside to inside on the two ends of the thread."
"And again turn those loops around and make each loop penetrate from the inside part into the outside part on two ends of the mesh which are on the opposite side."
"And this manner of suturing is better than the common light suture, and it is a suture of which there was previous mention."
"This is the discourse of Gulia"
"And some say that abdominal suture is corrected with two needles, so you should insert into these loops a file and begin with needle insertion from that which you should do and make it penetrate inside to the other side according to the suture of those who sew the heart through the opening."
"And know that when there is rupture in the middle of the abdomen, then the suture of it is more difficult than in other parts of the abdomen."
"But judgment about the treatment of pleurisy is also judgment about other kinds of pleurisy."
"The cause of this is that when you succeed in treating recent pleurisy with its own blood before the air alters it, and reduce the chest and sew it up and dress it properly, then there will be no relapse on that occasion."
"And if the air has already altered the pleurisy, then some people in your presence will make hard dressings and apply the files, and they should be consolidated with thread and mesh; and then treat it like the treatment of other kinds of pleurisy until it is healed."
"But if you are not present with these medicines, then wait for it for a while because it begins to cough up blood soon, and changes its color twice a day like I have shown you, until it is healed; because in many cases when pleurisy is simple, you do not need other treatment."
"But if you fear that pleurisy may communicate to the main limbs, then it is necessary that you submerge lion's wool in oil of good quality or rose oil and apply it around the parts which are between the shoulders and leave them on for several days."
"And if there is pain or putrefaction in its chest because this happens many times, then treat it with black stiptic wine and more so if the putrefaction has reached the chest and an opening has been made penetrating into the cavity of it."
"And know that pleurisy which is in the thick chest is easier to heal than that which is in the subtle chests."
"And it is difficult to heal because the chest which is called 'gegunu' does not receive any healing of pleurisy that falls into it from anywhere; and this is due to the great multitude of veins that are in it and its large size, and its subtle body, and its proximity to the nature of nerves."
"But if what proceeds from pleurisy is tissue and you succeed in treating it recently, then reduce it according to your discretion with which you reduce the chests equally."
"But if it has passed to that extent and has become green or black, then you should strengthen it with a file on the spot that is darkened by it so that blood flow may come, because there are veins and arteries in the tissue."
"And then incise that which is other than that thread and leave two ends of the file hanging from the part outside of the pleurisy so that you may be relieved of its attraction; because you should remove the covering of the tissue and the emission of blood from pleurisy."
"Memorandum about pleurisy when it occurs in the chest."
"When there is rupture in the chest and it is small, then it is possible that it may be restored in some people because I saw a man who had been affected with pleurisy in his belly with percussion of lance and the pleurisy was on the right side of the stomach, and the pleurisy was old and had made fistula, and he was freed from it and became well."
"Therefore I followed the treatment of him although he was not certain about its healing, but I succeeded in subtly treating it until it was healed and the part was consolidated."
"And I also saw that the part was consolidated, but he suffered from illness which happened to him in his belly; and no one knew about this bad accident and he remained in his usual dispositions eating and drinking, and then entered into a bath and exercised himself in his sayings."
"And some experienced people have said that when pleurisy occurs in the chest and it is small, then it should be tied in this manner: and this is that you take figs with large heads; and then adjust the two lips of the pleurisy and place one of those figs which has its mouth open on the two lips of the pleurisy; therefore when it takes hold of them and strangles its mouth, cut off its head because it adheres and is not dissolved."
"And then place another fig near the first one, and do not cease this until you have used figs according to the quantity of all the pleurisy."
"And then reduce that and close up the pleurisy; and those heads will remain attached in the chest until the chest is healed, and there will be no harm to anyone."
"It is now possible to tie the intestine with a subtle thread made from the cleaned intestine of an animal, then take the end of this thread and tie it around the end of the intestine, wrapping it and carefully inserting the tied end back into its place."
"This method of suturing with ants is merely a matter of trust and hope."
"But if the wound is large or extensive, especially in one of the delicate intestines, for it only causes further subtlety and not true healing of the whole."
"Of the treatment of furuncles and fistulas."
"Do you know that any ulcer or abscess which opens and becomes chronic without being consolidated and drained always, wherever it may be in the body, is called a fistula, and we call this type of boil an 'azukem'?"
"And in truth, a fistula is a hard, thick, white node without pain and with a concavity like the concavity of a chicken's egg; for this reason it is called a 'rizat' ulcer, that is to say, an egg."
"And in some people it is moist, which oozes out; but if the moisture is quickly drained off, it heals in a few days." "Sometimes this moisture is abundant, thick, and subtle."
"I have already shown all those causes, their signs and their treatments with medicines in the division [on ulcers]."
"And so I should tell you about the treatment of fistulas which is done by operation using ointments."
"And know that fistulas occur in all the members of the body; for there are those which pertain to large veins and arteries, or to nerves, or to the bladder, or to the intestine, or to some of the ribs, or to certain vertebrae of the back, or to certain joints composed by such composition as that of the hand and foot; and those are which give proximity to the principal member and similar ones."
"And so those fistulas which are according to this manner are of the diseases that are difficult to cure, and they do not receive care, and occupation with them is work and ignorance."
"And if there is some fistula the depth of which does not reach these places that I have mentioned, and you hope and trust in its cure, and you want to reach cognition of it, then take a tent of iron or bronze, and if the fistula goes straight, search for it with this."
"But if the fistula is tortuous, then investigate it with a tent of subtle lead, for lead due to the weight of its body is alleviated and curved towards tortuosity."
"And if the fistula has no horrible openings, it is not possible for you to indicate anything about it with a tent."
"Therefore, search for the opening through its openings, because the humidity with which you cleanse it will go towards the other openings and the flow from them."
"And furthermore, inquire carefully in what manner it is possible for you to know if here there are bones or nerves, and whether the fistulous cavity is distant or close, or whether it is a fistula with many openings that is above all of this with your full strength, with your examination, with which you examine the disease, and the discovery of pain through your compression with the hand on the place, and similar signs and accidental causes of apostemes."
"And when you have considered all of those causes with true knowledge, then go to the cure according to confidence: and that is whether you consider it now whether the fistula is apparent nearby in a healthy place, distant from joints, nerves, arteries, veins, or any of the places which I have mentioned to you."
"Now you dry out the fistula according to what was said beforehand about its narration, and remove that which is in that filtration and of corrupt flesh, and that which is born from the opening of the flesh, or of bile and similar things, and cure that wound when it has been healed."
"But if the fistula is of great depth and it is rectilinear, then you must insert it into the front as much as possible according to your ability, and then cleanse it from all its corrupt flesh; and also administer hot cloths wrapped in sharp medicines, and introduce them into the cavity of the fistula which you have taken hold of with iron."
"And do this several times within until the sharp medicine has burned away all that is rough in the cavity of the fistula due to corruption."
"Then restore it with ointments which generate healthy flesh until it has healed."
If it's not healed by this, then cauterize it as we have advised.
If the cause of the fistula is bone and you must certify this, then inquire as we have advised and dry it according to our instructions, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or main member as we have said.
But if the bone is exposed and there is some corruption and blackness in it, then scrape away that flesh until all corruption is removed. Then care for it with this medicine so that it may heal inside.
And if it does not heal and spits blood like this, then know that you have not yet reached the complete eradication of the corruption; therefore open up again carefully and search out the reason for it and cleanse it with your last strongest medicine, and then restore it.
And if it is healed, that is good. But if not, then know that the corruption is in the distant depth of the body which has not been reached, and therefore there is nothing to do but leave it alone.
And if the bone is corrupted and small, or if you can pull it out, then pull it out with gentle forceps which are suitable for that.
But if many bones are exposed, then carefully remove all of them and do not leave any cause without your strength.
But if there is any difficulty with the causes of moisture, and there is no fear or error in their incision, then incise those membranes or flesh which are here, and relieve the bones.
But if you are not prepared to remove the bones at that time, then pause over the wound and make a dressing for it so that it may close up. Leave this in place until it is around those bones of flesh and membranes, and guard the dressing so that it does not become consolidated, and that the section which you have incised during your operation remains open.
Therefore, if you fear [that the wound will become closed], apply a poultice soaked in olive oil or Egyptian anguent or one of the green ointments, for when those membranes have dried up and the bones are separated by ablation, then attraction is alleviated.
But if it is a large bone such as the hipbone or thighbone or similar to those, and only the surface of it is corrupted, then scrape away that corruption with a rasp only until it has been completely removed. Then restore the dressing immediately.
But if much of the bone is corrupted and the corruption has reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that wound immediately. Incise it completely down to where the corruption has reached, and cure it so that it becomes consolidated.
And I recommend this to you: what should happen to a man in his thigh so that you would pause and seek help during your operation.
A young man aged about 30 years suddenly felt pain in his thigh. There was swelling internally on the inner side of the thighbone up to where the abscess had reached the thighbone. It was an abscess with a large head and no external cause could be found.
And so much time passed with that [abscess] due to the error of doctors until it finally burst. Much matter flowed out, and its cure was then suspended until the hip was fistulized. Many orifices were made in the hard bone through which there was constant discharge of pus and moisture from the body.
Then for many months various doctors attempted to treat him over a period of two years, but they knew nothing about the art until I was called upon.
And when I saw his hip and the matter that flowed from those orifices in great abundance, his whole body was already weakened and his complexion was yellowish.
Then I inserted a tent into one of those orifices until it reached the bone.
And then you searched and examined all the orifices and found that they all originated from every part of the hip.
Then I took courage and incised over one of those orifices until I discovered a portion of the bone. I scraped away that corrupted part, which was earthy and corrupted and blackened. And a portion of the hip had already become corrupted where it had penetrated into the muscle.
Then you closed up what was revealed and prepared for surgery on the exposed bone.
And I thought that it was not the bone but only the corruption that should be cut out and closed up, as I had already determined.
Then you suspended dressing with a consolidating medication for many days, yet it did not consolidate.
And then you reopened and discovered again over the bone according to the first discovery, and you found continuous corruption with the bone.
And I closed up what seemed to me to be beyond that corruption. Then you proceeded with the cure and dressing, yet it was not restored.
Then you discovered it again and did not cease cutting the bone little by little particularly until you cut around about a palm's width of it. You extracted it with its marrow, and then you restored it with medications, and it became consolidated lightly and healed.
No further operation or section is necessary in this case except for the disposition of the weakness of his flesh and for the scarcity of his endurance and fear of death. For he was always depressed due to the superfluity of evacuation and bad syncope.
Therefore, he was healed completely, and there is nothing lacking in the place of bone or hard flesh. His disposition in his body was good and he returned to his former strength; he changed his habits and did not do anything contrary to his health nor suffer harm from any cause.
But if the bone is prominent in place of flesh that is thin, then it is necessary for you to section it in this manner: Take linen and strengthen it at the end of that prominent bone, and command someone to stretch it out. Then pause that first linen with a thicker one made of wool. And then lay it over the flesh that is near the bone, and extend its end so that you can pull the flesh away from those parts. And uncover the flesh over the place where you want to cut so that the saw does not scrape the flesh.
And place wood or a table below the bone appropriately, for when you do this, it prevents the saw from scraping the corrupted flesh.
It is necessary that the sawing be done little by little over the corrupted place, because if the corruption is in the concavity of the bone and does not appear on its surface, it will be necessary to saw again afterwards.
But if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, with one part continuous with another, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part of it, then uncover the flesh from all parts. And place wood below, and cut off that first part where the corruption is so that the sawing may continue into the other part.
Let the sawing be according to the location of the corruption, a little at a time, as we have said.
But if the corruption is at the joint, cut off that corrupted joint and saw off the bone where it is continuous with the other part.
But if the corruption is in the continuity of two joints, then there is no reason to saw off except for harm.
And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or foot, it is very difficult. But you must inquire about the corruption and how it appears to you, and scrape away that corrupted part according to each disposition that is possible for you. And with each incision, be sure to correct what you have done so that you do not harm any vein or nerve.
"You should know what kind of chisels and saws are suitable for cutting these bones, considering the location of the bones, their preparation, thickness, subtlety, size, smallness, hardness, and rarity; therefore, you must prepare appropriate instruments for each type of operation."
"Knowing that this operation requires the use of a specific tool, when you have great learning and long experience in the techniques of this art, and knowledge of various illnesses, then you will already know what is appropriate for each tool regarding all illnesses."
"And you, having learned at the end of this chapter the number of instruments that you will use with ease to perform your prohibition which you will practice on others." Here is the English translation for "Forma de serra":
Forma d'autra serra:
Other method for a large incision
Method of the ray The head of this drill should be shaped like a star-pointed key, and its points should be shaped like the tips of a star.
And it is advisable that at the same time they are rubbed with the heads of joints when they are corrupted, or if the mouth is too wide.
Form for a smaller razor
Form of a broad-bladed razor
A well-made curved knife with the sharpness of steel and the blade shaped like a dagger "Form for it:"
Razor shape with concavity
Another subtle razor shape
Form of another razor with curved tip
Form for small razor resembling a stingray's tail
Form of another smaller incision tool
Form of another incisor; this one resembles a drill, with its tip resembling a saw, and is used in many places for cutting through bone:
Form of a drill suitable for use in drilling holes through bones
And its tip is triangular and pointed.
It is made of Indian steel, and similarly covers all the causes that we have mentioned for razors, incisors, and saws.
Of bone-cutting tips and bone saws
Extremities may become paralyzed either intrinsically or extrinsically. If you have treated that paralysis with medications and the cure does not help, sometimes the paralysis will spread to a limb for no apparent cause. In such cases, it is necessary to incise that limb at the location where the corruption is present, so that the illness can escape through that opening and thus avoid death or harm which would result in greater damage to the limb.
The sign that this has happened is that the limb turns black where it was burned by fire, or that it becomes very dark where the paralysis has entered into that limb and spread throughout the entire body. Therefore, incision of that area is indicated in such cases.
Similarly, if the cause of the paralysis is due to poisoning from causes like that of the sea scorpion or viper or spider and similar ones.
And if the paralysis or poisoning is at the tip of the finger, then you should incise the finger and not allow the corruption to spread into the hand.
Similarly, if it reaches the hand, then you should incise that area at the wrist, so that the corruption does not spread into the arm.
And if it goes up from there, then incise the arm at the elbow joint.
"And if corruption and dampness spread beyond the cold, then death of the patient ensues; but to administer another cause for this in cure is a matter of quantity of power."
"And similarly if corruption invades the said lung, then you shall insert a finger into one of its nostrils."
"And if you take hold of the lung, then you shall remove it entirely." "But if it cannot enter the nostril, then you shall insert your finger into the space at the junction of the nostril."
"And if corruption has already spread over the nostril, then there is nothing else to do except dismiss it and let the patient die."
"The method of inserting or cutting the member is that you should stretch one thread at the part where you wish to insert it, and stretch another thread over the place. Then extend one thread above and below, and stretch another thread in its middle; then separate the flesh which is between the two threads with a sharp knife until the whole flesh is exposed, and then it shall be inserted or cut."
"It should also be stopped with linen at all parts so that it does not touch the place where it was; and that healing may come to the patient with an appropriate scar and a cauterized wound."
"But if bleeding occurs while performing the operation, then you shall cauterize the place carefully, or apply some powders to stop the bleeding. And then return to your treatment until it is completed."
"And then bind the member with a bandage at its proper place, and care for it until it is healed."
"And I tell you what happened to a man in his foot. He had this accident which we are talking about, which is the fourth kind that happens in the foot due to burning that was like the combustion of fire."
"And that corruption happened first in his toe, so that it spread throughout the entire foot."
"And then that man prepared to remove the member because he could no longer bear the pain and burning. He inserted his foot at its joint and it was healed with fire."
"For a long time, this same corruption happened in the finger of the hand indicated."
"And then it came to me and caused that excess fluid to be reflected back onto the hand where I had placed my medicines for its cleansing, so that the excess fluid was not discharged and began to spread to another finger until it reached the hand."
"And he asked me to cut his hand off, but I did not want to do that hoping for the reflection of that excess fluid. And more than that, I feared that if I were to cut off his hand it would be mortal, because the power of the disease was strong."
"And after he left me, he returned to his own land and later I heard that that man had cut off his entire hand, but then it was healed."
"And I have not yet finished this story except to serve as an aid for those who suffer from this disease, and so that it may be significant for which it is significant and according to which it should be treated."
"On the treatment of sinusitis and the quality of cleansing enema with medicines."
"When an aposteme occurs on some fleshy members and the space of the aposteme is prolonged until it collects pus, and then it bursts and perforates, and the pus comes out, leaving the place empty like a vessel, and the cord that is above it appears thin like a wisp of silk, and there is no further corruption nor does it impress on bone or nerve or ligament, it is called 'sinus' but not 'fistula.'"
"But if the space is prolonged until corruption impresses on some member, then it is called a fistula and not sinus."
"And the treatment is to cut off that cord entirely as it is rolled up, especially if it is thin and appears like silk cloth, ensuring that it does not adhere to the place due to its corruption."
"But if you hope that the cord will adhere and that corruption has not yet progressed further, and there is swelling at its mouth, then you should treat it with an enema."
"And if you examine the sinus, then if it is large and the arm that emerges has a foul odor, then you should cleanse it with an Egyptian medicine made of oil, vinegar, and cinnamon bark ground up equally and adjusted in a vessel, which should be cooked over fire until the medicine reaches the consistency of honey."
"And then you should take some of it and dissolve it with water and honey, and use that to cleanse the sinus, tightening its opening, and leave the medicine in it for about two hours."
"And then remove it with a sponge; do this for so many days until the sinus is cleansed and the infection is removed."
"And sometimes it is cleansed with water of ashes when this medicine is not available to you. Then take the ashes of grapes and put them on the water, then mix it together and cleanse it with that until you are satisfied that the sinus is now healed."
"And if the disease does not tolerate this Egyptian medicine nor water of ashes, then you should cleanse it with water and honey mixed together in equal parts and also mix some wine with honey, because the property of honey is to cleanse and wash, and wine makes the sinus adhere, especially when the wine has excess tannin and dryness."
"And when you do this several times and are satisfied that the sinus has been removed, then cleanse it with something that causes flesh to grow in it."
"And if you take some diaphoretic ointment and dissolve it with rose oil and astringent wine, or cleanse it with other medicines and ointments that have the properties that I have already written about in the treatise on ointments."
"And if the opening of the sinus is narrow and cannot receive the nozzle of the enema, then you should dilate it little by little with a small iron rod, pausing in between to soak it in Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it is dilated."
"And similarly if the opening is wide, then you should bring together its lips with a suture and leave some of it open for the insertion of the enema without any addition."
"And if the opening of that from which the arm emerges is located above its parts, then dry it with pus below where it is in order to cause the arm to flow downwards, because when the arm is blocked by the pressure of the sinus, flesh may be generated within it."
"And if it is not possible to dry the sinus within the environment of pus below as you wish, then prepare the member with such preparation that the arm flows out of it lightly according to what seems appropriate to you and without any cause for the arm being retained."
"He who is above the opening of the sinus, he removes at all times so that it does not escape from its place in the arm." "And how do you know whether what comes out of the arm is too much or too little, or if it's digested, or not digested?"
"Also consider the location of that sinus, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and whether there is an abscess."
"And when your treatment is prolonged in such a manner, and you see that the matter thrown out of the sinus opening already adheres, or approaches adhesion, then on the third day, carefully remove it. And when you remove it, immediately change the cloth for another one and renew the dressing."
"But if a considerable amount of space remains in the sinus after its opening, do not despair about the adhesion of it, because healing will occur. For some people, there is delayed generation of flesh in wounds, and among these are those in whom the opposite occurs."
"And if after many days the arm remains undigested from the sinus, then you know that the sinus does not adhere. And if the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and is the cause of prolonged healing, then adjust in the drying of medications. And if medications are humid in their substance and virtue, they become dry like a fine ointment, when there is an adjusted superfluity of addition of rose water."
"And the final thing to be done when it is cured is that you take some fine ointment and dissolve it in rose oil, and place it on a linen cloth soaked in its own substance. And apply that cloth warmly on it, and use it thus."
"And if it seems that there is no ointment available at the time of action, then take honey and thicken it with heat, and use it. Or else, take myrrh and aloe wood and incense, grind all together finely powdered over the honey when it is on the fire, and apply this mixture on a cloth and place it on the sinus. And apply that honey which has been cooked until it thickens, and powder it on a cloth and place it."
"And sometimes it is administered with long and fine roots of celestial lily (which is celandine) and powdered barley and centaurea, and use these simples alone or adjust them together ground and sifted finely powdered over the honey which has been prepared. And use it."
"And if the sinus remains prolonged and is not healed by this treatment, then know that the corruption is in the bone of it. And make an examination in the bones or in other hard members or in the ligaments. Then treat it with fistular cure, as mentioned above."
"On the treatment of panaritium, ongnis attrita and incision of added finger and section."
"An ingrown toenail is an accumulation of flesh that occurs next to the nail of the big toe of the foot or hand, and it grows quickly in other toes as well. When its treatment is delayed, it becomes more serious; either it's a chronic ingrown toenail, cauterized and corrupted, emitting a foul odor, or the entire toe may become corrupted."
"And so, when you have finished what we've said in this section and your treatment does not conform, then it is necessary that you cut away with iron all the excess flesh that remains from the nail and properly cauterize the wound afterwards, for cautery is very helpful in this matter."
"But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, yet if there are excrescences on the nail that begin to press upon the flesh inside, causing it to throb and ache, then you should make a subtle incision at the angle of the nail that presses against the flesh, lift up that part and cut away the flesh easily, and apply over what remains of the flesh cooling medicines until all is removed; and properly dress that with ointment until it heals."
"But if the corruption has already reached the bone, then you should cut into the bone and remove it, for there is no time when the bone will heal if it is corrupted."
"And if the corrosion and corruption extend to the finger, then you should cut into it at one of its joints according to what is remembered about its condition, and properly dress that until it heals."
"But if the nail receives injury or pressure and there is intense pain in that place, then first perform bloodletting at the beginning of the illness, and properly scrape the nail with a sharp spatula with a transverse section from top to bottom, making sure that the section does not reach into the flesh beneath the nail, for you will cause great pain to occur and it will produce an excess growth of flesh in that location; and properly dress that place with something that relieves pain."
"But this nail, which is found in most men, is usually entirely fleshy and also has bone, or it may be very hard at the tip of the nail."
"And some are born at the root of the joint, or their origin is in some of the joints of these fingers." "But that which is born in some joints of the finger does not hurt, and that which is born at the joints is usually painful."
"And those that are born fleshy have a broader section, and it should be cut off at its root with a broad spatula."
"But that which is born at the root of the joint is difficult to cure; therefore beware of cutting it off."
"But if it is born in the middle of a finger joint, you should first cut into the flesh of it with a round incision down to the bone, and then saw through it with one of those suitable saws, and properly dress that until it heals."
"But consolidation which occurs among these between their veins or by the nature of the person born so, or by consolidation due to plague or burning from fire, or by appearance, then that consolidation should be cut into until it returns to its natural form."
"And also place between their dressings of softened linen soaked in rose oil to prevent them from becoming consolidated lightly, and separate those that are consolidated with a thin sheet of lead so that they may be consolidated according to what is necessary."
"And similarly, if consolidation occurs in some of these on the palm, then you should cut that consolidation according to what is prepared and convenient for the shape of the member."
"Of incisions for removing warts, there are three kinds."
"Varicose veins are twisted, thick veins full of melancholic superfluities that appear in the mouth of body members, and they occur more often in the legs, especially among travelers, workers, and porters."
"Then you should administer a purge for the body of black bile several times with strong expulsion, and also bleed the patient from the basilic vein."
"But the cure for them with iron is done in two ways: one way is that it should be incised and drawn out that black blood, and the other way is that the vein should be raised and all of it extracted."
"The section is done in this way: first, immerse the beginning of the vein with cold water so that the thick blood may be resolved, which is the sediment of the vein, and next, strongly tie the vein of the sick at its upper part near the thigh bone into a bandage, and next dry the vein at one place, or two, or three with a wide section, and then raise the black blood with the tweezers from below the part where it exits, upwards downwards until as much blood as desired and as many times as necessary has exited, which is the amount that can be tolerated by the patient."
"And also, he should tie it up, and command him to abstain from foods that generate black bile."
"And repeat the cure by phlebotomy when the veins are full and this is necessary for the patient."
"But the raising of it is done in this way: you who raises the vein of the sick, if he has much pain and fever, and next puts him in bed and immerses his vein with cold water until it reddens and the veins are dilated; or that he be exercised by strong exercise, if bathing is not available to you, until the limb is heated."
"And then dry the vein on the right side of it with a section in its length or at its end where it joins the bone, or at the top part of it near the heel."
"And then open the vein with forceps and strip the vein from all sides until it appears at sensation, and one should look for its appearance as often as desired declining towards blackness."
"And then remove the bandage and the vein becomes white and strong like a chord."
"And then you place there what has been elevated until it rises above the bandage and remains raised, and suspend that with one or two cloths."
"And then dry another section near that section for three days and then strip the bandage from above the vein until it appears."
"And then elevate that and cut into it again with another section near the heel, and then remove that and elevate it until it exits through the second section, and then remove that from above that."
"And do this until you have removed it from the section that is above or below all sections until everything has exited; and then cut into it again."
"And if you cannot remove and elevate it, then insert a thick needle with strong thread and tie it up and remove it; or put there what has risen above the bandage and twist your hand around it until it is completely wound." "And make sure that it is not cut; for if it breaks, it will be difficult to raise that much and harm will come upon the patient through that."
"And when everything has been removed, then place over the site of the wound lanolin immersed in vinegar and rough oil and unrefined oil until it is healed."
"And if the vein is contracted without tortuosity where there can be wrapping around the divisions and not according to what has been said, then you should make incisions over all parts of that tortuosity and at its wrapping places, and then suspend it with forceps until everything rises."
"And make sure that your incision does not cut the vein and does not wound it, for it will be difficult to raise it if you do so; use your caution in this."
**Form of the incident with which the vein is cut:**
Not like needles it is not sharp nor has it an acute extremity so that it does not harm the vein; and it is of thick flexibility lion, for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein through its subtlety; having in it superfluous thickness as we have said.
Of leg vein extraction
This vein is generated in the calves of the legs, such as at Atig in Arab territory and in dry and hard terrains of little tenderness where there is neither grass nor water.
And it is also generated in other places on the body apart from the calves.
And its gestation is of putrefaction which comes from leaving the spine like venom inside the body, serpents and worms, crabs and worms generating between the spine and the flesh.
And the sign of the onset of its occurrence is that this vein becomes inflamed in the calf with a sudden inflammation; and nearby there is an ulceration; and from there begins the vein to come out from that ulceration which appears like the root of a plant.
And then when the extremity appears, immediately you must wrap around it one weight of lead whose weight is that of one dragon, between two dragons, and hold it there and let the lead hang suspended from the calf.
And as many times as some cause causes it to come out from its places outside, wrap that in lead and hold it there. And if it is not prolonged, then you should cut off a part of it and wrap up the remaining; but do not cut it so deep that it remains inside, for if you cut it too deeply it will contract and enter into the flesh and cause an aposteme and putrefaction in the place with a bad ulceration.
For that reason it should be treated gently and extracted little by little until it is completely removed from the end of it and none remains inside the body.
And this vein has been found in some men to be as long as two palms and ten fingers, and I have even heard that one was twenty palms long.
And if it is cut at the time of its treatment, then insert a straw into the track of it and pierce it with a long straw through the body until all that is in the matter has been evacuated, and administer putrefaction to the place for some days with medicines; and also treat it with the cure for apostemes.
And this vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and comes out from there with many openings, and each opening has its own branch.
And therefore treat it as we have said in the division above, and with what is said above.
Of cutting for worms generated under the skin, called bovine ailment.
This ailment is called in some lands "bovine ailment" because many times it occurs in oxen, and there is born between the skin and the flesh a worm which goes throughout the body, pushing and pulling, and is felt from member to member until it tears apart the skin and comes out.
And its generation occurs because of putrefaction of certain humors, just as happens with worms and serpents and earthworms and roundworms in the belly.
And it is feared because of its harmfulness, for when it goes in the body and rises up to the head, and reaches the brain, then it causes a great disturbance there and enters and destroys the brain, which happens many times.
And therefore when you wish to cure it and extract it, then do not do so unless you see its movement and appearance by feeling it, and then you should press down on what is above it and on both sides of it with pressure and constriction, and then dry up around it and extract it.
And if it is embedded in the flesh and cannot be caught hold of, then you should apply a cautery with fire to the place where it resides until it is burnt up, for the greatest danger is corruption of it with which it corrupts the place as we have said.
But if it reaches the head near the brain, then press strongly on the brow with firm constriction and also dry up around it and extract it; and let the patient use medicines to purge his body of bad corrupt humors, and avoid foods that cause putrefaction.
Of cutting for the ailment called nafir
This ailment is called in our land "nafir," and it is a pain that comes in some members, and also changes from member to member.
And you will see this one as I will describe to you. I was called to see a woman patient in a village, and I uncovered her arm and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the elbow, and as it had been there for about an hour, I saw that inflammation move like a worm pushing itself along, but more slowly than if it were actually moving, just as if it were molten silver running from place to place.
And then the pain went away from that place and became apparent in the muscle, and stayed there for about an hour.
"Next, correct the other body between where it reaches the other arm."
"I also told him to turn himself around so that I could see his whole body; and he was amazed at the transformation of his limbs and their speed." "And I had seen such things before in my travels according to that manner, but I had never heard of anyone suffering pain from being transformed limb by limb." "But I did not see this among the women as I saw it in men."
"And you do not think that is because the woman was old, with dry skin and visible veins, and in this appearance there seemed to be that windiness transformed."
"And it is necessary that this backward curvature does not appear in those who are graceful and have moist skin with veins concealed."
"And when you want to perform the operation, and the patient feels that pain, then it is not apparent on the surface as we have said. Then press down upon him and release him gently and carefully until that constrained windiness is released, and cauterize the spot."
"But if you do not see it among your patients, then treat him with exercise of the body and with what expels windiness, and apply to him pills made from fetid herbs and pills made from serpentaria and similar things."
"On the extraction of arrows."
Arrows are diverse according to species and the parts of the body where they strike, for their diversity is such that those with large points, small ones, concave tips, or blunt heads are solid; while those with three edges, tongues, or star-shaped tips have different properties.
"Servants are distinguished by when an arrow strikes them and passes through the bone, exiting from the cyphac which is on the brain. This occurs due to violent soda and scotomia, vertigo, redness in the eyes, inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasms and confusion of understanding, vomiting bile, speech is suddenly cut off, voice destroyed, and white humid plague-like matter exits from the place, similar to water."
"If these symptoms appear before you, then you should abstain from treatment and extraction of the arrow if it is not outside."
"When the arrow strikes near the left breast and seems to be stuck in hard flesh, not soft flesh, you will feel a sudden movement like a pulse or flow of black blood. There will also be coldness in the extremities, chills, sweating, fainting, and soon after death without delay."
"And when the arrow has pierced the lung, there is an emission of frothy blood from the wound. The vessels near the neck swell up, the patient's complexion changes, they expire loudly or sigh for breath frequently, and desire cool air."
"And if the arrow strikes the diaphragm, which is located in the lower chest area, there will be pain near the lower ribs. There will also be sudden, violent coughing with pain and sighs, but not all members or muscles will be affected."
"And if the arrow strikes the stomach, then there will be violent vomiting of undigested food."
"And if the arrow strikes the abdomen and becomes lodged within it, then there will be some hole or tear in the skin, flesh, or intestines (which may have ruptured). There is little hope for recovery through extraction of the arrow."
"And if the arrow strikes the bladder and urine is excreted externally, with some blood or other matter from the wound outside. There will be severe pain over the area of injury, indicating that death is imminent."
"However, the other members such as the face, neck, throat, shoulders, arms, spine, collarbone, hip, thigh and their counterparts are saved according to the greatest dispositions when the arrow does not hit any vein or artery, nor is it venomous."
"And I will tell you what I have seen of these arrows, so that you may know about their treatment."
"The cause is that in a man who was struck by an arrow in the lacrimal gland of his eye near the root of his nose, when I extracted it from the other side of his ear, he recovered without any injury to his eye."
"And I extracted another arrow from a Jew who was struck in the eyelid of his eye, leaving the eyelid puffed up afterwards. The arrow was already hidden and could not be seen except for a small part that adhered to its shaft. It was one of the sharp arrows of the Turks with a lion's head made of iron without feathers."
"And the Jew recovered, and there was no great harm done to his eye."
"And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man who was struck in the throat. It was an Arab arrow with feathers on it, and I cut through it between two guides and then carefully extracted it. The Christian man recovered."
"And I extracted another arrow from a man who was struck in his belly and thought that he would die from it. But thirty days had passed without any change in his condition due to the arrow's location. Therefore, I cut into the area around the arrow and pulled it out carefully, and the man recovered with no great harm done."
"And I saw another man in whom an arrow had become lodged in his back. The wound around it had healed over seven years later, and then the arrow suddenly emerged at the root of his thigh."
"And I saw a woman who was struck by an arrow in her belly. The wound healed over inside her without any change in her condition, and the woman suffered no injury to any of her natural functions."
"And I saw another man who was struck by an arrow in his face. The wound healed over and the arrow head broke off without causing much pain, and he appeared similar to these others."
"And I extracted the arrow from the face of one of the king's nobles that was lodged in his nasal septum and had deviated slightly towards the right side. The entire arrow was hidden."
"And I was called for his treatment three days after he was struck by the arrow."
"And then I opened the wound of the arrowhead very narrowly. Then I probed it with a subtle finger but did not feel anything; however, he felt pricking on the outside of his right ear. Therefore, I believed that this pricking was due to the tip of the arrow."
"And I widened the opening with an ointment having attractive and digestive properties, believing that this location would swell up so that the arrowhead's location might appear to me, so that it could be seen."
"And no significant harm occurred at that location where the arrowhead had reached. I continued applying the ointment for many days without any harm occurring, and the wound healed during this time. After several months had passed, one day he felt the arrow inside his nose and remembered it to me."
"And then I applied a burning caustic medicine over the wound for many days until it opened up. Then with my finger I probed that area and extracted the tip of the arrow subtly, which adhered to its shaft."
"And precisely by that burning medicine I opened the wound until I saw the tip of the arrow visibly. And I spent time on this matter for four months."
"And after the wound was enlarged and it was possible for me to insert forceps into it, I did so but could not grasp anything with them. Then I did not cease probing and manipulating that area in various ways until one day I began extracting it using methods of extraction described at the end of this chapter, specifically using forceps adapted for descending fractures. And after that wound was restored."
"And some physicians judged that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored, but I restored it and the wound healed completely, and the patient recovered entirely with no harm remaining in him due to any cause."
"And I tell you about the methods of extracting some arrows because it would be too long to discuss those that I have not mentioned here, for the divisions of this art and its definitions are not understood by narration alone, nor can they comprehend them in this book."
"And the learned artisan compares little about much, and about what is present rather than what is absent. And he discovers new operations and new instruments whenever strange causes occur in this art."
"And therefore I say that arrows are not ejected from the limbs into which they have been inserted except by two methods: either by attraction of the area in which it is lodged, or by the opposite direction of its path."
"And that which is ejected through the entrance point, or is an arrow proceeding in a fleshy area, is pushed out and ejected."
"And if the arrow does not come out at the time it is cut, then you should leave it alone for a few days until the flesh around it softens and its attraction and exit are alleviated."
"Similarly, if the matter has entered into bone and does not yield to your efforts, then leave it alone for some days and treat it again with attraction and motion each day, and it will be discharged."
"If it does not yield to your efforts after several days, then you must perforate around the arrow in that bone entirely with a thin awl where the space made by the arrow is widened, and extract it out."
"But if the arrow has already disappeared in the place of the wound and is hidden from sight, then you should explore there and try, and if you feel it, then attract it out with some suitable instruments for attracting it."
"And if you cannot get it out because of the thickness of the flesh and the length of the bone, and here there is neither bone nor nerve nor vein, then make an incision in the flesh until it is widened enough that it will be possible to extract the arrow."
"And if the ears are those which are held, then cut away completely the flesh in which it is embedded with all the effort you can muster; and endeavor on this, if you cannot avoid cutting through the fracture of the ears and twisting them until you succeed."
"And when you perform the extraction of the arrow in any place where it is, then use a twist of your hand and forceps at all points until it succeeds; and be very subtle so that the arrow is not broken and that it is made easy for you to attract it and extract it."
"And if you cannot succeed in that at your first attempt, then leave it for a few days until the swellings around it have subsided, and then again treat it when it is eased." "But if you encounter flow of blood, then administer what we have said about treatment in its chapter."
"And guard your skill in incising vein or nerve or artery, and endeavor in every possible way to avoid the arrow; and do this with facility and tranquility and slowness and steadiness as we have taught you and recommended."
"And thus do you contract the arrow in such a way that the wound is made according to the figure according to which the lodging of the arrow was in it, for this is more advantageous." "But if this is not possible for you, then administer what is possible for you according to the figures."
"But arrows which are fired from the opposite direction, or those which have already caused some wounds in their exterior parts, or which appear to be near the surface of the wound due to the swelling above it and its prominence; then cut over that; and let the section be according to the quantity taken by the forceps; and then pull it out, for it is easy to extract."
"But if it is retained in the bone, then twist your hand according to its direction until the arrow presses on the bone, and widen it with it further, and then extract it."
"And otherwise, leave it for a few days, and then again treat it as we have said."
"And if the shaft of the arrow is in that, then push it out with it."
"But if the shaft is broken and you want to administer propulsion, then introduce this, if it is blunt, strike concavely so that it enters between the concavity of it in the head of the arrow and then push it out with it."
"But if the arrow is concave, then push it out with a strong instrument entering into it, for the arrow will be eased by that."
"And if the arrow is embedded in bone, then it is necessary for you to cut away all the flesh around it, if this is possible for you, and then treat it with what is appropriate."
"And if the arrow strikes bone, or enters the belly, bladder, or side, and is so close that you can touch it with your hand, and if it is possible for you to cut over it, then cut over it and guard yourself from incising vein or nerve, and extract it; and sew up the wound if necessary, and treat it until it is healed."
"Form of forceps with which arrows are extracted:"
The tips of their tongues are sharp as bird beaks, fashioned like saws when they grasp at the arrow to not let it escape.
And there are many different kinds of beaks, large, small and medium-sized, according to the size of the arrowhead and its width, the breadth of the wound and the tightness of the flesh.
like this way, so that it may alleviate the insertion into the concave arrowhead and is pressed with it.
Venous phlebotomy
The veins used for phlebotomy are: 30, of which 16 are in the head. There are two pulsating veins near the ears called "auriculars," two herbs on both temples, two veins in the lacrimal ducts of both eyes called "aspectantes," one vein prepared in the middle of the forehead, and another at the tip of the nose; two jugular veins at the neck; two veins above the upper lip; two veins inside the lower lip; two veins behind the tongue called "algeletic"; and two veins on either side of the tongue. The veins that are phlebotomized in the arms are five:
"And in the foot and leg there are three veins: one of these is that which leaves the curvature of the wild boar's tooth; the second is saphenous, and its location is near the leg of the domestic dog; and the sciatic vein, and its location is near the leg of the wild boar; and in the leg there are other veins similar to those."
"The benefit of treating veins near the ears is for old-fashioned headaches and migraines, and for healing wounds and ulcers on the head from ancient times."
"And the method of letting blood from these veins is as follows: it should be done on a clear day, and the patient's head should be shaved in the occiput area where both veins are located, using a wide cloth with good friction; then strongly bind the patient's head with a bandage that appears at both locations near the ears in two points pressed down on the head; then seek that vein with your finger, and if you feel its pulse with your finger, here signal to stop."
"Then take the lancet knife, which is that which is inserted, and carefully insert it into the vein in the elbow until the bleeding comes to the bone." "And then raise your hand with the vein and elbow upwards, and incise the vein with an indirect incision." "The length of the incision should be equal to two fingers placed side by side or nearby; let blood flow out as much as desired."
"And sprinkle powder on it and leave that until healed."
"And as already mentioned at the beginning of this book, an incision is made there and they are cauterized."
"More about the two great veins that are in the temples: the benefit of phlebotomy is for ancient migraine, persistent headache, and frequent eye inflammation, as well as acute excess blood flowing to the heart."
"And the quality of performing phlebotomy on them is, as I recommend to you: compress the illness with your hand until the two veins appear clearly through touch and sensation; then, feel their pulse with your fingertips, and at that moment strike [with the lancet]."
"And likewise, elevate the vein above it with your index finger, insert the phlebotomy lancet diagonally from below, elevate the vein upwards, and incise it thus as you have done on the other two veins; let blood flow out according to your need."
"And then release the compression of the illness, place your finger over the vein for an hour to stop the bleeding, and apply pressure on that spot with cotton and powder, pressing it down firmly. Leave it until healed."
"And this has already been preceded by the memory of them [the two great veins], their incision, and attraction at the beginning of this book."
"And therefore, the benefit of phlebotomy from the vein on the forehead is also the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein for ancient facial illnesses, migraine, and eye disorders with infected ulcers."
"And the quality of performing phlebotomy on him is, as I recommend to you: that the illness compress his head with a cloth until the vein appears; and then take the instrument called 'fossor' [excavator], which has this form:"
"Press the prominent point on the top of the 'fossor' onto that vein and puncture it with a quick or slow motion, according to his condition. Let the blood flow out according to the amount you desire; then release the compression of the illness and press down firmly until healed."
"Sometimes it is performed with a broad phlebotomy lancet; however, it need not be acute-pointed like the other phlebotomies. Approach it from the side and incise it across the transverse vein, as bone is nearby and would break easily if the lancet were too thin."
"But the benefit of the two veins that are located on the eyelids is for treating scabies of the eyelids due to inflammation and sebaceous matter in the eyelids, as well as facial illnesses."
"And the quality of performing phlebotomy is that the patient compress their head with a cloth, and then you incise those veins while standing at his head."
"And the phlebotomy should be made across and slightly along the length with a blunt-pointed lancet, as there is little flesh in that location. If the lancet is too thin, its tip may break easily."
"And then let the blood flow out as much as you need, and press down on those spots, keeping them compressed for one night. Then release them."
"But the phlebotomy of the nasal vein is beneficial for acute fever and violent colds, as well as facial illnesses, migraine, and inflammation that occurs in the face, especially when it is chronic."
"And the quality of performing phlebotomy on him is that the patient compresses their head and you take hold of their nose with your left hand, then take a long, thin lancet and insert it into the middle of the tip of the nose in a straight line, as the vein does not appear here by touch. As soon as blood begins to flow..."
"...gradually withdraw your hand along with the lancet and let blood flow according to your need. Then compress that area for one night, as it is easily restored."
"But the benefit of phlebotomy on both cheeks is for constriction of the throat and the onset of leprosy, as well as many other illnesses such as eczema and malignant ulcers that are corroded, like herpes zoster."
"And the quality of performing phlebotomy on those veins is that the patient compresses each side of their head with a cloth; then stand over the patient's head while they are seated on a chair."
"And then incise the long vein with a broad, blunt-pointed lancet gradually. Then extract blood according to a moderate quantity or as much as is needed at that time. And do the same on the other vein."
"And then release the cloth and compress both veins with a medium force to prevent the patient from fainting. Then let them rest overnight, as the wound will be healed by morning."
"And the benefit of phlebotomy on the veins in the angle of the jaw is for treating small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, gingivitis, malignant ulcers and cracks, as well as malignant ulcers that occur in the nose and around it."
"And the quality of performing phlebotomy on those veins is that you have the patient sit facing you and compress their head with a cloth. Then roll back the lips and look for two veins, one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left side. The demonstration of each is by its darkness, as there are many small black veins around them. Then incise each vein obliquely."
"But if you are in doubt about which one is the correct vein to incise, then aim for the incision that shows more blood and pus."
"And perform phlebotomy on the two veins located above the lips as well."
"But the benefit of phlebotomy on both veins that are below the tongue is for preventing suffocation due to inflammation of the throat, as well as inflammation of the uvula and other mouth illnesses."
"And the quality of performing phlebotomy on those veins is that you have the patient kneel between your thighs facing the sun, elevate their tongue with a mouth gag, and look below the tongue to see one vein on its left side and another vein on its right side. The color of each vein tends towards darkness."
"And then perform phlebotomy on each vein; but be careful not to withdraw your hand while doing so, as there are arteries below them."
"And the veins that are commonly phlebotomized in the elbow are those which are present in all humans. Phlebotomy on these veins is performed in two ways: either by puncturing with a mulberry-shaped or olive-shaped lancet of varying sharpness, or by cutting with a scalpel-like lancet called 'alnessil', and this is how it is done:"
"It is used like this: its edge should be aimed at opening concave veins that appear full and contain thick, turbulent blood."
"This phlebotomy uses a lancet of lesser width and very sharp point, suitable for drawing blood from fine veins containing subtle, citrine-colored blood."
"Of the remedies for phlebotomy of the basilica vein, which is one of three veins: for it draws out the blood from illnesses that are below the throat and the stomach, and thus relieves the chest and abdomen."
"And let the phlebotomist be careful when performing phlebotomy on this vein, for there is an artery nearby, and if he errs in puncturing the phlebotomy site, he may injure that artery and cause profuse bleeding. Therefore, it is necessary not to puncture it with a sharp point but rather to cut it with scissors."
"And if the basilica vein cannot be seen manifestly, then you should leave it alone and move on to another vein or seek some branching one; but if you puncture where the end of the arm finishes, for that is visible; and cut that with scissors as we have said."
"But if you wish to perform phlebotomy on the median vein, then first at the bend of the arm where you know the pulse point, and hold it in place with your thumb; then lift up the arm and cut through the skin with concave scissors with a sharp point as we have said; and be careful not to strike the artery nearby."
"And when you press with strength on that limb and observe swelling in the place where you have pressed with your thumb, know then that it is a swelling of the artery, and therefore avoid it."
"And if blood flows during phlebotomy like a child's urine, and it is thin and red, know then that it is arterial blood. And therefore, you should cover your finger with that place for some time; then remove your finger gently, and if the bleeding stops, which often happens, then press on the arm and leave it alone."
"And guard the wound of the cut with a cloth, and keep it clean and avoid touching it for some days until it is healed."
"But if the blood does not stop flowing, and it seems that you do not have present the appropriate medicine for this, then cut into the artery itself if it is apparent to you. For its extremity will contract and the bleeding will cease. Or take a wisp of lint and press it onto the wound; then take some plaster and apply it; then take one handful of pulverized frankincense and tie it tightly over the place where the vein was cut with linen and cloth for another day."
"And therefore if the blood stops flowing, that is good. And if not, then treat it with whatever has been previously mentioned about stopping the flow of blood."
"And the cessation of bleeding can be difficult in many cases due to the small size of the vein and the possibility of obstruction by the limb of the arm."
"But phlebotomy on the basilic vein is beneficial for removing blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body; because it is composed of branches of the basilica and branches of the cephalica, as we have said."
"And therefore, one should be careful during phlebotomy of that vein, because below it is a nerve; and if the nerve becomes attached to the puncture of the phlebotomy, then numbness will occur, and healing will be difficult, and perhaps not complete. And this nerve can often be felt; but in some people it may be hidden and subtle and not apparent. Therefore, you should pause your phlebotomy with which you are performing phlebotomy on that vein, and avoid the nerve with your strength."
"And if the vein is between two nerves, then cut across the length of the vein."
"The benefit of phlebotomy on the cephalic vein is that it attracts blood from the head and relieves illnesses of the eyes."
"And therefore, if you want to perform phlebotomy without damaging the artery or nerve, choose the olive vein or the myrtle vein for phlebotomy."
"But nonetheless, sometimes inflammation occurs in some people when phlebotomy is performed without percussion first; but this inflammation soon passes."
"The first thing you should know is that phlebotomy should only be administered for the preservation of health and with hope of benefit and caution against the occurrence of illnesses. And it should be performed on one of the veins that are in the elbow, namely the cephalic, basilic or median vein; and it should be performed at the beginning of spring, after fasting in spring and autumn, and around meals in winter, when signs of repletion appear."
"And phlebotomy should be performed either on the third day or at least three hours after a meal."
"But phlebotomy should be administered whenever it is beneficial and necessary, whether night or day, at any hour and at all times."
"And children should not be phlebotomized until they are at least fourteen years old, and pregnant women should not be phlebotomized except between the fourth and seventh month; and elderly people who have passed sixty years of age should not be phlebotomized."
"And before anyone wants to be phlebotomized for any reason, they should cleanse their bowels beforehand with a lion's claw purge, especially if there is much retained feces in them, so that the veins do not draw up the superfluities during phlebotomy of the bowels, which are purified, and do not harm the principal members."
"And patients with sacred or profane insanity, nor those suffering from drunkenness or madness due to drinking until it passes, nor those with dropsy should not be phlebotomized. And phlebotomy should be avoided near colic pain and vomiting, and near diseases of the abdomen, and near excessive sex and work and exercise during fasting or vigils, or any cause that dissipates virtue, either bodily or animal."
"And before phlebotomy, consider the subtlety of the humors, especially if the blood is thick; and use foods and drinks, and medicines if possible, to thin it out."
"And before phlebotomy, enter the bath if there is no prohibition against it, or exercise somewhat to make the blood more subtle."
"And pause phlebotomy around midday, that is around the hour of tierce, as we have said."
"And you should make sure that the person undergoing phlebotomy avoids all harmful passions and actions on that day, such as anxiety, anger, fear, excessive work, pain, sex, or their like."
"And at his seat should be present those things used by men with fragrant aromas and odors, and balsams and like substances according to their availability."
"And the phlebotomist should sit on a cushion that is higher than the patient's."
"And first extract your arm and rub the patient's arm with your hand two or three times, and then tighten the tourniquet with a cloth strip and wrap it twice."
The stricture is softened, for the stricture, when not equal, or if there is excess fluid, then prohibit blood flow; or if it's due to softening, then also prohibit blood flow completely.
Regarding the stricture, it's necessary that whoever is to perform phlebotomy should rub their hands together before veins are inflated and clearly palpable.
The phlebotomist should anoint their lancet with a little bit of properly prepared olive oil. Then they should place the index finger of their left hand on that vein where the phlebotomy is desired, allowing the vein to swell slightly and preparing it for percussion, in order to determine which vein is suitable for phlebotomy, namely one that throbs like a heartbeat, not one that is full of windiness and contracts under pressure when the lancet is placed upon it. If the lancet opens the vein too widely, then it is too narrow.
Therefore, it is necessary that the phlebotomist be experienced and attentive to all these causes.
After placing the lancet, if the vein is not filled with blood at once, it's better to withdraw and wait awhile. If after that time it still doesn't fill with blood, then try another spot slightly below or above the original location, but avoid any area that appears inflamed or infected.
If the area is inflamed or the patient feels faint, then it's best to leave them alone for a day or two and not attempt phlebotomy again until they have recovered, as bleeding can worsen an inflammation. Do not strain the limb too much nor attempt bathing after the procedure.
If the blood flows freely, then continue with the phlebotomy.
If the opening is small and blood flows subtly, fearing that not enough blood will be let, then insert the lancet again into the same track but adjust the angle slightly to increase the size of the opening. Do this carefully before the area becomes inflamed, as many men are susceptible to inflammation with even a small incision.
But if the area is already inflamed, then do not insert the lancet again there, for it serves no purpose. Instead, place a piece of lint soaked in olive oil on that spot to alleviate the heat and help cool the blood. It's better to use olive oil than other oils in this location.
Similarly, it's recommended to apply a lint soaked in olive oil during any phlebotomy where veins are not allowed to bleed freely, such as when using a tourniquet or tying off the vein with ligatures. This should be done after tying off one of those veins, as it helps to thin and disperse the blood, preventing clotting.
If a large inflammation develops at the site of phlebotomy, which often happens, especially if not enough blood was let or if the vein was barely opened, then apply cold compresses soaked in a solution of water and salt. Soak a sponge in this mixture, lightly wring it out, and place it on the area for about an hour to help reduce swelling and inflammation as it dissolves the heat.
It's important to do this especially when stopping the flow of blood from that vein with a ligature or cauterization, or when tying off another nearby vein.
If there remains some discoloration or greenness in the area for a few days, don't worry about it. If you wish to apply something to the spot, use a plaster made from aloe and myrrh dissolved together, or apply a compress of mint juice or chamomile juice mixed with a little olive oil.
Many times, inflamed areas and swellings occur after phlebotomy at the temple.
Then place your hand over that area and if it feels soft under your compression, then that swelling is harmful and bad. In this case, be sure to apply one of the remedies mentioned earlier to prevent excessive bleeding from an artery.
Make a plaster with something astringent, like oak bark or witch hazel, to harden the area and promote healing. Then treat it with other suitable remedies until it is fully healed.
It's important to remove blood from every person according to their constitution, the amount of blood they have, and the color prevailing over their blood, as appears.
For if the blood is black, let it flow until it turns red. Similarly, if the blood is thick, let it flow until it becomes thinner. If the blood is thin or sharp, allow it to flow until its acuteness is removed.
If someone who is robust and has a strong constitution requires bloodletting on one occasion, then make the phlebotomy incision wider and longer to let more blood flow.
Conversely, for those who are weak or frail, make the phlebotomy cut smaller and narrower, and bleed them in small amounts over several sessions. This is to avoid weakening them further by removing too much blood at once.
It's better to make a transverse cut across the vein for phlebotomy rather than just puncturing it with a lancet.
This method of phlebotomy avoids excessive bleeding and nerve damage, making it more praiseworthy and safer than methods based on width and length.
For those who commonly faint during phlebotomy, it's recommended to treat them beforehand with a small piece of bread infused in vinegar or simple oxymel, lightly wrung out. Then bleed them in three or four sessions over time.
If the person has a cold constitution, then before phlebotomy, have them take bread infused in myrrh syrup or aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and similar fragrant ones.
If someone faints during phlebotomy due to losing too much blood, then they should drink beef tea and sweet-smelling syrup afterwards. Use aromatics such as aloe and linseed oil to anoint their feet with it.
Use the other causes mentioned in the division of syncope due to evacuation that were discussed in the chapter on syncope.
For those who want to expand their veins and dissolve their blood according to the second intent (purpose), it's recommended that phlebotomy be done on someone whose constitution allows for significant evacuation, but whose strength is weak. This way, the blood is removed gradually over several days, according to the amount of blood that can be safely removed based on their constitution.
For those who wish to expand their veins and draw off their blood according to the second intent (purpose), and whose constitution is robust, then do so about eight or nine hours after the first phlebotomy.
For those who wish to remove blood from their body in opposition to its natural flow (as in cases of left-to-right shunts), it's recommended that they do so on the second or third day after vein expansion.
If there is a small amount of thick, sharp blood in the body that causes fever, it's necessary to remove a large quantity of blood in one session, and make the opening wide enough to induce syncope. However, be sure to maintain all conditions for safe phlebotomy, and place your hand over the pulse of the vein to prevent accidental death instead of fainting, as many untrained or negligent practitioners cause this very mistake.
Do not attempt to redraw blood after the vein has been tied off and it's difficult for blood to flow out. Instead, press on the area with considerable force and curve your hand slightly outward, as this is much better.
To avoid phlebotomy being performed a second time due to inadequate blood flow, you can:
If the vein is infected, then let it be and do not touch it until the inflammation has subsided.
If there is a need to draw blood for evacuation according to necessity, and it is not an excuse, then you should draw that blood from the patient's arm or another vein in their other arm.
The vein called the "funis of the arm" is phlebotomized in place of the cephalic or basilic veins when they are not visible or obscured because it consists of those.
The quality of phlebotomy on the patient is that they should insert their hand into warm water until the tourniquet tightens and the vein appears clearly.
And it should be pressed firmly over that limb with a tight bandage; and phlebotomy should be performed transversely in a small area, not laterally or along the length.
The opening should be wide and the phlebotomy incision should be made where you perform phlebotomy on the junction of the hand, a little bit.
And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then you should immerse your hand in warm water again and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your purpose.
But if you are in the summer days, then you may be excused from immersing your hand in warm water, and in wintertime, the body is naturally accustomed to having blood warmed by hot water.
And phlebotomy of this vein is safer than that of all other veins because there are no pulsating veins or nerves in it.
And phlebotomy of the little saphenous vein of the right hand is beneficial for liver diseases.
The quality of phlebotomy of that vein is that you should press the hand with a bandage or your hand, after immersing it in warm water until the vein becomes inflated and clearly visible. Then perform phlebotomy transversely; if you mistakenly cut something else, it will not matter much.
And be careful not to compress your hand during phlebotomy because the nerves lie close beneath the skin and can easily be injured.
And again immerse the hand in warm water and let the blood flow into it because if you do not immerse it in warm water, the blood will coagulate at the opening of the vein and prevent its flow.
And once the blood has been extracted according to necessity, then you should press over the vein with oil and salt so that it does not heal quickly. And do likewise for all veins that are streight.
But the benefit of phlebotomy of the median vein of the left hand is that it is beneficial for diseases of the spleen.
And do likewise in phlebotomy of this one as you have done with the other.
And the benefit of phlebotomy from the saphenous vein is for diseases that are in the lower parts of the body, such as those of the womb, and retention of menstruation, and for diseases of the skin and ulcers of old wounds, and similar diseases.
And the quality of phlebotomy from this vein is that the patient should immerse their foot in warm water and rub it until the veins appear clearly. Then bind the junction of the foot with a bandage and locate the opening of the vein near the heel, where many branches of it are found on the surface of the foot.
And then perform phlebotomy on the largest branch or one close to the heel below the ankle joint because that is better and safer.
And if you perform phlebotomy on the surface of the foot, then be careful of the nerves that lie close beneath it. And stop your phlebotomy with the instrument you are using for cutting across, so that if you wish to incise deeper you may do so without harming any nerve.
And let the phlebotomy be sufficient.
"Yet if it is prohibited to let blood, then immerse the patient's foot in warm water until the blood flows freely from that area until it is evacuated."
"And if the phlebotomist fails at first attempt, then try again with the flebotomy on another vein slightly lower down, because this location is suitable; and do not fear the patient's malice, but protect yourself from nerves as we have said."
"And similarly act upon the other foot equally."
"And concerning the sciatic vein, its location is below the ankle joint near the starting point of the fibula."
"And the benefit of phlebotomy for him is pain relief when it is done to extract blood."
"And the quality of phlebotomy for him is that the patient enters a warm bath, and swiftly and strongly presses his hand to his side above the ankle bone on top of the four aforementioned veins with a long narrow cloth, so that nothing else appears."
"And thus when it appears, then you phlebotomize that vein according to each vein as much as is possible for you and according to the cross-section, which is better; or else incise that vein with an incision or sever it with a section, because its location is suitable."
"And it is in many men much enlarged; and if you happen upon that one, and none of the rest appear to sensation, then phlebotomize some branch of it, namely that which appears on the back of the foot towards the aforementioned heel and ankle."
"And protect yourself from nerves, and let flow as much blood as you wish."
"And immediately untie the ligature and pause upon the location of the phlebotomy wound, and strongly press the location because it is healed lightly."
"Regarding ventosities (flatulence) and their qualities of use."
Winds are of horns, or of ears, or of veins.
And bloodletting is done in two ways: one through scarification and extraction of blood, the other without scarification.
And this bloodletting that is done without scarification has two methods to it, for either fire is used or none at all
And of the fourteen locations on the body where bloodletting is performed with scarification and extraction of blood, one is at the nape of the neck which is the last section of the head; another in the middle of both parts of the collarbone; another under the chin near the jawbone below the mouth; another on both spatulas; another on Alhocoster which is above the hip joint; another on both foci which are located on the forearms; another on both kneecaps; and another on both thighs.
And bloodletting does not draw out the blood from large veins but only from the small capillaries scattered throughout the flesh, and therefore it does not lose its virtue through this method, just as there is no loss of fluid through phlebotomy. Nor should bloodletting be done with fire or without fire in any disease caused by excess within the body until all of the body has been evacuated.
But if bloodletting is necessary for an illness or for cleansing, it should be administered at the beginning, middle, and end of the month, and at any time when necessary.
And therefore when it is necessary in any of those causes, and especially if it is in the third or middle of the month, we command bloodletting to be done at that time because those days have passed two or three hours.
And it is beneficial to perform bloodletting from the nape of the neck when it causes heaviness in the head and makes the eyes grow dim; but it is necessary that this be an appropriate evacuation for the entire body.
And this bloodletting is done at the location of phlebotomy from the cephalic vein.
But it is not proper to use this method in those who are of cold temperament or those who have catarrh, as it causes great harm to them.
And therefore bloodletting should not be used for the elderly and those whose illnesses are hot in nature.
But it is said that continuous bloodletting causes forgetfulness. Therefore, you should command the phlebotomist to pause his hand slightly at the beginning of the bloodletting in order to prevent the generation of forgetfulness.
But bloodletting of the armpit is done at the location of phlebotomy from the dark vein and the basilica vein: and therefore it causes asthma, and constriction of the lung, and division of the chest muscle of the lung, and coughing, and congestion.
And therefore bloodletting from the armpit should be done gradually, because if it is paused suddenly at the beginning, it generates weakness in the body and stomach.
And bloodletting from the elbow causes accidental pains in the head and inflammation of the eyes, migraines, and pleurisy, and pains in the roots of the teeth. It is done at the location of phlebotomy from the basilica vein.
And you should command the phlebotomist not to press his hand during scarification so that he does not injure the artery and cause bleeding.
And bloodletting from the chin causes dryness in the mouth and corruption of the gums, and it resembles the appearance of illnesses that are in the mouth. It is done at the location of phlebotomy from the lymphatic vessels that are on both lips.
But bloodletting that is done over the two spathula bones causes headache, which occurs due to congestion of heat.
And bloodletting from the two divisions of the jawbone of the face causes benefit in phlebotomy of three veins: the basilica vein, dark vein, and cephalic vein. This is because that attracts blood from all those veins that are large in the flesh, and also attracts the small veins from the other veins that are larger towards reaching the attraction to the three veins.
And command the phlebotomist not to proceed with scarification because the location is bare of flesh and thus exposed to nerves and arteries.
And it is one bloodletting method in which bloodletting is done over the buttocks, causing hemorrhoids of the anus and ulcers that are also there.
And you should command the phlebotomist to do a large bloodletting with a wide-mouthed cup because that location requires strong sectioning. And few thin-walled cups are drawn and it is scarified with scarification.
But bloodletting from the calves decreases by degrees in order to manifest diminution, because it attracts blood from the entire body and causes old pains of the kidneys and womb, and of the bladder. It also provokes menstruation, and causes boils and swellings, and it is done at the location of phlebotomy of two saphenous veins, and the ankle bone, and two small veins.
But they greatly weaken the entire body and cause syncope in many people.
And bloodletting from the ankle bone has benefit similar to that of bloodletting from both calves.
And the quality of the position of bloodletting is that you should pause the cup at the beginning empty and follow by moderate suction, not prolonging the position of bloodletting but pausing it lightly and removing it gently so that the humors come to the location by equal coming. And do not cease doing this until you see the location already reddened and swollen, and that the appearance of blood appears.
Then you scarify and continue suction little by little, and carefully consider the condition of the body.
Because that person who has tender flesh with few pores should be scarified only once and not more than that, so that the location does not become ulcerated.
And command the phlebotomist to widen the scarification a bit and then press gently while maintaining suction with ease.
And if the blood is thick, then you should scarify twice because in the first instance the way for subtle attraction of blood and wateriness of it is opened. But in the second one, the extraction of thick blood is acquired through scrutiny.
And if the blood is very fetid, then no scarification should be done on the third occasion so that it can conclude.
Finally, when we want to extract blood little by little or a little at a time, one scarification is sufficient for us.
And if we want to extract much blood, we should scarify with great scarification; and if we know that the blood is thick, then it is necessary for us to scarify with a previously opened scarification.
And the term of scarification refers only to the depth of the vein.
"When the chain (intestine or hernia) is thick, hard, dark, and its openings are narrow, it is necessary that the places for the cups be anointed with lenitive, aperitive, resolutive; if it is in summer time, thus as oil of aloe or violet oil, or dossy mallows oil, or cooked cumin oil; and if it is in winter time, then oil of narcissus, or lily oil, or camomile oil, or blood, for those resembling this."
"If the superfluity is large and abundant, then the oil should be of amaranth, or balm mint, or aloe, or aneth, for those resembling this."
"But if the cupping glass has wide openings of tender flesh, then it is necessary to prohibit oil, and for this, the places for cupping near the cupping should be washed with cold or hot water of solatrum, or cumin water, or borago water, and similar ones."
"And for that whose blood is of great humidity, wash his cups with sour wine, or myrtle and sumac water, and similar ones."
"And for that whose superfluities are large, wash his cups with old wine, or sage water (majoram), or decoction of aneth, or chamomile, and similar ones."
"And it is necessary that cupping be guarded before bathing; having to be administered near the time of bathing for an hour or two hours, and it is necessary that he sleeps near the cupping."
"What is it necessary that the person about to undergo cupping should guard before cupping."
"At the beginning it is necessary to consider: if the cupping glass or the one who should perform phlebotomy is choleric and vents on his acute and inflamed blood, then he should take causes of cooling, such as sour pomegranates, chicory with sour wine and lettuce, and secanolabum (scammony), and julep, and similar ones."
"And pause in their foods such as poleta (peacock), roasted birds, and sour seasoned foods, and similar ones."
"And for that whose complexion is cold, it is necessary that he takes to drink hyssop syrup with almonds or hyssop syrup with seeds, and sumac, and moderately odoriferous wine between old and new; and that he be advised to use little drink and eat, and avoid foods of peacock, canary, pigeons, small birds, and doves."
"And it is necessary that on the day of cupping and phlebotomy he should drink more than eat food."
"And it is necessary that some hours before cupping or phlebotomy, certain people be given tyriaca altharac (an antidote), or musk medication, such as muscated, or alcelita, so that the principal members are strengthened and that the blood may be subtilized; and it is not necessary to take that scalfatz."
"The cups that are not followed by scarification are those that are paused on the liver, and on the spleen, and podagra (gout), and on the navel, in the joints of the ankles, and on the hollow of the ankle, for these members do not suffer scarification upon them."
"And those are not desired except for the attraction of blood from the member, such as pausing cupping on the breast in illness of bleeding of blood from the nose; and they use it so that frozen cold cupping may be dissolved from the member, such as pausing upon the belly and the navel; because it rarifies the member, scalds it, and relaxes the pain because it resolves cupping."
"And cups are paused upon the lungs when there occurs in them opacity or phlegm because by the virtue of strong attraction it draws out opacity and expels phlegm from its place."
"And similarly, it does when paused upon the liver and spleen, because it removes cold cupping from those enclosed."
"And these cups are administered only with suction; some times they are administered with fire."
"And sometimes they are administered full of warm water in the illnesses of the spleen."
"This is why the cup should be filled and made larger, because cold water alone or water in which herbs suitable for this purpose have been cooked."
"Form of cupping administered with fire: the opening of the cup should be as large as two fingers wide, according to how we have formed it; and the quantity of the mouth should be half a palm wide; and it should be placed on the side where there is swelling, in the location that is in the circuit, half of it, let the traction be small according to the amount that enters into it through a needle."
"It should be made of earthenware or glass, with thick walls, lion's foot, round, and smooth, so that it does not injure the member by its position upon it."
"And in the middle of it should be placed a transverse iron or earthenware wick, whereupon candle is paused with fire."
"And this cup should be much larger than that which we have recommended; and the smaller one according to the illnesses and the condition of him who uses it."
"The cups for infants and emaciated people are different from those for young people and robust individuals."
"The quality of pausing this cup with fire upon the member is that it should extend the mouth of the fire with decently dried wood before a small candle of wax, and pause that upon the middle of the transverse wick in the middle location of the cup, so that the fire may be kindled around the partition of the edges so that not the body of the sick person may be burned."
"And then it should be paused upon the member of the sick person, and let him hold that traction which we have said, until when we have the cups and do not need to hold the wick, because the vapor will rise over that traction, at that time the cup will soon be dissolved."
"Then immediately extinguish the mouth according to its manner, and repeat it if necessary."
"However, in cupping that is administered in the illness of pleurisy with water, there is neither transverse wick nor traction, and it is not administered except that it should be filled with water, and it should be paused upon the member only."
"And this is its form: The larger this cup is, the better, because it can hold a large quantity of water."
"Chapter 97."
"Bloodletting is not administered in most members except in those where the position of cups is not possible due to their small size, such as the throat and gums, and similar ones; or in members that are denuded of flesh, such as the fingers and nose, and theirs."
"And the quality of using them is that if bloodsuckers are found, they should be in the muddy waters of ditches."
"And then they should be placed day and night in muddy water until they are hungry, and there remains no cause in their belly; and then the body should be evacuated at the beginning with phlebotomy and cupping; and then rub the member of the sick person until it becomes reddened; and then pause them upon him."
"And when they are full, throw them away."
"If it is possible to suck the place with a cup, it is better in judgment."
"But if not, then wash the place with sour wine and then with much water; and let it be rubbed and expressed."
"If the body of blood is prolonged near the place of the bloodsuckers and it is much absorbed, then take a cloth of linen in hot water, and pause that upon it until the absorption is absorbed."
"When blood is abundant, powdered vitriol or wallflowers and similar astringent causes are applied until the blood is stopped; alternatively, sliced fava beans may be placed on the area and left until they adhere to it, at which point the blood will have been stanched."
"Additionally, if necessary, leeches should be used for bloodletting, whenever possible they should be changed."
"And if suspension of bloodletting is prohibited, then the area should be rubbed with fresh blood or a needle should be inserted into the location until it bleeds freely. Afterwards, compresses are to be applied, because they adhere when they sense any bleeding."
"When you want them to stop, powder some ground garlic or salt or ash on them and they will soon cease."
"And thus begins the third section of the treatise: On Restoration." "This chapter is very often necessary in the art of medicine, and concerns the restoration of fractures and dislocations occurring in bones."
"O son, know that boastful physicians and common folk, who have never regarded the books of the Ancients nor read even a single letter from them."
"And for this reason it happens that the manner of the Ancients is not practiced in our land, and I do not wish to have been forgotten at any time; nor have I added anything below except by way of condensation for those who read the books of the Ancients and study them diligently, so that they may extract science from them."
"And therefore I direct you to experiment and study throughout the length of my life."
"And I have already described in this chapter everything that my science contains and on which my experiment has passed, since here I have condensed it for you other physicians and freed you from the occupation of elongation; and I have condensed it to the end of condensation; and demonstrated it to the end of demonstration; and formed many forms of instruments that are administered therein, as is done by addition of demonstration, just as I have done in two preceding chapters."
"Chapter One."
"Summaries and collections from the essence of fractures of bones, from which a premise is necessary before we begin to remember the members that are broken in diverse ways one by one." "It is fitting that I should declare in the prologue of this chapter the summaries of my discourse, and the chapters which are intended for the understanding of those who will practice this noble art and who will stand firm on its truth; so that you and they may be prompt to know or learn it better than others."
"And therefore I say that when a fracture or dislocation or torsion or collapse occurs, it is necessary for you at the beginning to perform phlebotomy on him or to alleviate his pain by some means, if no prohibition exists such as debility of power or if he is an infant or elderly or during intense heat or cold."
"And furthermore it is suitable to be content with light foods of fresh herbs and the flesh of birds and crabs; and prohibit heavy meats and filling foods and all foods that fill the veins with blood, lest you be assured of a safe wound and lest you fear effusion of matter into the member."
"And therefore return the patient to his first regimen with which he is accustomed to live."
"And therefore, when the broken bone begins to be restored, it is necessary that the patient be sustained with nutritive foods of much and heavy nutrition in which there is viscosity, such as foods made from wheat cooked with water, rice, capons, kid, fish, calf's belly, fresh cheese, thick wine, and similar foods; and with this regimen coagulation of the fracture occurs more gently and easily."
"And know that the bones of children and old people are not able to be continued and consolidated according to their nature due to the drying out of the members thereof."
"But nevertheless nature adapts and connects itself over the broken bone in any way whatsoever, with some cause similar to glue that adheres and strengthens it until it is conglutinated together, until the end of fortitude and firmness comes, just as fire at the beginning, unless some cause prohibits it from its works."
"And for this reason it is necessary that you pause the foods of the patient, foods in which there is heaviness and viscosity and thickness, as we have said."
"And know that the species of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of the members, for a fracture of the bone of the leg is different from a fracture of the bone of the head; and a fracture of the bone of the foot is different from a fracture of the bone of the arm; and similarly all other members are diverse among themselves."
"And I come with remembrance of every species of fracture, explained in its own chapter separate from the others."
"Great diversity within itself." "And the species of bone fractures are diversified within themselves; for there is an arched fracture other than stellar ones that occur therein; and sometimes they are fractured according to the length of the bone: these are called 'sagittal' and 'stellate' and 'additional' and 'non-additional' fractures, as happens when a reed is prepared to write with, and there is a fracture with swelling and disruption at the head, and there is a small fissure fracture."
"And for each species there is some specific pain or torment in its restoration, which will be remembered distinctly in their proper places."
"Many signs of bone fracture." "And for this reason a bone fracture is known: its torsion and the prominence and appearance of it to the touch, and its shortening when you compress it with your hand."
"And therefore when there is no apparent torsion in the place nor is any made by your touch when you agitate the bone and the patient does not find great pain, then there is no fracture here."
"It is possible that there may be some torsion or small fissure, therefore you should not move it with your hand nor compress it all at once; but pause over it and apply the medications of which remembrance will come to you at this moment appropriate for the place; and furthermore it should be straightened by means of subtle manipulation."
"And know that the place where it is arched and not cut in two or otherwise than sagittally, when all separation from its companion has been removed, then you should begin immediately to correct it, provided that it does not have an open wound."
"And if it has an open wound, then leave it for some days until the wound stops; and furthermore elevate it in whatever manner you can of elevation."
"And know that restoration of it and approximation of it is easier than the bone where there has been separation."
"And furthermore strengthen it according to what will be remembered about it."
"But if there is a separation of the bone, then it is necessary to extend this broken member from both sides if it is the arm or leg; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two strings or with one string and your hand."
"And be in such a position that you hold the member in its natural shape while the separated parts of the broken member are extended; then it is necessary for you to return those additions with force and according to whatever manner you can place them back in their places."
"Be mindful of your strength so that you do not harm the patient through your actions or cause them injury; and proceed with caution according to your ability, applying one bone with its companion according to their best forms."
"Ensure that at that opportune moment you touch the patient with your hand, and if there is any diverse cause here, correct it and equalize it according to the quantity of your strength."
"Avoid violent extension and compression, as many foolish physicians do, causing an abscess to form through their actions or causing contraction in the limb."
"And the quality of the bandaging of the injured limb is what I recommend. For you should know that broken limbs are diverse in their smallness and greatness and in their shape."
"And for those that are small, such as the arm, hand and foot, and similar ones, it is necessary that the wrapping be made with very soft cloth."
"However those that are large such as the thigh or leg, it is necessary to have a thick and hard wrapping in them, for the hard bandage connects the large member strongly on all sides with equal tension so that nothing enters between them."
"And appropriately begin by applying your bandage with pauses in equal parts over the location of that fracture with three or four wrappings according to how much the limb deserves, and strengthen your hand a little with the bandage."
"And appropriately go beyond that to the highest part of where the fracture is located and strengthen your wrapping more than before with which you have strengthened the location of the fracture." "And appropriately extend yourself with wrapping beyond the location of the fracture a bit and slowly loosen your tension little by little until you reach halfway."
"And appropriately take another bandage and wrap it around the location of the fracture again with wrapping, and then go beyond that to where there are no wrappings. And your operation should be in the tensioning and loosening of the wrapping according to what we have said about the first wrapping above."
"And appropriately place cotton or cloth between the wrappings to equalize any twisting of the fracture if there is twisting. And if not, do not place anything in between them for any reason."
"And appropriately place another bandage over it and appropriately apply poultices made of suitable herbs at once if there is no inflammation or abscess. And then place something over the wound that will absorb the inflammation, and leave it for a few days. And then strengthen your poultice over it."
"And the poultices should be made of soft white lint cloth and properly formed. Or they can be made from oak wood or palm fronds, and each poultice should have this size and shape:"
"But the poultice that is placed on that fracture should be thicker and softer than the other poultices. And its length should be equal to the size of the limb in both magnitude and smallness. And appropriately strengthen your wrapping over the poultices with another bandage according to your first tensioning. And appropriate tie it down from above with a thread, as we have said about tensioning, so that your tensioning is greater where the fracture is located, and the farther away from the fracture, the less tension there should be."
"And the threads should be soft in size and fineness, and made of wool. And if the threads are thick, such as I have seen some people use who tie their threads with twisted cords, it is a great error when they try to make the tension even."
"And very fine threads are not convenient because you will not be able to achieve the tension that you want with them. And it is necessary that there is less than a finger's breadth between each poultice."
"And if the pain is felt at the ends of the poultices due to tensioning in those places, then place cotton or wool between them so that it does not cause injury."
"Sometimes a fracture is accompanied by swelling, and there can be disruption of the nerve in the cord. And I have discussed this in more detail in chapter two on singularities."
"And know that not every broken limb should be strapped with poultices on the first day. The reason for this is that when a limb is large, it does not necessarily need to have poultices placed on it until about two or three days after, depending on your certainty of the arrival of an abscess."
"And this is the manner in which the ancient surgeons treated fractures and dislocations using poultices that were placed on them."
"The manner of poultice used in the treatment of fractures, convenient for many complexities and especially for women and children, because it does not cause heat or friction. And you should take powdered mortar, which is the ground flour that comes out of the movement of the millstone on the walls of the mill."
"And mix it in this way: sieve it with albumen from an egg, and use that mixture without making it too thick or too thin."
"Another way to make a poultice for treating fractures and dislocations is: Take asafetida, laudanum, acacia, enula, and mustard, which is the resin of wild mustard, two drachms each; myrrh and aloe, one-half drachm each; alochil, twenty drachms; all are ground and sieved and mixed with bitter almond water or egg white if the condition is scalded. And use this poultice because it has a good composition and restores lightly broken bones, and is suitable for many people."
"Another way to make a poultice suitable for fractures and twists is: Take mustard and white lead, two drachms each; myrrh and aloe, one-half drachm each; acacia, six drachms; gum arabic, twenty drachms."
"All are ground in a mortar with a mallet and then sieved, mixed with water or egg white, and applied."
"A way to make a poultice for joints and separated bones in their places, and when there is accidental pain in those areas and for cracks and fractures: Take clean wool and immerse it in vinegar and hot oil and place it on the location."
"But this poultice is not useful for healing, bringing an abscess to a head, or expelling pain properly."
"Another way to make a poultice that restores broken bones is: Take fig leaves from the fig tree and leaves of wild poppy. Count them all together and make a poultice of them."
"An abbreviated method of administering a poultice for the restoration of bone fractures and when you want to resolve the remnant of an abscess: Take roots of white lead, chamomile flowers, violet flowers, oat flour, all in equal parts; grind them all together and mix with wine if the member is not scaled."
"If it is scratched, then cleanse it with warm water infused with coriander or simply warm water."
Another method for applying a poultice that is stronger in resolution than the first one, when an abscess occurs during the restoration of the limb: take root of marshmallow and seed of it, and balm, melilot, marjoram, violet flowers, chamomile, all finely chopped and mixed together; let them be crushed and cooked with water from the oak tree or sweet water or wine, everything according to the quality of the limb and its color.
But Hippocrates does not specify in his book that it should be applied on the member for forty days during its restoration, but rather cerote made from wax and oil and nothing else; and he recommends that it be between thickness and subtlety.
But it is seen that Galen says they should be applied on the broken member during its restoration and the causes in which there is drying with little heat are such as myrrh, incense, and similar to those causes that we have recommended.
Another way to make a poultice that alleviates injury and pain: take the following finely chopped ingredients and mixed together: wax, celandine, human skin shavings or bird feathers, marshmallow root, and salt; grind them well and sieve them; then cook it to make the poultice.
But the quantity of time that it should remain bound according to what is appropriate and when it should be unwrapped depends on whether pain or swelling has occurred or not; if the bone is broken, it is not advisable to remove it from its place too quickly. Therefore, do not untie it for many days unless there is no pain or inflammation. And if great pain or swelling or inflammation occurs at the place, then you should immediately remove it and apply another poultice to that area.
And take some linen cloth and sea sponge dampened in hot water, and with that wash the affected area inside until the swelling subsides and the pain is alleviated; then let the limb rest for an hour. Next, apply over it a compress soaked in sour wine and oil or rose oil to help draw out any accumulated pus and reduce inflammation of the limb, ensuring that there is no further pain.
And then apply another gentle bandage and small poultice over the first one, tightening it gently until it is healed.
And if at some point the abscess, heat, pain, inflammation, and all other symptoms have been completely alleviated, and you still need to apply a poultice and bandage, then do so in the same manner as you did initially.
And if no other cause from those that we have mentioned occurs at the limb, then you should not remove the bandage until three or four days have passed; sometimes even up to twenty days depending on how the limb appears when it is unwrapped, as we have said, ensuring that the fracture adheres and comes together with the coagulation of the flesh above it.
And then adjust the bandage more tightly than the first one, according to how the limb appears when it is unwrapped, and adapt it to the thickness of the swelling of the injured area.
But if the area of the fracture becomes dry and emaciated more than necessary, then you should know that nourishment is prohibited from reaching it. Therefore, immerse that area in hot water every time you remove the bandage; do this for three days altogether. Then loosen the bandage a little, which will allow nourishment to reach the limb and promote healing.
But what foolish restorers of a fractured limb do when it is not set correctly from the beginning, setting it crookedly according to their own error and causing great fear, this has been greatly condemned by ancient authors in their writings.
And I have not seen anyone do such a thing, so it is more reasonable that they should not do it.
Chapter According to: On fracture when it occurs in the head.
The varieties of fractures are many, and their forms are diverse, and their causes are distinct. For some fractures occur from blows that break the bone entirely into the cavity, leaving the bone like a splinter, which is why this type of fracture is called 'disjointed'; or the blow cuts through part of the bone without cutting through its depth, and this kind of fracture is called 'elevated'.
The plague of these two fractures is great or small, and [it causes] fracture that is crushed or twisted; the cause of it is blunt impact with little force.
And this fracture is penetrating and approaches the muscle which remains on the bone, or it is located on the surface of the bone, with the plague being large or small.
And there is a fracture that becomes concentrated within the bone itself, in the finest hairs of the bone, which is why this type of fracture is called 'capillary fracture'.
And there is fracture caused by a blow or impact that forces some portion of the bone into its interior, which happens in concave locations like those of an egg when it receives an impact and its shell breaks inward.
Especially this occurs in curved bones such as the bones of the head.
Broken bones of all kinds are weighed down similarly to stars separated from their orbits. And you shall return everything in its place.
We recognize all kinds of fractures by detection on them and by inquiry with gentle touches and observation of decayed flesh that is over them.
A capillary fracture is recognized by its appearance on the bone, it is cleaned and rubbed with touch, for where there is a fracture appears black.
But in the treatment of fractures, one must first consider the accidents of the disease, and then if they occur due to those accidents that have manifest significance, such as vomiting from cholera, extension, loss of consciousness, fainting spells, acute fever, sweating of the eyes and redness of them, and similar appearances in major dispositions.
But if accidents do not occur frequently, then you await health, but then you begin the treatment of it.
The reason for this is that if it has happened to you at the beginning as it was happening and this is during the winter days, then it is necessary that you study the bone structure before the fourteenth day according to all dispositions.
And if it is during the summer days, then you must extract the bone before the seventh day, having ensured that what remains of the bone is corrupted by the paniculum, and that the accidents which have been mentioned occur.
And if the fracture has already reached the paniculum covering the brain and is with small pieces and attrition, then it is necessary that you insert the comminuted fragment and attrition according to what I will recommend to you.
And that you shave the head of the patient and uncover the bone according to your custom and manner as much as possible according to the figure of the fracture, so that it is light on the patient.
And if it happens to you that you must perform the detection of the bone, fluxes of blood or a hot abscess, then you must pause for it with what is necessary, and this is that you wash the place with cloths infused in wine and rose oil, and make the fracture rest until the abscess is sedated, and be sure of fluxes of blood; and then immediately begin with the circumcision of the bone and the ablation of it.
And this is according to one of two methods of operation.
And one method is that you insert the bone with a narrow incision such as this: and immediately administer another incision tool, somewhat wider than the first: and this is its form:
"And then administer more of the incision powder than the second one."
"And it is necessary that you have various incision knives of different lengths, some of which are thicker than others; some of them are sharper than others and are very sharp at their tips, and they are made of iron or steel."
"And use them with ease in percussion on the incision to avoid hitting the head and harming it."
"And if the bone is strong and hard, then you must first perforate around it before administering the incision knives, which are called non-depth knives."
"And they are not called thus because those do not reach the end of the bone where it is appropriate to use them, so that the knife has a rounded tip or edge on that side which is left behind, similar to a small margin or circle, which prevents being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone."
"And it is convenient that you take many of these knives, each one suitable for the thickness of each bone, so that in all tests of the brain, the tip is sharp, and its length and width are according to the thickness of this test."
"And this is the way of three types of knives:
"You are to now cut with the incissors whatever is between each joint of the bone, and you shall gather that thin pus which you can raise by levitation, as we have said before, so that you eradicate the bone, either by hand or by some other cause using certain instruments which you shall have prepared for this purpose, such as tweezers and subtle forceps."
"And be sure that the scissors do not touch any part of the skin."
"And then when you have circumcised the bone and separated it from the skin if it is continuous with it, you shall extract it, but first scrape and clean that in its roughness which is in the bone with another instrument similar to scissors, but nevertheless ensure that it be thin and subtle."
"And if there is any fracture of the small bones and you try to remove them with ease using whatever instrument is necessary, then clean the wound with linens and bandages which we have mentioned."
"And another method of operation is light and distant from fear, which Galen describes as worthy of great praise; this is the manner of it: It is necessary for you at the beginning to begin uncovering the fracture of the bone in the place where the break is most evident and manifest, until when you have uncovered that fracture and paused with the end of this gentle and happy scissor which has this shape:"
"And the round end is lion-like and does not cut any skin, while the sharp end is like this in two sides lengthwise, thus; so that the round end fits against the skin with the sharp edge striking the bone."
"And then strike the scissors with a small hammer on one end until you cut all of the bone with ease as it revolves, and you are certain that the skin does not tear in any way whatsoever, and if the patient is the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, he was asleep."
"And then if any skin remains attached to the bone in certain places of the bone, cut that with the round end of the scissors and remove it easily, for it is removed without injury or fear."
"And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the skin, and what is cut off or removed from the bone is only its surface, and remains rough and sharp in places, then you must shave that roughness and remove those sharpnesses with subtle razors which you have prepared in different sizes so that it may be possible for you to use them in all places where they are most convenient and straight according to what you perceive the operation of the broken bone and its figure to be."
"And you must use in your shaving of the bone at the beginning the widest of those razors, and then immediately use the most subtle of them, and do not cease doing so continually until you have administered to it the thinnest and the most subtle of all."
"But in each of those other small capillary fractures and subtle fractures, you must administer care according to what you perceive about their correction."
"And it is because not all those who have studied this art agree on this." "And we have shown in large fractures what has been written about this."
"And if the skin is torn when you remove the bone, then you must take cloth according to the quantity of the wound and dip it in rose oil and place it on the opening of the wound; and also take another doubled or tripled cloth, dip it in wine and rose oil and place it on the first one and do this as lightly as possible without pressing too hard on the skin; then apply a linen bandage over that and don't pull it too tight but only to the extent that the wound itself requires."
"And leave it with this treatment for one or two days until you are sure that the wound is dry and cauterized; then remove it and apply medicines which promote drying, such as linseed oil and powder of iris, and powder of aloe and tragacanth, and others like them."
"And if you make these medicines into powders that are finely ground and applied dry to the wound; generally speaking, apply any medicine that has the property of cleansing without biting."
"And be sure that the wound in your treatment is kept clean and not covered with grease or anything else; do not let it become infected; because when an infection sets in on the skin of the brain it corrupts it and causes illness, even death."
"And if an inflammation occurs on the face of the head, especially after the bone has been exposed and when its treatment is neglected, it appears black on its surface; then consider that if such accidents occur in the illness they are harmful without doubt."
"If blackness does not appear on the face but only from the medicine applied to it, and this is due to the virtue of that medicine, then you must take a portion of honey and three portions of rose oil, mix them with linen cloth and apply it to the face; then treat it with the appropriate remedies until it heals."
"Chapter III"
"On restoring the nose when it is crushed."
"You should know that the nose is not broken except when two parts are crushed simultaneously and raised up, or one of those bones is displaced; because there are two bones in the nose, the left one being made of cartilage and not broken, but only bruised and twisted."
"But if one of the two parts is broken, then you must insert your little finger into the nose and reduce the fracture with the tip of your thumb inside and your other fingers outside until the nose returns to its natural shape." "And have this done easily by you, taking care not to cause harm to the patient during the operation."
"And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and your finger cannot reach it, then you must use the tip of a probe with a small thickness."
"And if the fracture is in both parts, then you must perform this same operation on both."
"And be careful to restore it on the first day of the fracture if possible; otherwise, wait until the seventh or tenth day after the wound has healed."
"And also insert into the tip of the nose a wick made of cloth if the fracture is in one part or two cotton balls if it is in both parts; and they should be as thick as possible to fill the cavity of the nose."
"Some of the ancient restorers say that the cotton balls should be wrapped in wool and changed every day, but I have not seen this; however, it is necessary that the wick be wrapped in egg white mixed with powdered mallow; then leave it until the bone has healed and the cartilage has hardened."
"Sometimes, instead of cotton balls, it is appropriate to insert pieces of lion's claw into the nose, especially when there is abundant pus and inflammation in the fracture of the nose, provided that the patient can breathe freely."
"This method is not necessary for you; if you wish, do this, or if you wish, use cotton balls instead."
"And if inflammation occurs again after the wound has healed, plaster the nose with cerote or cotton infused in vinegar and rose oil, or with diachylon."
If there is no aposteme, cauterize it first with flour of sesame and powdered earth of iris mixed with egg white; then place a lion's skin on him, and do not allow him to raise his nose for any reason.
If the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or are comminuted, then you should apply splints to them and extract those that need it using appropriate instruments; then close the wound and treat it with something that adheres and consolidates, and use plasters suitable for that purpose.
If plague occurs inside the nose, then you should treat it with hot compresses and administer lead cannulae until it is completely healed.
Chapter IV
On the restoration of the jawbone when it is fractured.
When the lower jawbone is broken and the fracture is not accompanied by plague, first examine whether the fracture is on the outside only, and whether it is not broken in two and curved inward at its edges. If so, its treatment will be easier.
Then, if the fracture is on the right side, insert your left index finger into the patient's mouth and similarly for the left side with the right index finger. With this finger, gently push the bone edges together from inside while pressing the outer part of the bone together with your other hand until it becomes evenly aligned.
And if the jawbone fracture is already separated into two pieces, then you should apply traction to both parts in a straight line until it is possible to achieve alignment.
And if there is commotion and displacement of teeth, then strengthen those that you expect will break with gold or silver wire or thread. Then place a roller bandage on the broken jawbone, and place another roller bandage over it doubled. Then place a large, well-made splint on top, or use a piece of sole leather cut to the length of the jawbone. Then tie everything securely in place according to how you think is appropriate for that application, taking care not to cause further damage.
Command the patient to rest and avoid physical exertion, and have them take liquids slowly through a straw
And if you estimate that the bone has already begun to change shape in some way, then on the third day remove the splint and realign it. Then apply plaster made from powdered brick, egg albumen, or chickpea flour over the splint, taking care to first remove the cerotum. Then place a linen bandage soaked in oil over the plaster.
And when the plaster is well attached and adjusted onto the bone, and there is no further displacement of the bone position, leave it in place until the fracture has healed and strengthened. For many times this fracture becomes solid in three weeks.
And if another boil occurs later on, then apply whatever has been mentioned many times in the treatment of it until it is healed and the boil has disappeared.
And if the fracture is accompanied by inflammation, then consider whether it is due to a separated bone fragment or infection. If there are infected areas, then use whatever you think appropriate to remove them using suitable instruments.
"If the opening of the wound is too narrow, then widen it using forceps according to your needs."
"And when you have finished those procedures and there is nothing left to remove, then if the opening of the wound is wide enough; otherwise, apply one of the plasters that are suitable for this purpose and cover it until it heals."
"Chapter Five"
"The repair of the collarbone when fractured."
"Often the clavicle is broken near its middle, and this fracture occurs in one of three ways."
"When it is broken or separated, or separated into two parts without accidents, its repair is easy; when it happens as described in these procedures, its repair is difficult; when the fracture has an opening."
"And the procedure for this is that when the fracture has no opening, you should have two assistants present: one to hold the broken clavicle in place and the other to extend the neck at that point."
"And then approximate the fracture with the aid of those said above until it takes on the correct shape, and is not in too much prominence or concavity."
"And if you need more extension, then place the palm of your hand on the sick person's chest with a cloth or wool between them, the size of which should be according to the amount needed; and extend and elevate the clavicle and press the cloth with your hand until the fracture is approximated correctly."
"And if you cannot draw the end of the clavicle outwards to its proper position, then have the sick person sit up on their neck and place your palm over the muscle of the right shoulder with sufficient force."
"And the assistant should press on the muscle of the shoulder blade until the bone of the clavicle is elevated to its proper position, and then you should reduce the fracture and approximate it with the aid of these said methods."
"But if there are spurs on the clavicle that are painful, then you should cut over them and remove those spurs with ease."
"And if it is retained in the bone, then you should make an incision into it with one of the knives that you have brought for this purpose, as you had placed the clavicle on the instrument that serves to hold it; and this instrument is made of wood or iron, and its shape is like this:"
"And it resembles a spoon, the concave part of which should be according to your need, depending on the size of the bone or its prominence."
"But its length should be according to what is possible for you during the operation; it should have two extremities of this type, one broad and the other narrow."
"And if the disruption of the wound that you incised when you removed the spur from the bone is large and you are certain that there will be an abscess, then approximate the two lips of the wound with stitches."
"And if the disruption is small or you fear an abscess, then fill the wound with dressings and powders according to the size of the wound."
"And if an abscess forms, then soak a cloth in vinegar, rose oil, and wine and place it on it."
"And all of this should be done without causing pain to the fractured bone; and you should see the patient every day so that when the linen becomes softened or if you see the splint becoming loose, then you should correct this and tighten the bandage."
"And also make the patient sleep on their back and place a small cushion at the level of their shoulder blade during the night so that the assistant's arm is raised to the side and therefore the clavicle fracture is elevated due to the elevation of the muscle; or the patient's arm can be tied to their neck."
"And do not remove the bandage unless it happens that there is discharge in the area or an abscess forms within twelve days."
"And also renew the plaster if you see it becoming wet in that place, and adjust it to the reduction and restore it and leave it until it is restored and the clavicle fracture has healed."
"And it is strengthened and comfortable in about twenty-eight days, but sometimes in some men it can be completed in less time than that."
Chapter VI
Of the Reduction of Shoulder Fracture.
The scapula is fractured on its lateral side and only the margins are broken, not the body itself.
And therefore when it is fractured on its medial side - and it is fractured in the middle of it - and only known by touch, then according to the figure of the fracture you should prepare for it and reduce it according to its natural shape in every way that is possible for you.
And also place powdered flour with egg white and linen cloth on it, and then sprinkle doubled cloth powder on it. Then place a thin board splint according to the size of the whole scapula or a little more on top of it.
But if the splint is concave in some parts of the scapula, then you should fill that concavity with linen cloth and place the splint according to equality.
And also strengthen it from above with a long bandage with appropriate constriction and firmness of the splint so that it is not removed from its place.
Check the bandage every day, and whenever it becomes softened, replace it on another occasion and tighten it and adjust the splint if it has been removed from its place.
Have the patient lie on their side.
The scapula is restored in twenty days or in twenty-five days.
And therefore when this number is completed, then you should dissolve the bandage, and know for certain that it is of those bones whose union is not doubted nor their dissolution.
And if you proceed to the site of the humerus and place the elbow outside, then incise it there, leave it open, and do as we have said in the clavicle fracture regarding the treatment of an abscess if one occurs here.
De fractura del colz e de restauracio dâ€™ella.
"For the restoration of a broken foot."
"The foot sometimes breaks in the middle and is displaced; however, its ends are usually intact but crushed."
"And when the middle of the foot is broken in an accident, it declines to the sides and causes great pain, difficulty in walking, coughing, fever, and vomiting blood. The fracture is evident in the cavity of the broken bone and is not hidden from sensation."
"And for the restoration of it, the patient should be placed on their back and a pillow put between their legs. The muscles of the foot should be pressed upon and the bones adjusted with two hands, taking care in the operation and ensuring that everything is done according to the best possible manner and what is convenient, until the bone returns to its proper figure."
"And then apply plaster and cotton wool, and pause on a delicate wooden board or calico cloth, taking care to wrap it in cloth. And take care that it is placed upon the broken bone without moving it; and sometimes bind it around the back with bandages according to its roundness, and strengthen it with appropriate strapping. And also consider the binding at all times, and when it becomes softened, strengthen it."
"And if it is necessary to provoke the removal of that [cast], because of corruption or pressure, pain, or an abscess that occurs in the place, then you cut and untie it, remove the plaster, and rectify what has happened there with a healing manner for it. And also reduce the plaster again, sometimes even its face; and adjust the strapping until it is healed."
CapÃ­tulo VIII
Chapter VIII: On the restoration of the ribs when they are fractured.
"Know that fractures of the ribs occur only in large spaces that are on the back; and at the extremities of their ends, such breaks do not happen unless it is due to them being cartilaginous." "The discovery of it is not hidden from sensation during its investigation with these tools."
"And the restoration should be done in such a way that you align the fracture with these tools according to the most possible manner, ensuring it is aligned properly depending on what is needed, and then apply plaster and strengthen the broken bone with steel if necessary."
"And if the fracture of the ribs is displaced at its ends inside, then great pain and puncture will occur for the sick person, like the puncture that occurs in those who have coughed up blood, and because the bone pierces the pleura. And this causes difficulty in breathing, coughing, vomiting of much blood; and this is difficult to cure."
"And even the Ancients used this technique with many tools."
"And among the things they said is this: whenever foods are given to the sick person that causes inflation and windiness, so that the belly becomes inflated and extended, then the fracture will be pushed towards its ends on the outside."
"But we would not recommend this because it could easily lead to an abscess forming if it is not done carefully. And even if it has already happened, then it will help with that."
"And some among them said that it is better to remove the wind and then suck strongly with force; this is similar reasoning, but however it is feared that the wind might drive the superfuities to the place through weakness."
"And some among them said: whenever the place is covered with wool that has already been immersed in warm oil, and powders are placed between the ribs inside until it is full, then the wrapping should be done as evenly as possible according to its roundness; and then the sick person should be treated with dietary cure and medication for pleurisy."
"And if the sick person suffers from severe constriction that cannot be endured, and the bone pierces the pleura with sharp pain, then we fear for the sick person. Therefore we should make an incision over the place, uncover the broken rib, and then place on top of it the instrument called the 'cipher' which was previously mentioned. Then we should carefully insert the bone and remove it."
"And then we should join together the two lips of the wound if it is large using sutures, and treat it with plasters inside until it heals."
"And if an abscess happens inside, then quickly and gently place powders in rose oil on the place, cover it, and treat the sick person with what is appropriate for an internal abscess."
"And let him be propped up on pillows while lying down until he is healed."
"Chapter ix"
"A restoration of fracture of the spinal bones of the back and neck."
"Sometimes fractures occur in the bones of the neck, and they tend to adhere to each other, similarly to the spinal bones of the back." "And if this happens to someone and you want to know if they will heal or not, then consider this: if sometimes the muscles are already softened, stunned, and dead, and cannot move those parts nor extend them nor straighten them, and when you compress those parts with your fingers or prick them with a needle, they do not feel pain in those parts, then know that it is not healing, and in these conditions it is mortal."
"And if those parts move and feel compression with your fingers or puncture, then know that the spinal cord is saved and the illness will recover with treatment."
"And if you see similar symptoms in the bones of the neck, then consider their weight."
"Now if you see that they are already softened, it has happened to those parts what happens in the muscles, and especially when lying on their back, there is shortness of breath and excretion without control, and sometimes they are suddenly reversed on their back and want to urinate but cannot, then know that it is mortal, and therefore do not bother with its treatment."
"But if none of these things happens, the condition is better and easier to treat."
"And the treatment for this is that you should apply a poultice made of hot cabbage leaves, smeared with honey and oil or crushed mulberries, and place it on the affected bone. Repeat this application several times a day until the swelling is reduced."
"And then apply one of the comforting and heating plasters, and tie it on tightly. Command the patient to rest and remain calm, and not to sleep on the side where they feel pain until they are healed."
"And if it happens that the bone is fractured or some other cause has already separated from it, then you should dry it with a bandage and expose the bone. Then join together the two lips of the wound with stitches if it is large, and treat it with a liniment of henbane until it heals."
"But if it is the end of the bone that has broken off, then you should insert your left thumb into the anus and grasp the broken bone with your other hand according to its position. Then apply a poultice and plaster, and bind it tightly."
"And if you feel that there are broken pieces within the wound, then remove them and clean out the wound. Then treat it with the previously mentioned treatment until it heals."
"Chapter .10"
"On the restoration of a tooth."
Bone fractures in wide joints are broken, and if they break, the fracture of them is only a communion at the ends of those and are inserted into the length and decline towards the inside; and it happens to the patient pain in that place and puncture, and the limb becomes stunned when it's fractured.
And its restoration is that you stretch your hand over that side which is above the fracture which is its shape.
And if the fracture is only at the end of it, then you should align that according to what appears appropriate for equating an entry that is assembled to its natural figure.
But if the fracture is in the long bone or one that already declines towards the inside, then you should make the patient lie on their belly so that you can prepare for the restoration of that fracture. And then once you have aligned it, pause on that plaster, and also pause on that stick of wood or bone, and stretch with strictness over the one where there is no fear of puncture from fracture nor displacement of the splint.
And align the concavity with whatever you use to fill that entry so that it takes on the correct structure, and command the patient to sleep on their back or on their side.
But if an abscess forms, then you should cease the extension and restoration of it until the abscess is sedated, and pause on whatever sedates that according to what has been preceded. Then return to the restoration of it, and stretch it as is necessary.
And if this happens in the bone, then you should extract them.
Chapter XI
On the restoration of a fracture of the ankle joint.
"Aid is required between the neck and the top of the shoulder."
"And if it is broken, the restoration of it is done in one of two ways, of which one way is that you take a piece of plaster of moderate thickness and apply it thus:"
"And there should be attached at both ends two ligatures, and nearby suspended from the elevated location."
"Then place the patient on a chair; and nearby, gently place their broken arm on a flat surface so that it reaches its elbow in the middle of where the curvature of the bone is attached."
"And then suspend some weight above that, or the attendant should extend it towards the sides; and immediately the physician should apply the fracture with his hands together, so that the fracture returns as necessary."
"The other way is that the patient should be propped up on their neck and suspend the arm at the elbow with a ligature, and then command two attendants: one of them should hold what is above the fracture with his hands; and the other should hold below it; and each of them should extend to their respective side."
"And if you wish the extension to be stronger, then strain over the fracture with a ligature and over that again with another ligature, and each of the two attendants should extend to their respective sides."
"And if the fracture is close to the extremity of the muscle, then it is necessary that half of the ligature should be placed on the elbow and the other half below the fracture near the joint."
"And similarly, if the fracture is close to the joint, then it is necessary that the ligature should be placed over that location and over that joint."
"Then place it gently and without difficulty, and immediately when it is placed according to what is necessary and applied with a good application, then strain it so that it does not happen that an ulcer forms."
"But if an ulcer forms, then leave the bandage on for up to seven days, and place over it a clean lint soaked in warm water and rose oil until the ulcer has healed, and then strain it."
"And the way to strain it is: place plaster over the fracture, and then wrap a clean napkin over the plaster; and then adjust the arm on that support, and place his hand covered over his muscle."
"And then wrap the cloth and strain the arm on that support so that the arm is in a stable position, unless some cause prevents it due to the broken bone."
"And then use splints."
"And then place over the fracture that splint which is wider and stronger than the others; and place between each splint the width of a finger, and let the length of the splints be according to the break with an addition of three fingers on either side."
"And then strain over the splints with the bandage which was mentioned at the beginning of this chapter."
"And ensure that your bandage is as tight as possible around the location of the fracture." "And when the fracture has been reduced, then make the bandage looser."
"And therefore if you see that the situation of the splints and the bandage is as we have said in the time when you restore the limb to its proper position, then do it."
"And if you fear an ulcer forming, then leave the bandage and splints on for up to seven days as we have said."
"And also consider the ligature in all cases for three days so that there is no pressing or inflammation at the location; otherwise, the food may not reach the limb due to an excess of tightness; therefore correct everything as we have said."
"But if you are in doubt that nothing will happen because of it, then do not remove the ligature for less than three days or more."
"And let his sleeping place be on his back, and let his hands be placed on his stomach."
"And place over the cooking stove full of wool on which to rest the limb, and consider at all times of night or day that the figure of the broken limb is not displaced nor dissolved, otherwise if the ligature becomes moist then correct everything with your own judgment."
"And give the sick person their food according to the order which we have mentioned earlier, ensuring that the food is subtle at the beginning until straining begins, and then it is necessary that you thicken the food for him."
"The custom of the splint and bedding is that they should be strained for forty days, and then it is necessary that they are removed and a bath administered, and treated with ointments which correct it."
"And if the fracture is laid bare, then do not remove the ligature and splints for up to ten days or up to two months."
Chapter XII
"On the restoration of fractures of the arm."
Brace is composed of two bones called radii; one is small and touches the said thumb, the other is large and is placed next to the small radius on its outer side.
When only the larger radius breaks, or when both break together.
And when the small radius bone is broken above, its restoration and healing will be easier
When it breaks below the fracture, the restoration of it is bad, and its healing is difficult.
And worse still when both bones break together
Therefore if the bone that is broken is the small radius above, it is convenient for the doctor to apply a small extension with ease while waiting for its healing.
But if the large radius is what's broken, then it requires that a stronger extension be applied.
And if both radii are broken together, then you should apply traction quite strongly
And it is necessary to apply the figure of the hand during the restoration and extension of it stretched out on a splint, with the wrist of the hand placed above all others, so that the ear lobe may be lower than the other fingers, and the patient may be sitting on a cushioned chair.
And there should be a splint placed in front of it at its height or towards it, so that the patient does not run into any trouble.
And moreover the minister should extend the arm of the party above with his own hand or with a sling, and another minister should similarly extend it from above.
And furthermore the doctor should heal the bone while reducing it into the best possible position.
And if there are splinters in the fracture of the bone, then you should try to reduce them all back into their proper place with your own strength.
And if there appears in it a splinter separate that punctures the elbow and is not to your expectation in the restoration of it, then you should apply traction on it and reduce that according to the manner which has been described above.
But if the fracture is with pus, I have already spoken about that specifically in another chapter, and therefore you should take care of it according to that.
And if an abscess forms at the beginning of your treatment, then you should lay a cloth with cerate made from rose oil and white wax, and it should be medium between thickness and thinness, and press the cloth on it with subtle tension until the abscess is drained. Then remove the cerate and apply a plaster prepared from powdered mallows with clear egg whites, and also apply bandages; and the bandage that is applied to that fracture should be soft and strong.
And know that in most cases the number of bandages for the arm is two or three, or there may be a fracture at one elbow or at both elbows together.
And moreover you should apply your tension on the location of the fracture with great force and vehemence, and when it is more towards the upper parts above the fracture or towards the lower parts below it, then apply the tension a little softer according to what was preceded in the beginning of this chapter.
And the cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and moist, and not hard or rough, and the bandage with which it is pressed should be of medium thickness between thin and thick, as has been recommended.
And consider the member and its ligament for a few days. And if some cause occurs that requires correction, such as swelling occurring in the member, then you should immerse the member in cold water until that swelling ceases.
Let the member rest without pressure until it has paused, and then return to applying traction.
"If the swelling has already softened and the bone has moved back into place, then correct this with your skill."
"And consider whether the nutrition reaches the limb due to an excess of narrowing, for then you should soften that a little and let it rest for a few days until the nutrition returns to it, and then strengthen it."
"But if the illness has not occurred due to any of those causes mentioned earlier, then it should be allowed to rest for about twenty days or so."
"And then suspend the limb of the patient with your skill using agitation movements, and have them sleep on their back."
"And know that this fracture takes about thirty days or thirty-two days to heal, or perhaps it will take twenty-eight days, and all of this depends on the disposition of the complexion and the dispositions of the virtue."
"Chapter XIII."
"Of the restoration of fractures of the fingers and toes."
"I know that at the tip of the hand and fingers of these carts there is fracture, not just bruising many times seen."
"And when there is fracture or bruising on the hand, it is necessary that the patient lie flat and in front of them place a pillow according to equality, and nearby place their hand over the extended one."
"And then the minister extends the broken bones, and the doctor fits those together that are congruent with good congruence."
"And then it is necessary to apply plaster and gauze, if there is no cauterization; and then place a splint on top according to the quantity of the location, which you have already wrapped in linen cloth."
"But if the fracture is in the parts inside of the palm of the hand, then make a similar sling of cloth, and command the patient to press it against their palm with the fractured hand; also let it be bound with long cloth."
"And let the splint be of leather with cloth in which there is padding, so that the leather adheres to the palm; and bind it according to what is necessary."
"But if the fracture is on the outside parts, then it is necessary to place splints above and also another splint from the side part of the palm, so that the hand is straight and upright; and then apply the bandage, like when wrapping a rat's tail between the said bands."
"And if there is a fracture of any of the knuckles of the fingers, then if it is the thumb, fit it properly and bind it to the palm; and if you wish, place a small splint on the outside so that the fracture is elevated and not crushed."
"But if the fracture is in the other fingers, like that of the middle finger or the index finger or the ring finger or the little finger, then fit it and bind it with its own digit; or all can be bound together in continuity, which is better; or place a small splint on top as we have said for the thumb."
"And consider, in your restoration of the fracture, and apply a cauterization if necessary according to what is appropriate for that operation; also consider the position of the abscess and oppose it with what is necessary when any cause of those occurs."
"Chapter XIV"
"Of the restoration of a bone fracture in the thigh."
"The bone in the thigh is often broken, and this is indicated by pain that increases before and during urination."
"And its restoration is performed in such a way that the ligament tightens over the fracture and other ligaments leave the fracture, and the patient lies prone on their stomach and face."
"And first, the surgeon extends all the ligament to its departure according to its quality when the fracture is in the middle of the bone."
"But if it occurs at the upper end of the thigh, then the ligament is drawn towards the hip at the departure of the penis, so that its extension does not occur inwards, and other ligaments leave the fracture."
"And similarly, if the fracture occurs at the hip joint, then the ligament should be drawn towards it, and its extension should be made away from the joints."
"And then the surgeon uses screws on both sides to reduce it according to its natural shape and join the bone with good union. Afterwards plaster and bandage should be applied if there is no inflammation of the limb." "But if inflammation occurs, then leave it for some days until the inflamed area is reduced, and then return to your treatment."
"The bandage should be made in this way: wrap a hard bandage over the fracture and fold it twice or thrice, removing any excess; then wrap the knee so that it reaches the ankle and thigh."
"And then insert a long splint between the thigh and knee near the hip joints, and bring the ends of the splint from above the two parts, and wrap it around the knee and thigh removing any excess bandage."
"And then apply traction on the thigh at the location of that fracture, and apply a weight of one or two pounds on the bone of the knee."
"And then fill the spaces between the knee and thigh with soft cloths, so that the bandage is well consolidated."
"And then begin with a firm bandage on the middle of the limb over the fracture site with three or four layers, and as you move away from the fracture site, make your bandage thinner, lighter, and softer."
"And then extend both ends of the splint towards below until it reaches the heel of the foot, and tie both strings tightly on the other side so that the limb does not move from its place."
"And then leave the bandage on like this so that there is no infection or inflammation of the limb, nor any swelling or redness around it. And if anything occurs, take care to remove it immediately and correct it right away, as we have said many times."
"But if the bone is pressed down and sticks out at one point, then raise that point as much as possible. And if it cannot be raised, then make a hole over it and remove what is causing pressure, and cure it according to what has been said before until it heals."
"And sometimes this fracture of the knee is strengthened with strings in addition to those already mentioned, as we have said in the case of the adjuster and the arm."
"But however, in the restoration of the limb in this way it should not happen that the patient limps; and if it is restored alone without applying the other bandage, then it is necessary for the one who is always lame."
"And know that the knee is strengthened in forty days or a little more or less, and all this depends on the diversity of complexions and other dispositions."
"Chapter 15"
"On the restoration of fractures of the kneecap."
"Know that fracture of the shinbone often occurs suddenly, but most commonly it happens through direct trauma."
"But if the fracture has occurred, then it is nothing more than a break or wound in its parts, and this is accompanied by pain or sharp pain, and on top of that there is great swelling."
"The restoration of the patient is such that what has been broken in their limbs should be set back together with these tools, joined and connected as much as possible by equality, ease, and manufacture."
"And then place plaster on that round bone if necessary, and then press down with sufficient force as appropriate."
"And also consider all the arrangements which we have recommended in other fractures, especially those involving pus and similar accidents, as long as it is suitable for this patient to be treated."
"Chapter XVI."
"The restoration of a fractured bone."
"Know that in the shinbone there are two bones, one of which is thick and is called by the name 'shinbone'; the other is slender and is called 'fibula'."
"And also know that in each of the species of fracture that occurs to both bones of the leg, restoration is done similarly to the restoration of the arm, and the operation for it is one."
"And if both bones are broken at the same time, the shinbone becomes completely shattered."
"And if only the thinner bone is broken, the shinbone remains intact in front."
"And if only the thicker bone is broken, it is the outer one that is fractured, and this is due to causes other than those mentioned above."
"Therefore, apply extension, traction, and splinting of the fragments according to the same principle."
"But it is necessary, if the fracture of the shinbone is located having many attempts, that extension be smaller and lighter, and alleviate with your virtue."
"And in the shinbone there is some cause for operation on the arm, which is when you align the fragments and complete all your operation; then you will take pieces of wood from a tree that has been felled nearby, and they should be made like branches of palm; choose those that are not too thick, nor too thin, and their length should be according to the length of the shinbone, from front to back."
"And apply each splint over two wrappings according to its length, and place one on the broken shinbone on one side and the other on the other side, and they should be from front to back, at the height of the ankle."
"And apply the two splints in three locations on both extremities and at the midpoint, for with this structure the shinbone is prevented from bending to the right or left, and it stands in good position."
"And also apply a splint of wood according to the length of the shinbone, and place it on it so that it retains its movement."
"It is especially necessary that you do this in fracture, and when with it there is proper healing."
"And also examine the shinbone every day and study it carefully, and keep it away from infection, inflammation, or other similar causes. And when any of these causes occurs, then apply this again until it is healed."
Chapter XVII.
Of the fracture of the ankle and bones of the foot.
"No fracture occurs entirely in the ankle; but fractures occur sometimes in the bones of the foot; and in these of the foot few fractures occur, and they do not occur except in cases of dislocation."
"And if fractures occur in the bones of the foot and sometimes those bones become elevated above each other, then the sick person should place his foot on the ground prepared thus while walking."
"And also apply the other foot on what is elevated by those bones and press them down, press hard, align them until they return to their places."
"And also apply plaster and bandages on it, and place a small table with two flat heads on the belly of the foot."
"And also strengthen that [ankle] with the foot with a descending support, since you have wrapped it with cloths and other things of which you have need."
"And when three or four days have passed, then unwrap the bandage, for you will find the bones aligned, either joined together or dislocated, and the operation on these is as you know."
"But if some of them are joined together, then restore those and align them as I have told you and explained to you in the restoration of the fingers of the hand." "And also apply splints on the joined fingers according to their length and place them somewhat aside from them. And also place this table which I have recommended on the foot, and strengthen it with descending support."
"But if what is joined together in the bones are two or three or more, then apply splints on each finger according to its quantity wrapped in lion's skin, and strengthen the table at the lowest part of the foot, with one of the heads of the table placed under the belly of the foot so that it retains it well."
"And remember that you should not forget to consider all the causes which are mentioned to you in the other fractures of the accidents that we have spoken about, and apply this to every accident as it is necessary."
Chapter XVIII.
Of fracture of the woman's pubic bone, of the hipbone, and of the penis.
"When the pubic bone of the woman is fractured, then apply that in a padded cell, and also incline it somewhat to the side of the back, and let it be held behind."
"And also the midwife presses on the pubic bone and makes it like a sieve; and also the woman should be struck, and little by little raise her buttocks, for all this is forgotten until the pubic bone is placed before like a sieve and the fractured bone returns."
"And also apply powders on the back of it. And when she wants to urinate, move the cot with ease and let her urinate, and reduce it and return it according to the manner in which you mixed it at the beginning, and then return it to its first powder."
"And do this for seven days or thereabouts, for that is restored."
"And if you wish, take a bladder of sheep and strengthen it on the back of it with a reed cane. And insert the entire bladder into the pubic bone and inflate it through the reed by blowing air into it until the bladder is inflated inside the pubic bone, for the fracture returns."
"And also press it with cotton and keep it at rest for some days as we have recommended until it is healed."
"And when the hipbone of man or woman is fractured, then administer in the restoration and reduction of it what we have recommended for the bone of the thigh."
"And what is right is not hidden in these nearby fractures and which occur rarely, especially to those who are learned and understand this my book; for that fracture teaches you the correct way in the restoration and support of it, and therefore understand well."
"But in the penis of man when it is fractured, take a gourd of dough and place the penis inside it. And also apply over it wrapping with cloth and let it be wrapped, and then let it rest for three days or so until it is healed."
Chapter XIX.
Of restoration of fractures of bones when they are displaced.
It is convenient for that one to whom it happens that a bone is fractured out of place, and especially if the bone is large like the thighbone or the fibula, or similar ones, that you should carefully perform flebotomy on him at once if the conditions for flebotomy are present in him as we have said above.
"And if bloody flux flows out, then it is necessary that you apply pressure to stop it immediately, powdering sage three times on the wound."
"Therefore begin restoring the fracture immediately today and do not delay, lest an abscess occur."
"But if an abscess occurs, then wait to resume the restoration until the ninth day, until the abscess has softened. And do not approach it on the third and fourth days of all, because you will cause bad accidents."
"But if the bone breaks through the skin and is visible on the shoulder, then it is necessary that you perform reduction promptly and cover it with soft dressings gently and without excessive extension."
"But if reduction is not readily achieved and the bones remain displaced despite your efforts, then reduce them using this instrument: it is made of iron, seven or eight digits long, and its width varies according to the amount of displacement. And thus the physician must have three or four of these instruments ready for use in all kinds of fractures."
"And if it is reduced, and there is a little hardness due to swelling, then apply pressure gently on it at the time of operation."
"And if it is an extremity with sharp ends that are next to one another, and the skin over it is thickened and swollen, then incise it along its thickest part and open it widely on both sides."
"And this is how it looks:"
"Named in Greek 'labre volentz atelarem', it is a rare disease."
"Why should the extremity of the bone elevated on the bony prominence be padded?"
"And press down on it so that it returns to its place, and remain like this for some time."
"And then try to align the ends of the fracture together, and if the fragment is small and does not fit well with the instrument, then insert the end of that bone inside so that the instrument has power over it."
"But if you cannot reduce the bone despite all that has been mentioned, then cut it with whatever instrument you have available among those which have been listed; or saw it with one of the saws however you can."
"And remove any sharp edges and small rough areas that remain on the bone."
"And when the bone is reduced and yet the patient feels strong pain on movement, then know that the bone has not returned to its natural position. And therefore do this which will give great relief to the patient."
"When your reduction of the bone is complete and then you apply dressings with black stiptic wine, especially if it is summer time, do not allow the patient to lie on a greasy pillow or any other cause where there might be oil, so that no corruption or decay may occur afterwards."
"And then apply splints at the time of completion of the reduction of the bone, and leave the dressing uncovered enough so that you can insert traction with forceps and use bandages according to the quantity of the dressing."
"And be careful that you do not strain the dressing over the fracture, for many times fools have done this and it has caused harm to their patients resulting in death or corrupting or damaging bone, which is very unhealthy." "And if your reduction of the fracture is light and soft, differing from the usual type of reduction for fractures."
"If the dressing is large or a bad one, and you fear about those unfortunate accidents which have been mentioned earlier, and you find pain in the location, then do not rely on those splints, but make this wrapping of hard cloth instead of splints and bind it tightly with them."
"And when after one or two days the dressing begins to be warm in that place, then you remove the cloth which you had placed there with wine, and apply hot compresses, as we usually do for dressings, thus using such things as treacle and similar substances."
"And it is convenient that you remove the stitches and examine the dressing every morning and evening until it is consolidated and firm, and it is necessary that the member be prepared in such a way that the corruption runs out of it easily towards the outer parts."
"If many days pass and the dressing is not consolidated nor does it separate from that warmth, then you would know that this is a case of inflammation for which you should examine the dressing with touch." "And of those inflammations, those which are separated and removed and extracted are good, but those which do not separate and putrefy the member and cause pain, you should incise them according to what is possible for you."
"And if anything happens to the dressing such as swelling or blistering, then it is stitches or some other kind of corruption and putrefaction, therefore you should pause for one of those according to what has been described in its own chapter regarding its cure."
"And of this, let my speech be brief and you make your point: when the bone is crushed, it swells up over the member like the bones of the thigh and the forearm and similar ones in large members, and do not attempt to reduce or extract it because many times death has occurred through this; leaving that alone until corruption occurs, for it will fall off by itself after about twenty or thirty days; and then cure the dressing if you see fit, and if not, leave it."
"Chapter .20."
"Of the treatment of necrosis that occurs in the vicinity of some fracture."
Many times this swelling occurs during the process of healing a fracture, especially near joints, and it is caused by the member being in its usual position.
Then consider if the swelling is recent and administer medicines that have astringent properties such as alum, iris, and myrrh. Mix some or all of these with honey, albumen of egg, or vinegar, and apply it on a bandage over the swelling, binding it tightly but not too tight.
Let this dressing remain undisturbed for several days; then remove it and apply another one until the swelling has disappeared. Alternatively, place a lead plate over it, since lead has the property of reducing any swelling in the limbs.
If the swelling has already become hard and it is necessary to provoke a break in it, then cut through the skin along the line of maximum prominence using a scalpel blade. Excise the excess bone and remove any fragments until the swelling disappears. Then cure it with appropriate treatment until it heals completely.
CapÃ­tulo XXI
Chapter XXI:
"When a bone fracture is restored, but the member remains delicate and brittle, this occurs only for several reasons: one of which is the multitude of solution of the ligament not according to what is due, or by excess of constriction of the ligaments where nourishment cannot reach the member, or by multitude of useless embroilment; or by superfluous movement not at its proper time; or by lack of blood in the patient's body and debility."
"To cure this, one must give the patient food to make their heart tender and multiply blood in them; they should also administer baths; and apply warmth and joy upon them."
"And then pause the pressure on the member, so that the pressure attracts nourishment to it, or continue rubbing it with warm water until nourishment returns to its normal state."
"Chapter xxii."
"Regarding the treatment of bones that are broken crookedly and then restored, it is prohibited to operate on them for this reason:"
"When the member has been restored but still retains signs of its former crookedness and prominence at the site of the fracture and node, although the member may not be prohibited from its natural operation, you should not accept the claim that it is newly broken."
"But many foolish physicians and restorers have done this in our land, and this operation is greatly to be condemned because it brings great danger with it, the sign of which is death."
"But if the limpness and nodosity are recent, then they should be rubbed with warm water in which softening herbs have been cooked, such as althea flowers and rose hips, and mallow, and similar ones; and a plaster of mollifying paste made from these should be applied, like that called dialaquilon when well-made; or fresh rose hips ground together with honey or oil of cinnamon should be applied as a plaster; or figs steeped in fat of pigeon should be rubbed on, and suchlike medicines named 'amermans consolidacio'."
"And sometimes with frequent light friction it can be dissolved, especially if done with the most humid ones, and movement of the member should be encouraged in all parts at all hours."
"But if the crookedness has already appeared and is strong and hard, and has turned into bone and there is a need for its treatment with iron, then it should be cut away as much as possible above where the continuation of the bone has dissolved, and what is superfluous from the node of that member should be incised with subtle scissors, and ease should be given to it through diligent study."
Chapter XXIII
"Concerning dislocation."
Dislocation is the displacement of certain joints from their proper place, causing them to lose their mobility and altering the shape of the limb, which leads to great pain and injuries for the patient.
Therefore when a dislocation occurs, it is necessary to reduce it as soon as possible, and not delay the reduction, because if it is delayed, the joint becomes inflamed and difficult to reduce.
And therefore it is necessary that at the time of inflammation, the joint should not be moved or stretched, because often this causes spasm and severe pain.
But when this happens, then you must cover the patient with a blanket and let them rest until the inflammation subsides. Then the limb should be wrapped in hot water and oil, and finally it should be gently reduced.
And the limb should be treated with whatever will bring the memory of its former position back to mind.
And now I have ordered the chapters on dislocation according to what has been previously stated in fractures, from the division of the body into upper and lower parts.
Chapter XXIV
Of the treatment of dislocation of the lower jaw
When both jaws are dislocated, they are not difficult to reduce. Dislocation of both jaws occurs in two ways: either the mandibles are displaced from their normal positions by slight movement and become softened a little; or else they are completely dislocated and must be softened at the point of articulation until saliva begins to flow from the mouth, indicating that it can be opened and closed again. The tongue should be wrapped in cloth during this procedure.
But when the dislocation is slight, it often returns to its proper position on its own with no cause.
But if the dislocation is complete and full, then gentle reduction should be administered promptly, without delay.
"And let the attendant hold the patient's head, and the physician insert the tip of his thumb into the groove of the mandibular dislocation inside the mouth, if the dislocation is on one side; or that he insert both thumbs together, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the others hold the patient's hands from outside with which they stabilize him. And command the patient to cease biting down and relax each side in turn; and the physician guides the mandible back into its proper place."
"And if the reduction is difficult, and especially if both mandibles are dislocated at once, then administer evaporation with warm water and oil until it becomes easier to reduce both, and do not prolong the reduction of one side while delaying the other, as we have said."
"And when they return to their proper places and the mouth of the patient is closed but not relaxed, then apply powders made from cloth with wax and rose oil; let them be made of wax and rose oil; and let them be applied with ease using soft linen."
"And let the patient sleep on his back with his head propped up between two pillows, so that he does not bite down on anything at night; do not force him to eat or drink anything. Let his diet be soft food until the pain is gone and the jaws are healed, then he may eat what he wishes."
"And with this administration should be done easily and gently, without forcing the opening of the mouth for eating, drinking, or any other purpose until the jaw is healed."
"And if the reduction of both jaws is difficult when they are dislocated and do not return to their proper places, then often a fever occurs along with continuous thirst, and sometimes there is vomiting and copious purging."
"And when this happens, know that it is a serious matter, for many people have died from this within eight days."
"Chapter .xxv."
"Of the reduction of the dislocation of the clavicle and the end of the muscle."
"The collarbone is not dislocated from its inner side due to its continuity with the sternum; however, sometimes it can be dislocated on its outer side, which is noticeable by touch."
"And for the reduction of this dislocation, let the patient lie on his back and extend his arms." "Then press upon it with your palm firmly until it returns to its proper place."
"And then apply plasters and powders and strengthen that."
"But the end of that which seizes the lung and is attached to it does not become dislocated at any time. Therefore, when it needs to be reduced, do so according to what has been said above."
"And then apply plasters, powders, and bandages to that place, and order the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until he is healed."
"With this same treatment, the end of the muscle is reduced when it has become separated from its proper place."
"Chapter xxvi."
"Of the reduction of dislocation of a muscle."
"You should know that a muscle can only be dislocated in three ways: one being at the point of attachment to the tendons on either side."
"The second way is when it is dislocated at its midpoint above the muscle, which rarely happens. It is not dislocated behind by the shoulder nor in front through the nerves."
"And most often it becomes dislocated and protrudes at its attachments on either side of the tendon, especially in those with little flesh where it is easily dislocated. But in those with much flesh, it protrudes with difficulty."
"And often in some men there occurs a blow or fall, and the muscle becomes inflamed with an incurable abscess, and it is dislocated by that."
"Therefore, you should first remove that before it becomes entirely hard, and then proceed with its treatment."
"It is recognized that the dislocation occurs at its attachments on either side of the tendon. Therefore, you can distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the normal one, for there is a clear difference between them. You will find concavity in the head of the muscle on either side of the tendon, which resembles a chicken's comb. The patient cannot bring his hand to his ear nor move that limb."
"If it is dislocated towards the sternum or upwards, you will find a clear and obvious touch."
"And this dislocation can be easily reduced when it is fresh and the patient is a child."
"And the reduction of this dislocation is performed by raising the patient's hand above his head. Then place your thumbs on either side of the tendon below it and raise the joint with force upwards to its proper place while the patient raises their hand and extends it upwards. Then press upon it with your thumbs as it returns easily."
"But if it does not return as described above and the dislocation has existed from the beginning for many days, then the patient should be immersed in warm water and treated with an embrocation that softens and moisturizes it like this: take a decoction of ale, linseed, and honey mixed together."
"And then the patient should be propped up on his back and wait for it to become loosened between elevation and pressure. Then the physician should place their heel upon the prominence and raise the head of the muscle with force while pulling the patient's hand so that it is not hidden at its attachments, and another assistant should hold the patient's head so that it does not move from its attachments until that muscle returns to its proper place."
"And if you wish, you can reduce it in this way: Have present a man who is taller than the patient and stands on that side. Insert his muscle between the tendons of the patient's dislocated muscle and raise the tendon upwards while the patient hangs suspended in the air, and another assistant pulls the patient's hand from the attachments on their abdomen." "But if the patient is light, then another cause should be suspended with him so that he may hang heavy, for the dislocation returns quickly."
"And it can be reduced in another way: Take a long pole with a round head like a mortar pestle that is neither too thick nor too thin. Place it on the ground and have the patient stand beside it with cloths of lions placed upon its head. Then have the patient stand along the length of the pole, extend their hand to the other side, and lean their body across with force so that the joint quickly returns to its proper place."
"And if it is difficult to reduce it despite all the causes mentioned above, then use this treatment: Take a pole that is two cubits long and four fingers wide. Its thickness should be tapered at its end towards the tendon like this:"
"And then place lion's cloths on its round head so that the pole does not injure the patient."
"And then place it beside the tendon of the dislocated muscle and extend the hand or arm over the pole so that the pole is bound to the assistant's arms and the end of the hand."
"And then place the arm upon a ladder according to its width and extend the hand to the other side. Suspend the other half of the body on the other side so that the joint may enter quickly."
When the application of remedies has been completed in any manner possible, then place a soft wool wick dipped in a suitable quantity of olive oil; and immediately apply a prepared plaster made from powdered myrrh with incense and albumen of egg over all the muscle, so that it is wrapped around; and then bind the wick with a proper binding; and let the linen be wrapped around the plaster, and the hand of the patient be tied to his neck, and let him be left thus for seven days without removing his hand.
The sick person should abstain from food until the limb is strengthened, because it facilitates recovery.
Then gradually increase food intake after seven or eight days and exercise the limb; if it becomes firm without softening, then it is healed.
But if the joint is dislocated many times due to humidity that occurs in it or for another cause, then cautery should be applied there with three triangles, according to what is said earlier in the chapter on cautery.
And if all this is done and after seven days the binding is removed and the joint is not firm, and the plaster and bandage are repeatedly reduced upon it, but it is still not firm and catches, and he cannot raise that arm above his head, then you should know that the nerves of the arm which are at the head of the muscle have been either cut or stretched or softened; and you should realize that the joint will never be firmly fixed in its place.
For reducing the dislocation of that which has happened you should place the elbow and shoulder blade or the parts behind it; reduction is made with pressure and extension using the hands until it returns to its proper position.
Then apply another bandage there and care for it until it is healed.
And if there is heaviness in the limb during recovery and slowness in the movement of it, then the patient should use baths many times until that heaviness is alleviated and it returns to its former nature.
Chapter XXVII
Of the treatment of dislocation of the hip joint.
The joint of the hip is displaced with difficulty and returns with difficulty; that one is displaced in all parts, especially in front of behind, and its displacement is not hidden from you when it appears leaving an empty appearance or leaving a palpable touch depending on how it is displaced, and when you reduce the displaced hip joint into its socket, that is clearly declared to you, because the joint is concave and cannot bend the leg nor touch itself with that muscle.
You must reduce the dislocation immediately before an abscess forms, because if it comes to form an abscess, reducing it will be difficult and its healing is not guaranteed; and especially when it happens at the back parts, for it is worse than all other kinds of dislocation and causes more pain and often leads to death.
And its reduction, when it is possible to reduce it, is done by extending the arm with two hands and expanding the elbow, and placing the physician's hands on the joint and pushing it back into place with the palms of his hands together, or with the edge of his palm facing inward as it returns to its place.
But if the dislocation is at the front parts, then it returns in this way: by bending the arm with his hand, pressing on the joint with the edge of his palm.
And if the dislocation does not obey reduction, then administer strong extension and much force.
And it is necessary that two assistants extend the arm and hold it firmly in place with two hands so that it does not move during extension.
And moreover, let the arm be turned around on all parts, because it is wrapped in doubled long cloth or linen.
And when the physician touches the joint with his hand, he should anoint it with some oil so that this may help to lubricate the joint and facilitate its reduction; and moreover, he should push the joint back into place with a strong impulse until it returns.
And after its reduction, it should be placed on an empanel with sternutory and expectorant properties made of album of wool, and it should be bandaged with a descending compression bandage, and the arm should be suspended from the neck, and left at rest for several days.
And after it has healed; and then if the joint is formed in its place, you should remove the linen from it and leave it alone.
And if you see that the joint is not strong, then repeat the emplaster and linen, and leave it alone for a few days until it is strengthened; and then remove it.
But if it happens that there is pain around the reduction of the joint and the condition of the limb is in motion, then administer humidification with baths and gentle friction, compression, until it is alleviated; or place on the joint an alleviation bandage, which is a fatty ointment; and then bind it, leaving it alone during the day and night. And then remove that bandage and put him in a bath; and when he gets out, you should rub the joint with gentle friction, and then apply again over it alleviation bandage, which is a warm ointment, once, twice, and three times. And meanwhile keep bathing him until it is well healed.
And if you wish, place over it a wet and scraped cow's hide with its edges stitched together and stretched over it tightly; do this several times, for that is humid and reduces swelling of the condition.
Chapter XXVIII
Of the treatment of dislocation of luxation, which is the joint between the arm and the hand.
Sometimes the hand becomes dislocated and its reduction is easy, whereas with other joints it is difficult. However, care must be taken to reduce it quickly when it happens, before the place becomes inflamed or an abscess forms.
And the reduction of its dislocation is that you place the hand joint of the sick person on a table and the physician extends his hand towards him, placing his palm or his fingers on the prominence of the joint, and pushes it until it returns to its place.
However, it is necessary to consider if the palm has already been dislocated onto the front of the hand, then the sick person should place the back of his hand on a table with his fingers extended and the reduction performed. But if the dislocation is posterior, then the position of his hand should be placed internally on the table, so that the physician's hand may cover the prominence of the joint.
"And thus if it returns soon, good. But if not, then immediately press with an embankment to drain the abscess and leave that; and do not repeat this, for if you do, neither will it suffer nor can you achieve reduction of the pus over time."
"But in any case cut through the Roman join according to its tortuosity; and do not reveal any cause to the patient, but that your hand is tired and cannot grip anything; however you know that the nerves are pressed or torn, and therefore heat it with a cautery near its exit and then give some reason for this."
"Therefore when the pain returns, then pause over the embankment that we have recommended, and let it be left and pressed for seven days; and afterwards it shall be released and let it alone, and his hand exercised."
"But if the movement of it is obstructed and there occurs in it any gravity, then use that with cold water and friction several times until it is alleviated."
"Chapter XXIX."
"Concerning the treatment of dislocation of these joints."
"Some times these are completely dislocated."
"And when some of these fingers are dislocated at the back of the palm or at the front of it, then seize the finger and push the dislocation back with your thumbs until it returns."
"And afterwards support the head of the finger, and suspend that above the part where it is dislocated, and let it alone for two days."
"And afterwards suspend that and extend it until it is completely healed within that day."
"And when it is not completely healed, then apply that according to the said narrative, and do not cease to release it during the day and exercise it with movement, and bind it at night; and do this for several days until it is firm."
"And do likewise if it is dislocated at the front of the hand, and bind that at that articulation and perform with it your first operation until it is healed."
"And do likewise in this manner when it is dislocated at other articulations."
"Chapter XXX."
"Concerning the treatment of dislocation of the vertebrae of the back."
"When there occurs at some of the vertebrae of the back or neck a complete dislocation, and several vertebrae are removed from their places, then in that case there is no cure, for death quickly overtakes the sick person."
"And a sign of this is that the evacuation of the sick person is involuntary and he cannot retain it; and many times some members of him are paralyzed or both arms of him or both legs of him, or one of those; or one vertebra is removed from its place, for many times several are removed and many times the dislocation occurs in four directions."
"Therefore that is already removed from its posterior articulations and is called 'gibbosity'."
"But the treatment of it is that then you should consider if the gibbosity occurs in childhood, for then there is no cure nor is there salvation from all."
"But concerning those which occur through compression or percussion or in similar manner to those, the Ancients have already described the methods of treatment at length, from which the greater part returns with profit; but I have already abbreviated that of which little excuses the multitude of it, due to my proximity to the intention of this exposition, with which I have briefly explained and formed various instruments for demonstrating this and expounding it."
"And only those are cured which occur properly at the back with what I have counted."
"And that the sick person should be placed on his face with his neck bent near to a wall, and be supported from below with soft cushions so that he is not harmed in his feet."
"And place a straight stick horizontally, put it on the ground at the end of the neck around the head of the sick person, and another stick under his feet at the other end of the foot."
"And let one assistant hold the stick, and it should not be fixed in a socket; and another assistant should hold the other according to that form."
"And wrap around the head of the sick person and tie it on tightly with linen and extend the end of the linen to the stick which is above his head, and bind that there; and then stretch the other linen over his hips down to his knees, and place that against his thighs; and then adjust all the linens and bind them onto the other stick which is above his feet."
"And then each assistant should extend the linen to the part of the stick and let not the two sticks and the linens of their places be removed from where they are placed, but nevertheless they should not be fixed in that way as we have said."
"And the physician should place his palms on the vertebra with strength until it returns, or he may place a table there and then adjust his feet on the table until it returns."
"But if it does not return by this method, then take a table whose width or length is about three braccia and hollow out in the wall which we have said is near to the sick person a place into which the end of the table can fit." "And then place the middle of the table on the vertebra, and the physician should place his feet on the other end, and stretch well until the vertebra is compressed and returns to its place."
"And if you wish, open with a twist using the hand; and this is how you should do it: lie down on the ground in front of the head of the sick person between the two sticks whose length is one braccio, and place your feet between the two sticks similarly; and let the distance between each stick be one palm, and already made in each stick is a hole through which the cord passes, and let each be firmly fixed to the ground so that it is not moved."
"And place a round stick on which is the cord, and let it be turned in the two holes of the two sticks."
"And on one end of it is a hole in which the stick is formed, whose length is one palm with what is turned; and the two other sticks have something similar to that."
"And then stretch the linens which you have stretched on the foot of the sick person in the hole which is above his head, and the linens which you have stretched on his buttocks in the cord which is above his feet."
"And then above each cord let there be an assistant who turns the cord with his hand, and the physician should press the vertebra as we have said."
"And then when the vertebra has returned and the place is closed, it is necessary that you should place a poultice with alum of chalk and lint; and then place on the poultice a piece of cloth from a table whose width is three fingers or thereabouts, and whose length is about as much as the place where the gibbosity occurs."
"And then bind it with linen as we have said, and feed the sick person on soft food until he is healed."
"And if there is any inflammation remaining in the place at the end of healing, it is necessary that medicines which soften and cleanse be administered with application of the table for a long time, as we have recommended; and a lead plate should already be applied to that place."
"And sometimes inflammation occurs in the back of the hipbones due to that dislocation; and it is that bone which is already inclined toward ruin, so that this medicine should not be applied to it, because much harm could come to you from it."
"Chapter 31."
"On treating a dislocation of the hip."
"You should know that the junction of the hip and the junction of the muscle only suffer dislocation alone, not those with small movement and concavity."
The hip joint is dislocated in four ways: either inward or outward, forward or backward.
It is most commonly dislocated inwardly and less frequently anteriorly or posteriorly.
The sign of inward hip dislocation is that when you press the healthy limb against the affected one, it feels longer and more prominent than the healthy one; the patient cannot flex their thigh and has to be guided by another person who takes hold of the dislocated limb to reduce it.
The sign of outward hip dislocation is that its symptoms are opposite those of inward dislocation.
The sign of anterior hip dislocation is that when the patient extends their limb fully, they cannot flex it without pain and cannot walk with the affected leg in front; urine retention and an abdominal mass are also present. The patient walks with a limp and supports themselves on their heel.
The sign of posterior hip dislocation is that the patient cannot extend or flex their limb at the hip; the affected leg appears shorter than the other and the buttock feels flaccid. The main feature is pain in the groin region.
However, reduction of the different types of hip dislocation should be considered if the dislocation is chronic and old, as it may have become fixed in a certain position. In such cases, traction should be applied according to the specific position of the limb, but not all cases require reduction. If reduction is attempted and fails, no further manipulation should be made at that time.
In cases of recent hip dislocation, one must first reduce the joint and then extend the limb at the hip both anteriorly and posteriorly. This should be done gently on both sides as the reduction may be completed by simple traction without further manipulation being necessary.
If reduction is not achieved by simple traction, then a strong and continuous traction should be applied to the limb from below or by elevating it on pillows. The other assistant should hold the patient's hand above their head while another pulls gently on the distal end of the limb. A third assistant may apply gentle counter-traction at the hip joint using a bandage wrapped around the thigh and held firmly in place.
The limb should be extended or traction applied internally from the anterior hip to the greater trochanter or externally from the posterior hip to the lesser trochanter.
All of these reductions should be done in one attempt while the patient is lying on their back with their buttocks just over the edge of the table, so that they are hanging down.
This method of reduction is common to all four types of hip dislocation.
If the hip dislocation is reduced using the method described above, then that is sufficient. However, if it is not reducible by closed methods, then specific treatment for each type of dislocation will be necessary.
For the closed reduction of an anterior hip dislocation, the patient should be placed on their side with the affected limb up. A bandage is wrapped around the thigh and held firmly at the point between the greater trochanter and the head of the femur. Traction is then applied to the leg in a direction from the anterior aspect of the greater trochanter towards the anterior superior iliac spine.
Another assistant should firmly grasp the patient's arms and push their body away from the affected hip while applying strong traction to the leg externally. This may help reduce the dislocation as it allows the femoral head to slip back into its socket.
This method is the easiest and most common way to reduce an anterior hip dislocation.
If the hip dislocation cannot be reduced by closed methods alone, then both of the patient's legs should be elevated simultaneously with gentle traction using two assistants. One assistant holds each leg just above the ankle and pulls gently while the other supports the buttocks from below to keep them elevated.
Each leg should be elevated about 4 digits ( approximately 10 cm) and the affected limb extended an additional 2 digits (approximately 5 cm) more than the other.
The patient should then be suspended by their arms from a traction apparatus or pulley system while lying on their back. The affected limb should be extended with gentle traction until the limb is approximately 24 inches (60 cm) off the ground.
A strong assistant should then grasp the affected leg just above the knee and apply gentle traction while another assistant applies counter-traction to the body by pulling gently on the waist. As this is done, the hip dislocation should reduce spontaneously with a characteristic "clunk" as the femoral head returns to its socket.
For the closed reduction of an posterior hip dislocation, the patient should be placed in the lateral position with the affected side up as previously described. The assistant should then grasp the leg just above the ankle and apply gentle traction while applying counter-traction to the body by pushing the opposite shoulder gently towards the table.
Two vertical posts should be placed on either side of the patient's leg. The posts are connected by a horizontal bar that is positioned over the affected hip and used to apply traction. A padded U-shaped bar can be inserted into this frame to keep the posts from slipping out of place during traction. Wet towels should be wrapped around the post and bar to prevent skin irritation or burns due to friction.
Each assistant should then apply gentle traction to their respective side while the surgeon uses one hand to guide the reduction of the dislocation according to the technique being used.
For hip dislocations that are anterior and inferior (obturator type), gentle traction should be applied to the leg with the patient lying on their back. The surgeon places one hand on the affected greater trochanter and uses the other hand to grasp the thigh just proximal to the patella. Traction is then applied by adducting and extending the leg at the hip while maintaining flexion of the knee.
For posterior hip dislocations, the patient should not be placed in extension as this can cause further displacement of the femoral head. Instead, the patient should be positioned on their back with a pillow or firm support under the affected buttock to elevate the hip slightly. The leg is then positioned in slight abduction and external rotation with the knee flexed, similar to the position used for shoulder dislocations. Gentle traction may be applied if necessary, but this should not cause pain or discomfort to the patient.
Additionally, compression should be applied using a bolster placed between the ilium and ischium on the affected side where the hip joint was located. This can help stabilize the reduced dislocation and prevent redisplacement.
After successful reduction of the hip dislocation, the surgeon should extend both legs and observe for signs of instability. The patient is then turned on their unaffected side while a spica cast is applied to maintain the reduced position and prevent redisplacement. The patient should be kept at bedrest for 3-4 days until follow-up X-rays confirm maintenance of reduction.
After 3-4 days, the spica cast and traction device are removed, and the leg lengths should be checked by comparing the lengths of both legs from the anterior superior iliac spine to the medial malleolus.
Then, if no instability is appreciated on examination under anesthesia, the patient can be allowed to bear weight as tolerated.
However, if any signs of instability are noted during examination under anesthesia, the patient should be re-casted in slight traction for 3-4 days before allowing weight-bearing again.
Approximately, it means: 'And then untie that one, and make them stay in bed for several days until they are recovered.'
'Chapter XXXII'.
'On the treatment of dislocation of the jaw.'
The jaw is dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated towards the outside, towards the inside, or more commonly towards the back. It is not usually dislocated towards the front.
"The sign of dislocation in this case is when you tell the patient to press their knee against something, and then you know that it has been dislocated."
"To restore the dislocation of this knee, you should make the patient sit on their right side so that they can extend their leg if possible; then attach your left hand to the front of their thigh and place your foot between theirs. Quickly bring your right palm behind their kneecap, hold it firmly with both hands, and another servant should extend their foot inward until the kneecap returns to its proper position."
"The sign of reduction of this dislocation is when the knee joint adheres firmly with light effort."
"And afterwards plaster that and make the knee adhere firmly with the joint, and also bandage it tightly with a bandage for three or four days, and then unbind it."
"And do not allow the patient to walk around for several days until they are healed and comfortable."
"If reduction of it by you is excused, then administer strong extension with linen strips, which were mentioned in the previous narration of hip joint treatment."
"Chapter XXXIII."
"On the Treatment of Ankle Dislocation."
"The talus sometimes becomes displaced due to slight movement, and sometimes becomes dislocated completely, and this dislocation occurs either on the inner or outer side."
"And the sign of talus dislocation is that often the talus becomes swollen at the site where it has dislocated."
"But the treatment for displacement of the talus is gentle reduction, and this is done by extending it gently with the hands until it returns to its proper place."
"But in the treatment of complete talus dislocation, it is necessary that the patient lies on their back and that they have a strong and reliable assistant standing behind them at the middle point of the dislocation."
"And then place your right hand above the upper part of the foot and your left hand below the foot at the level of the ankle."
"And then traction is applied with the right hand on the foot and with the left hand for two times, after which the left hand extends [the foot], and with the right hand pushes the heel up without turning it."
"And this should be done twice as we have described."
"And then on the third attempt, push the heel up again until you reach the ankle joint."
"So if [the talus] returns in one or two attempts with this method, and if the foot is swollen, that is good; but if not, then repeat the procedure until it returns."
"But if reduction of the talus with this method is prohibited, then have the patient lie on their side on the ground, and use a sturdy stick placed firmly on the ground to wedge between the two sides of the dislocation, and then wrap them up in cloth for fear of frightening the patient."
"And then the assistant holds their part [of the dislocation], and another assistant extends the foot with their hands or with a bandage placed on the neck of the foot; and each assistant extends in turn, while pushing the stick firmly between the two sides of the patient to prevent the body from being pulled towards the side of the extension."
"And then the physician reduces the dislocation with his hands, and another assistant holds the healthy part on the outside to prevent the dislocation from returning."
"And thus when the dislocation returns and it is declared that the reduction has been achieved, then apply plasters and bind [the foot] strongly with bandages, and tie the foot with bandages at the heel."
"And be careful or guard against the nerves which are behind on the talus, so that the bandage is not too tight and does not hurt them severely."
"And then leave him for two or three days; and if the bandage has softened, remove it."
On the third or fourth day, untie him, and forbid the patient from vomiting for 40 days. But if it is forced to go ahead of that space, it cannot be guaranteed that the dislocation has not been dissolved and corrupted, and thus it would not receive treatment.
And if an ulcer forms from the cautery, you should then apply what is described above in our narrative, in another place for treatment and embrocation, until it is removed.
Chapter XXXIV
On the treatment of dislocation of the said hips.
It is necessary that he who has been dislocated be wrapped with little extension without moving him; and it is not difficult, carefully doing so.
But if the dislocation is in some knots of the two thighs, you should then have the patient place his sick leg over something on the ground or on a table, and let him be thus as if he were walking.
And then you stand on the leg, and place your foot over what you have indicated of the joints, and then press that with your foot with strength until it returns, and make sure that it is wrapped and does not appear again in its prominence.
And then place the leg of that side on a table that takes all the leg, which should have two heads, and then stretch it with proper and firm bandages for three days; and then untie it and let him rest from walking for more days until he is strengthened and recovery is assured.
Chapter XXXV.
"Types of dislocation caused by plague or fracture or any injury."
"When such causes occur, if you attempt the cure and restoration of it, often death succeeds."
"And therefore one should not presume about the cure of it unless he is knowledgeable in this art, experienced, merciful and compassionate, cautious, not reckless or presumptuous; and that from the beginning [he uses] medicines that only cauterize wounds, leaving the patient to divine judgment and hoping for salvation from destruction, with alleviation of the illness, where there appears some hope." "And then strive quickly to reduce it at the beginning of the cause before an ulcerous wound forms."
"And then if the limb returns as desired, immediately administer treatment that will prevent ulceration and heal the inflammation with whatever is suitable for it from drying ointments."
"And if dislocation with fracture occurs and the ends of the bone are separated, then you should perform their reduction and do in this what we have said previously about simple dislocations as described above."
"And guard and avoid, according to your ability, that which is within the paths of fear as much as you are able; for this is better for you to owe to your Creator, and more lasting to your glory, and more helpful to your true body in your time." "So ends the words of Al-Bukhastis perfectly, may God bless them." "Amen."
