"Oh, sons, since I have fulfilled this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine, and by its completion it has reached its end, and by its explanations and declarations, it seems to me that I complete it for you with this treatise, which concerns the operation with my hand, that is surgery."
For the operation with my hand is despised in our region and in our times has been completely abandoned, so that the science of it has become rare, its traces have disappeared; and nothing remains of it except a few small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which have changed their hands and have deviated from those errors and hesitations so that they are closed off to their intentions and the strength of it is elongated and weakened.
"And it seems to me that I revive this one with an arrangement of this treatise according to the way of explanation and declaration and abbreviation; and also with forms of cautery tools and other instruments necessary for the work, which is added in the declaration, and by preparation for it, which is necessary."
"However, the reason why there is no good artisan with their hands in our time is because the art of medicine is long and its performer should be well-trained beforehand in the science of anatomy, which contains knowledge of the joints of the limbs and their shapes, conjunction, separation of them; and has the knowledge of bones, nerves, and arteries, their number, arrangement, pulsating veins and quiet ones, and places for their discharge."
"And therefore Hippocrates said that in the name of U is the cause, but little in the work, especially in the art of the hand."
"But we have already said about this at the beginning of this book; for whoever is not knowledgeable about what we have said about anatomy will certainly fall into error and cause many deaths, as I have seen too many times, because some are trained in this science but cast themselves away from it without knowledge or experience."
"For I saw a foolish and inexperienced doctor incise an escrofulous abscess on the neck of a woman and cut some arteries in her neck so that much blood flowed, causing the woman to die suddenly among the masses."
"And I saw another doctor who took upon himself to remove a stone from a man who had fallen into that state, and the stone was large; but he came to him and removed that stone along with a piece of the bladder, so that that man died on the third day."
"And I had already appealed to him to leave it alone, and I saw that because of the size of the stone and the disposition of the illness, I knew for sure that he would die."
"And I saw another doctor who received payment of one ducat from our land for surgery; and he undertook to treat a blacksmith who had a fracture in his hip. And the doctor prepared with his ignorance, removed the fracture on top of the hip bone with pulleys and screws with great force, and did not leave room for respiration."
"And he finally released him according to his desires and removed the splint, and also removed the bandage after some days and commanded that we release the ligature; but he did it in such a way that the hip bone became inflamed, causing damage."
"And I was called to him and prepared to release the ligature, and thus tranquility came about with the alleviation of his pains."
"But nevertheless corruption had already become confirmed in the limb, so that I could not hold it back, and corruption did not cease to wander through the limb until the patient was endangered."
"And I saw another doctor who punctured a cancerous abscess and it became ulcerated after some days, causing the evil to spread throughout its owner."
"The reason for this is that the cancerous ulcer is caused by black bile, which should not be approached with any iron at all, but rather to the limb that suffers from it must be applied what can expel it."
"And therefore, my children, it is necessary for you that the operation with the hand be divided into two parts: some are operations associated with health, and others are works in which there is danger in most situations."
"And I have already explained this throughout all parts of this book where operation is mentioned in which there is error and fear; for it is necessary for you to observe this and leave that alone, so that the foolish do not find a way to speak and dishonor you."
"And therefore take up your arms with solicitude and protection of God, and your illnesses with patience and steadfastness."
"And use the best way by the grace of God to pursue health and successful outcome, leaving behind terrible illnesses with difficult cure; show your arms against what you fear, so that steadfastness in your faith and name may not desert you: for it remains more to your glory, both on earth and in the end, to your sanctity."
"Since I have already said in some of my books:" "No cure an illness unless you know how to do it well, so that you may not be called a bad doctor."
"And I have already divided this book into three chapters."
"Here begins the division of the book, first of the first part." "The first chapter ordered is about the head, regarding the forms of instruments and the irons for cautery, and what is necessary in operation."
"Here begins the second part." "The second chapter, about stitching and perforation, about cupping glasses, splints, and extraction of arrows and similar things, all ordered according to the forms of instruments."
"The third chapter, about reduction and dislocation, and about the cure of torsion and similar things; chapter ordered regarding the head and the forms of instruments."
"It is necessary for me to say what are the effects of that cautery and its harms, and in what condition cautery is prohibited."
"Therefore I say that the discourse about the quality of cautery's benefit and harm is long and verbose, subtle in science, and secretly hidden; many wise men have already spoken about it, and they disagree with each other on this matter, but I will suffice with a little bit of their discourses, fearing lengthiness."
"And therefore I say that cautery is beneficial universally to every condition, both with matter and without matter, except for two conditions which are conditions of the body without matter."
"The complexion being dry and hot, with matter out of harmony; some said that cautery is beneficial for this, while others said the contrary, that cautery is not suitable in illness caused by heat and dryness."
"That person who says the contrary believes that cautery is beneficial in all dry and hot illnesses that occur in humans' bodies."
"And I say, according to what that person said, I have already experienced this many times."
"But it is not necessary to come back to this topic again since it has already been thoroughly explored in the chapter on cautery by recent authors, and considering the diversity of human complexions, the disposition of illnesses in their various places, their causes, accidents, and duration."
"But in other complexions, there is not much doubt, especially regarding hot and humid illnesses, since all physicians agree on these matters and are unanimous in their judgment using cautery for such conditions."
"And know, my son, that the secret of cure by cautery with fire and its benefits are discussed in medical writings on cautery, because fire acts simply, affecting only the member cauterized and not harming other adjacent members unless there is some injury."
"But the action of cautery reaches only those members from which it is drawn away, and if done forcefully, it can bring difficult-to-cure illnesses into those members."
"But fire, due to its purity and goodness of substance, does not do anything but superfluate. And it is already known to us through experiment and the length of service in studying this art that this is true; therefore, I am excused from discussing it at length here. However, if it were not for the fact that my book on this subject has not yet been published, I would reveal to you in this passage, with philosophical demonstration, the secret of how fire operates on bodies and its expulsion of illnesses."
"And know, my son, that they disagree about the time when it is appropriate to perform cautery, and they consider the best time to be in spring."
"And I say that cautery is appropriate at any time because the accidental harm caused by time is outweighed by the benefit gained from cautery. Especially when cautery is performed for pains or necessary pains, sharp and chronic ones, which do not tolerate delay, since greater harm comes from delaying than from a small injury occurring in the meantime."
"And bear this in mind, my son: only the common people and foolish physicians esteem that those illnesses which are cured by cautery have a delayed recovery, considering that consequence."
"And the reason is not as they imagine because cautery is like medicine that alters complexion and dries out humors which are the cause of pain."
"But cautery surpasses medicine in its efficacy and virtue of operation, being great because of its power."
"But it is possible that the illness might return at some point in time, depending on the complexion of the illness, its location, and the virtue of cautery used. It also depends on how much superfluity has accumulated in the body and what nourishment and influences have been received by the person. However, if cautery is applied to an illness that is subtle and affects a member with few superfluities and humors, such as toothache, it is less likely to return."
"And it is commonly said that cautery is the last resort of medicine, and this saying is true; however, people do not understand what they mean by it, as they believe that nothing can be cured profitably with medicine or any other cause besides cautery."
"And the cause is actually the opposite; the intention behind saying that cautery is the last resort of medicine is not because other treatments fail to help but rather because cautery is used at the end when all other remedies have been exhausted, and it is then that cautery proves effective." "And from now on, understand that when I say cautery is the last resort of medicine, it is not in accordance with the intention understood by the common people and many foolish physicians."
"And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they said this not because of any virtue of gold itself, but only for its equality and subtlety of substance."
"And they said that the place of cautery does not matter, which is not entirely true because I have proved and experienced that this is only true in certain bodies without others, and cautery with gold is good and better than with iron, as they said. However, when you perform cautery with fire using gold, it is not declared to you how much of it is consumed due to the heat of the gold, nor does it prepare itself to receive friction. And if you adjust the ignition on top of it, the gold melts due to the fire, and sometimes pieces of it fall into the fire, causing the artisan inconvenience."
"And for this reason, cautery with iron should be performed more lightly and more precisely to achieve the desired effect."
"And I have already arranged this chapter on cautery according to its chapters and those of the head within its powers, so that you may easily find what you desire from it."
The first chapter
This cauterization confers upon the humidity and frigidity of the servant who suffers from this accident whose two causes are coldness and an abundance of fluent flux, calledorrhea, from the head to the parts of the eyes and ears. It also causes much sleepiness, toothache and stomach pain, and generally all illnesses that come from frigidity, such as paralysis, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
"You should first instruct the patient to undergo a cleansing purge of the head with medicinal laxatives for three or four nights, as required by their condition and age."
"And then tell them to shave their head with a razor. Then have that servant bring the seat between your hands over a cushioned bench and have them place their hands on its surface."
"And then place the razor's edge against the palm of your hand, bringing it up to rest at the base of the patient's nose between their nostrils." "But first, when your middle finger has reached that spot, mark it with a thread and then ignite the olive oil cautery, which is prepared in this way:"
"And then place that over the marked spot with such force that your hand is slowly pushed down, and you turn it."
"And then raise your hand lightly and look at the spot. If you see any bone exposed there, like a grain of barley, then immediately raise your hand. But if not, return your hand with that iron until you see what I have described to you."
"And then take some salt and dissolve it on the spot and leave it for three days."
"And then place a cotton wick dipped in border oil on the wound, leaving it there until the fire's scar is destroyed." "And then dress the wound with tetraformacon ointment until it is healed."
"When the wound remains open, it is better to raise the arm, as this provides better healing."
"They said that the nerve should be cauterized inside the bone, and that the cautery should be held until some part of the bone's marrow is heated."
"And then it should be scraped until the heat reaches the bone, and then it should be treated."
"And others said that when the cautery reaches the bone marrow, it should press hard on the bone until it cracks, and this is the manner of treating small abscesses:" "They believe that from that place, the vapors of the head escape."
"And if the wound remains open for a long time, it should be treated until it is consolidated."
"But I have not seen these two kinds of cauteries done on everyone, only on some people out of fear; and thus, it seems to me, it is better with health when this is done. For the head is opened by the solution of continuity from this manner, just as we have testified in other members, and more so when the head of the sick person is full naturally."
"And the first kind of cautery is safer and better in my opinion, and that is where that work should be done with health."
"Chapter Two"
"On the cautery of the head."
"If chronic and prolonged pain occurs in the whole head of a patient who has long suffered from illness, and despite using various remedies such as plasters, ointments, bandages, and other treatments, there is no improvement, consider if the patient's head was of strong constitution by nature. If this is not the case, cauterize it again with another cautery." "And cauterize that on the horn of their forehead with an ember cautery where the chain breaks off." "Cut the chain and expose the quantity of bone mentioned earlier. Then cauterize it with a cautery at the back of the head where it is called the 'vessel', which is also the location used for applying a cupping glass." "And alleviate your hand in this, do not expose the bone, because the pain caused by this cautery is different from all other cauteries on the head and causes much greater pain."
"And I tell you this cautery in its place, because it is necessary to cauterize the horns of the head and the occupit with a more subtle cautery than that used for cauterizing the middle of the head. This is the form of it."
"Chapter on cauteries."
"On cauterization for non-classical migraine."
"When severe pain occurs in the part of the head or a throbbing pain is felt within it, let it be evacuated with medicines that clear the head. If this does not help, and other treatments are administered without success, then cauterization should be performed in one of two ways: either by cauterizing with an acutely burning medicine or with iron."
"The cautery with burning medicine is performed by taking a dish of salt and grinding it until its ends are ground off from both sides." "And then carefully cut the location of the pain in the temple with a sharp lancet that is just enough to expose the chain without cutting it completely."
"And then press it with a linen cloth moistened with hot water for about three hours. Then remove the salt and bandage the wound with soft cloth for two or three days. Then compress the area again under wet compresses until the wound heals."
"And then cure it with an ointment so that it is healed."
"And if you wish to do this with some burning medicines which I have written about in the second treatise on burning medicines."
"The cautery with iron is performed in this way, and this is its form:"
"And it is called closed nails because the head of it is like the shape of a nail with some curvature, and there is a small prominence in its middle."
"And then place the hot iron on the location of the pain and hold your hand steady so that the heat does not adhere to the arrow. Then slowly move the iron back and forth at moderate speed."
"And if the quantity of iron that adheres to the chain is such that most of it is burned, raise your hand up so that the artery is not burned and does not cause bleeding."
"And then immerse the area in salt water and apply it to the location, leaving it there for three days. Then compress the area with a warm cloth and cure it with an ointment until it is healed."
"If you wish to cauterize the extreme point of the temple according to cautery, be careful not to incise the artery in this type of non-classical migraine."
"Chapter Four."
"On the cauterization of ancient migraines."
"When you treat migraine as we have said in the previous treatment and in the sections on illnesses, and the treatment does not help, sometimes due to the severity of the illness, the first cautery with medicine or fire is not enough. Therefore, you should heat the temple cautery until it is red hot. Then place your hand on the location of the pain for a moment and press it until you incise the artery and cause blood to flow into the mouth."
"However, it is necessary for you to protect the continuation of the jawbone, which is moved during mastication, and that the muscle is not adhered to and that no spasms occur."
"And if it is about the care and caution regarding the flow of blood from the artery that is opened, for there is fear in its opening, especially for those who do not know what they are doing and are not studious and experienced. Leave the operation to someone at the beginning."
"And I bring back to memory the method of stopping accidental bleeding from the artery according to its way, in its proper place in this book."
"If you see this illness that does not improve with this cautery and the patient's constitution is tolerable, cauterize in the middle of the head as we have described, and cure the wound until it is healed."
"If you wish, administer the cautery which we have mentioned in the chapter on the stopping of bleeding with cautery using two tweezers, for this is better cauterization and more effective."
"Chapter Five."
"On the cauterization of ear pains."
"When there is pain in the ear due to friction and it is treated with laxative causes and other treatments that have been mentioned in the division, but the pain persists, then heat the cautery called puncture, of which this is the form:"
"And then puncture around the ignition point, and guide it around the entire ear like a wheel being turned, or make circuits around each one if the pain is in both." "Proceed slowly with the cautery of the rim of the ear little by little, so that you feel the location with caution."
"And if you make dots with the cautery all around the ear and leave it like that, then cure those locations until they are healed."
"Chapter Six."
Burning of the throat
The tumor that is treated and cured by cautery is only of those species that come through the blood vessels, as we have said in the divisions of diseases.
Avoid cautery for the species that arrives dry or due to spasm of the nerve
When you treat that kind of tumor with remedies and purgatives and warm drinks, and your treatment does not bring about healing, then you should cauterize the disease with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, the second a little below the forehead temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
And pause your cautery for the opposite of where the disease started, because softening happens only in the part that appears healed.
And the method of cautery is that you cauterize there with the cautery in the right side of the extreme tip of the ear above a little over the horn of the head, and on the other temple, the length of which should be according to the length of the thumb, and then pause your hand with the cautery until about half of the species of the bone is burned.
And this is the method of cautery, which is a species of the cutlery trade, the form of which is as follows: However, it would be much more subtle if you could see it this way; and sometimes it's necessary to cut away excess thickness.
And afterwards, treat the place with whatever is prescribed until it is healed.
"Chapter Seven."
"Regarding the cautery of ancient apoplexy."
When apoplexy is ancient and treated with what we have said without causing fever in the patient, then cauterize him with four cauteries: over all his temples; and with a cautery on the middle of his head as we have said; and with a cautery on his neck. And the manner of cauterizing is done as has been said above.
Then cauterize over the mouth of the stomach, and if it is worse, then treat him with what you proceed to do
Capitulum viii
Concerning the cauterization for forgetfulness caused by a stroke.
At first give him large jars and purgative pills to cleanse him
And then shave the whole head of the patient and apply to his neck the plaster made of ceter described in the treatise on plasters
And apply it several times, for that is the manner of cauterizing. And do this according to that measure which I have already said.
And if he is healed well by that, do so. And if not, then give him three cauteries on the back part of his head, descending from the highest part of his head down to the lowest part of his neck And pause between each cautery for the thickness of a finger, and then treat the burn with what you have proceeded to do
But if the patient cannot tolerate that much, then give him a cautery in the middle of his head. And if he can tolerate more, then cauterize him over both temples
Then treat him until he is healed; and let the cauteries be olive-shaped according to the form given before
Capitulum ix.
"Of cauterization of parasites and softening of the entire body."
"That you proceed with the cauterization of the head with fire and with water as we have said; and immediately seize the patient's head, and immediately cauterize that with a cautery in the middle of the head, and cauterize it on all the corners of the head, and cauterize it on the back part of it, and cauterize three times on the shoulders of the neck."
"And if it is necessary in the illness for mollification of the body because that one is too hot and the illnesses are tolerating and the illness is strong, then cauterize them with four cauteries on the shoulders of the back, and afterwards cauterize them between the nape of their neck and their shoulders, and raise their head up." "And immediately heal that one which is healed, and this shall be cautery with olive oil."
Chapter X.
"On Cauterization for Epilepsy."
"Epilepsy is not cauterized unless it is due to phlegm."
"Therefore, it is necessary to cleanse the brain at the beginning of the treatment and in the other cure that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is big and tolerant except for the exception of medicines."
"And if it is a child who does not tolerate medicines, then administer gargarisms and mastigators to cleanse the throat, beforehand for several days, with beneficial foods."
"And also burn the head of the patient, and burn it with a cautery in the middle of the head according to the aforementioned manner, and with another cautery on the occupit of it, and on each horn of the head burn." "And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then burn it with cauteries that I have mentioned, having paralysis and softening of the body over the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back."
"Let it be cauterized with olive oil according to what has been said beforehand."
"But if the patient is a child, then pause cauterizing subtly in this manner."
Chapter XI
Of cauterization for melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted moisture and thick bile, then cauterize it with the cauteries mentioned earlier in paralysis.
If the cause of melancholy is declining superfluity leading to it, and the patient's body is humid, then let them drink what cleanses the brain according to what has been mentioned earlier in the division.
And properly shave the patient's head, and also make a poultice decently from it over the circle, and properly apply that poultice in the middle of the head.
And let the patient be seated, and held down on all sides.
And also apply a liniment; afterwards, it is fitting to bind with wool. And warm that over the fire for gentle heating according to measure, which the said patient endures when it is most in them. And afterwards place that in the middle of the head within the circle, and let it lie there until it cools down.
And do this with the patient once every week, but with the other regimen of the boil until it is healed; or if you wish, cauterize that making little points according to how much of it there is, ensuring that your hand holds a cautery arranged thus: this is a species of cautery which moistens the brain evenly.
And also bind that wound with cloth or gauze.
Chapter XII
On cauterizing descending water in the head
When it has been declared to you that water has begun to descend into the head through the signs which have been mentioned in this division, then begin and give the patient to drink what cleanses the brain of him, and guard him from all humidities.
And let him be subjected to bathing with decoction for several days.
And then order him to raise his head, and cauterize it with a cautery in the middle of the head; and also cauterize that with two cauteries on both temples if it is the beginning of descent of water into both heads, or on one side if it is the beginning of the descent of water into one head.
Cauterize with cauteries all veins and arteries which are below the nape, and let the cauteries be placed at that distance along the line of latitude of the temples.
And guard against fluxes of blood when it is cauterized; and if you see any fluxes of blood, stop them with some medicine which is at your disposal.
And I come with wisdom which is in extraction of arteries and in excision of those, and in caution about fluxes of blood.
And sometimes it is cauterized in the brain between two bones with two cauteries producing copiously.
Chapter XIII
"On the burning away of ancient tears."
"When tears from the eyes are abundant and flow through the veins and arteries that are visibly present in the head, and it is confirmed that this is a superfluous fluid matter, then cauterize that area with a cautery, which we have described at the beginning of the chapter on hot water in the eyes. Cauterize the middle of the head and two spots behind the temples, and two spots behind the ears." "And if needed, cauterize that area on both sides of the eye socket above the eyebrow with a small cautery."
Chapter XIV
"On cauterizing the foul odor from the nose."
"If you treat someone with what we have mentioned in the section and it does not help, then prepare and give them this mixture to drink for three nights: ..., and then shave their head and cauterize it with a cautery made of mastic mixed with olive oil." "And also cauterize that area with a clove cautery, placing two cauteries on both eyebrows above the hair."
"Be careful not to burn that area."
"And this is how you make a clove cautery:"
Chapter XV
"For cautery of softening of eyelid inflammation."
When the eyelid is softened due to illness or moisture, cauterize that eyelid with this silver cautery device, and this is how it should be done:
"If you must, cauterize above both eyebrows using two small cauteries on each side, avoiding the temples." "And let the length of each cautery be proportional to the thickness of the eyebrow."
"Press the cautery gently against the skin without burning more than a third of the eyelid."
Chapter XVI
"Regarding cauterizing the eyelids when hairs grow inward and pierce the eye."
"When the hairs of the eyelid grow inward and pierce the eye, cauterize them in either of two ways: either with fire or with medicine."
"If cauterizing with fire, instruct the patient beforehand to extend his eyelashes like those that are combed out, until they are lengthened and hardened. And if any hairs emerge during this process, then stretch the eyelids using a bandage so that no harm is caused while waiting for them to grow."
"When the hairs have grown and hardened, then pause the patient's head in a suitable position, and holding the eyelid taut with your thumb, place the cautery upon it. The beginning of the cautery should be shaped like a sickle of iron, placed close to where the hairs begin."
"And then pause cotton dipped in alum or in mucilage of hartshorn on the eye."
"And then ignite the cautery which has this shape:"
"And then cauterize along the shape marked here, little by little, with repeated motions, until the surface of the line resembling a myrtle leaf is entirely consumed."
"The sign of the cure being accomplished is that you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted, and its hairs raised up from the puncture of the eye."
"And then raise your hand and leave it alone for three days. After that, pause a cotton bandage on it until the scar is healed." "And then dress it with ointment until it is healed."
If the eyelid returns to its previous position due to some cause and is softened, then apply the cautery again on that spot as you did initially.
If the eyelids are stuck to the eyelid, then cauterize that area which is elevated to its natural location and swollen, so that the eyelids do not stick together.
If the cautery with medicine is used to burn this area that you command the patient to lift the eyelids which are prolonged and swollen, then a piece of cloth like a mint leaf should be placed nearby.
And take some known soap and live coal on a needle tip, mix them quickly so that it does not cool down, spread this mixture on the cloth shaped like a mint leaf, place it on one or both eyelids, then place cotton wool dipped in egg white on the other eye, and keep the patient's head tilted back.
Place your finger on the medicine and press it lightly, but do not rub it in while the patient feels the bite of the medicine, for the sensation is like fire.
And once the burning sensation is felt, then remove the medicine and wipe it with your finger; when the burning sensation stops, then remove the medicine and wash the eye with water. Then observe if the eyelid has been lifted as it was before, in which case you should cauterize or cut the constriction with fire, for it is now at its best. And if not, place the medicine back on the location where it had not previously adhered until the swelling subsides and your operation is completed and the eye is contracted.
Then place cotton soaked in boric acid or another suitable solution over it until the inflammation of the adhesion is erased, and then dress it with a suitable ointment or another substance until it is healed.
And it is necessary for you to be very diligent in your operation that no medicine falls into the eye, and if the eyelid becomes inflamed over several days and some cause of hairs puncturing the eye occurs, then repeat your medication on that location where the eyelid has become inflamed, just as you did at the beginning, until it is healed.
And this is the method for treating a cataract.
Know that men's eyes are diverse in size and smallness, and therefore your cautery should be done accordingly.
And do not hide the path of correctness from anyone who studies this art.
Chapter XVII
Of cautery for a fistula in the tear duct of the eye.
"When you treat fistula as we have described in the divisions of diseases and your treatment does not succeed, then you must cauterize it in this manner: Command the patient to place their head on your thigh, and hold their head steady with one hand between their teeth so that they are neither moved nor agitated by their own head."
"And then place hot wax or pitch plaster on the wound on the head."
"Furthermore, this is the form of the cautery you will use:"
"The cautery should be hollow, like a reed or a vulture's feather tip, at the end of which you will perform the cautery."
"Furthermore, if you wish, it may also penetrate into the other extremity." "And if you want, let it be like this: as if tending."
"But truly, that which is hollow is better for your task."
Approximately press the fistula if it is open, and draw out its pus and dry it. If it is not open, then tear it open and extract the pus from it.
Then press the cautery which has been well ignited onto it and hold it there for a moment, but not too long at the end of the nose so that you do not burn your hand or disturb the patient, and then immediately place the cautery in the ashes and extinguish it.
And if at the beginning of your cautery you perceive that it enters into the bone, then that is good. Otherwise, repeat the cautery once or twice more if necessary; and leave it thus for three days, and again press on that spot with a border and around it with a drying ointment until it is healed.
But if eleven days have passed and it has not healed, then apply a medicine that is sharply corrosive to it until the bone is exposed and scrape it according to what seems appropriate in this chapter.
And there is another way of cauterizing a fistula which some doctors first described: enter the place where the fistula is and open it up, and immediately insert into that opening a very subtle probe whose shape corresponds to its form. Then pour into that as much melted lead as you can hold in your hand with caution so that the patient does not suffer too much so that the melted lead does not reach the wound; and cover the wound of the patient with a bandage dipped in album of egg or water, because lead adheres to the place of the fistula and heals it by marvelous healing.
And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cautery and treatment, then that is good. Otherwise, it is necessary to administer traction of the nose and reduce the fistula into the body of the nose according to what will come in its proper place.
Chapter XVIII
Of cauterization of the split hoof.
Many times it happens that splits occur in the lips, and more often in the lips of children.
"Therefore, when treating those fissures with what we have mentioned in the divisions and your treatment proves ineffective, then apply a small cautery knife in this manner which is shown."
"And it should be curved according to the subtlety of a needle."
"Then pause your hand carefully in those fissures until the cautery reaches the front of the fissure."
"And then cure that wound until it is healed."
"Chapter XIX."
"On the cauterization of a fistula in the mouth."
"When an aposteme forms on the uvula or palate or roots of teeth, and it bursts and is cleaned out, and then breaks open again, and a fistula forms, if you cure it but the cure does not take effect, then it is necessary to cauterize it according to the amount that has been received in the fistula. Then put that hot iron into the mouth of the fistula, keeping your hand inside until the hot iron reaches the front of it. Repeat this process once or twice more; and then cure it with what we have said about curing until it is healed."
"And if the wound heals and is sound, that is good. But if not, then it is necessary to uncover the place and remove the rotten bone according to what is written in its chapter."
"Chapter XX."
"On the cauterization of teeth and the softening of gum boils."
When gums are softened by moisture and teeth are painful, and you treat them with medicines without success, then place the patient's head on the table, and immediately apply the cautery of this form: thus you will place the tweezers over the tooth and quickly insert the ignited cautery into that area, keeping your hand a little withdrawn so that the patient feels the heat of the fire reaching the root of the tooth.
And immediately remove your hand, and repeat the application of the cautery several times according to what you desire.
Then have the patient rinse their mouth with salt water and keep it in for an hour, then spit it out, because the painful tooth will be solidified, the softened gum tightened, and the harmful moisture dried up.
Chapter XXI
On the cauterization of toothache.
When toothache is caused by coldness, or there's decay in the teeth, and medicine does not relieve it, then cauterization in that area may be done in two ways: either with a hot iron from cattle dung, or with fire.
To cauterize with a hot iron from cattle dung: Take some cattle dung, roll it into the shape of an iron ball, and place it on the glowing end of the tongs. Then quickly wrap that end in cotton cloth, and apply it to the painful tooth, pressing firmly until it becomes cold again.
"And then repeat this several times until the power of fire reaches the root of the teeth."
"And if you wish, soak some wool or cotton in the border of the powder above and place it on the painful tooth, then place a heated iron on top until the iron reaches the point of the concavity of the tooth."
"However, you should wait until the coal or iron is hot enough before cauterizing with fire. Make sure it has reached the center and that its heat does not reach the patient's mouth."
"And then heat the cautery iron to its proper shape and place it on the tooth with your hand until it cools down. Do this several times, once or twice a day, until the pain disappears."
"And it is necessary that after this cauterization, the patient should rinse his mouth well and hold it closed for an hour. Then he should spit it out; and this is the form of cauterization."
"And cauterize with whatever you wish according to what seems best to you."
"And this is the shape of the cannula:"
Chapter 22
On the cauterization of exstrophic defects
"When exstrophic defects are caused by friction and fluids that do not heal well with medicines and you wish to promote digestion of those, then heat the cautery iron to its proper shape, which is as follows: it should have two openings at its ends so that smoke can come out through one opening while the other remains closed. Place the heated cautery on the exstrophe once or twice until it reaches the point of the defect."
"And if the exstrophe is small, then place the cautery accordingly, according to its size. Then leave it alone for three days and place it on the edge of the wound, pressing it down until what the fire has burned is healed."
"And then treat it with ointments and dressings until it is healed."
Chapter XXIII
"For cauterization of vocal cords and constriction of breath."
"When humidity reaches the lung canal, especially when it's accompanied by cold weather, first, the patient should be given laxative medicines and then cauterize that area with a hot iron in the depressed place."
"And make sure that you do not burn through to the gut or scorch the spine, but only lightly cauterize it."
Burn that area with another cautery at the junction of the neck on the last cervical vertebra. Then apply the cautery to it in the same manner as before.
And afterwards dress that wound as is said above until it is healed
Chapter XXIV
Of cautery for the illness of the lung and cough.
When cough and lung disease are from moist friction, and the illness does not have fever or spitting, and is an ancient illness, therefore cauterize that area with two cauteries on the furcula at the depressed points of lion's head and buffalo's hump; and another cautery in the middle of the chest between both nipples; and let the cauteries be applied as described above.
And if you wish, let your cautery be puncture cautery with the cautery called punctum, of which the form is described above in the punctuation for earache.
And let them be punctured thus, and afterwards dress that wound with what is said above until it is healed
And since the cautery has three prongs for this cauterization, in one cauterization you can apply three cauteries as follows:
De cauterizacion del mal de gota, e del dolor de lumbos.
"Regarding the cauterization of the little head which is the tip of the helper."
"When the little head is displaced due to slippery lubricity and not firmly held in place during its return, it should be reduced before it returns completely; and gently move it so that it returns properly, as we have witnessed. Then, have the patient lie on their back or side; lift the thigh which is at the junction of the little head, with your left hand."
"And therefore you should cauterize it thus:"
"And cauterize the thigh until that side enters into the other side; and this is the figure of cauterization for four heads."
"And sometimes this is adjusted according to this count and there are eight cauteries."
"And then apply a poultice with salt and oil, and have the patient rest quietly until they are comfortable; do not move the limb for some time until it is healed."
"And if the dislocation is at the top and it is done this way, then cauterize over the muscle with a cautery called 'clavilh' or with pointed cauteries, for the joint is confirmed and the humidity is dissipated, and the pain is healed."
"Chapter 26."
"On cauterizing the stomach."
"When there is heat and much humidity in the stomach that causes it to swell beyond its normal size, and if you continue with the same methods of treatment without improvement, then it is necessary for the patient to sit upright on their bed or chair, extend their hands and feet, and cauterize them thus: one cautery on the left side of the pit of the stomach, as long as a finger with a blunt cautery; and two cauteries on each side of this cautery, so that it forms a triangular figure. Do not allow those that are not well-adjusted to cause burning."
"And the depth of the cautery should be equal to two-thirds the thickness of the thigh."
"And the figure of the cautery should be according to this form without addition. And if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and this is one cautery according to the circular form according to this form:"
"And cauterize the stomach puncturing it thus for whoever is afraid of this cautery: You should poke on the stomach with a tent as much as you wish and then cauterize those points with a cautery; and then treat them according to the treatment that has been previously mentioned until they are healed."
"Chapter 27."
"On cauterizing an inflamed liver."
"When there is pain in the liver due to coldness or humidity or excessive windiness that causes it to be thrown out of its normal condition by an excess exit, and if this condition is treated with what has been said and does not improve, then it is necessary for the patient to sit upright on their neck, and poke three cauteries according to this form and size onto the liver on the left side of the hypochondrium where a man lies when he is decubitus."
"And the space between each cautery should be according to the thickness of a finger, and the cauteries should be as long as the right hand's middle finger."
"And do not press too hard with the cautery."
"And the amount of cautery that is necessary should be equal to the width of the middle of the thigh and not any more than this. And if the condition persists, then place the patient on their hands and knees. If they are standing, then have them sit down with their arms extended, elevate their elbows."
"And it may be possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a knife cautery if you have subtlety and prudence in the art."
"And be careful not to proceed too quickly with the cautery, and cauterize only one third of the thigh at a time so that the entire body may be cauterized and it may reach the vessels. For here the flesh is thin."
"Chapter 28."
"Regarding the cauterization of a liver abscess."
"If you ever find an abscess in the liver and want to know if that abscess is within the liver's flesh or its capsule, then know that if it is within the liver's flesh, the patient will have more severe pain and tenderness."
"And if it is in the capsule of the liver, there may be intense pain, sometimes even tiring out the doctors treating him."
"Therefore, it is necessary for the patient to lie face up on their neck; then carefully feel for the location of the abscess with your fingertips; and also prepare the cautery instrument which resembles rags, whose form has been described in the previous page." "And cauterize it with that cautery until the entire chain is charred, until it reaches the gallbladder, until it burns clean."
"Also treat any other nearby abscesses to ensure they are healed as well."
"And note that this method of cautery should only be used by those who have studied medicine extensively and have experienced treating many illnesses. Although some may have tried it a few times, it is better left to the discretion of those who know what they are doing."
"Chapter XXIX."
"On the cautery of pleurisy."
"The ancient cauteries for pleurisy were made in this manner, according to Aristole: Take a dry, long stick of reed, cut it in half lengthwise so that it is as thick as your finger."
"And then dip it in oil and heat it over the fire, and cauterize with this cautery at the spot between the continuation of the collarbone and the neck; and also cauterize with two small cauteries slightly inclined towards the left side of the beard, and two cauteries inclining between the fifth rib and the seventh rib, slightly sloping backwards; and another cautery in the middle of the chest; and one on the stomach, and three cauteries at the back parts; and one cautery between the two shoulders, and two cauteries on both sides of the chest."
"And do not grasp the cautery with your hand, but rather hold it at its midpoint during the procedure."
"And the ancient masters said that men who use an iron cautery like a rod should heat it in that place between the ribs until it reaches the abscess and burns it clean, as we have described for the liver abscess."
"But in this procedure with cautery, there is nothing to fear, because even if it happens that someone dies right away, it occurs in the location of the fistula which was not healing."
"Chapter XXX."
"On the cautery of the womb."
"When you treat the illness of the womb with what we have said about the cure in its division and it does not improve, then perform cautery on it in three ways, all of which are acceptable. One way is to make three or four cauteries along the length of the womb according to the shape of the liver cauteries, whose shape has been previously described."
"And let each cautery be as thick as a finger or slightly more, and the manner of the cautery should be the same as that described for the liver cautery."
"But do not grasp the cautery with your hand, and let the illness be over before the two sides [of the womb]."
"And another way of cauterizing is that you heat the cautery having turned it twice, which causes we have described in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and lift up the cord which is towards the womb where the seat of the left-sided illness is located."
"And let your lifting be such that you lift up the cord according to the length of the body, so that cauteries may be made according to the width of the body."
"And then insert the two vertices, heated with hot coal, into that place where with those you penetrate the cord from the other side."
"Then remove the cautery, and thus four cauteries will have been made."
"And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three vertices."
"Then treat the cautery because it is possible that it has remained there for too many days, since heat is more effective than other causes in curing."
"Chapter XXXI."
"On cauterizing hydrocele."
"Do not cauterize a hydrocele unless it is inflamed."
"When you treat a hydrocele with the methods of cure that we have described in its division and it does not improve, then you should cauterize it with four cauteries around the scrotum, and one cautery on the stomach, and another cautery on the liver, and another cautery on the womb, and two cauteries between the spine bones of the back, and one cautery on the right side of the thighbone, and another cautery on the stomach." "And let the quantity of the depth of the cautery be proportionate to the thickness of the cord."
"Then leave the cautery buried so that it may heat for a long time."
"And do not remove the illness from the cure right away because of the cautery, since two intentions will thereby be joined together and it will be speedily healed with the help of nature."
"The shape of the cautery with which the belly is cauterized should be like a keyhole as it has been previously described, and that with which the back is cauterized should be like an olive as it has been previously described."
"Chapter XXXII."
"On cauterizing obesity and sciatica."
"When obesity appears in hydrocele and is filled with serous water, then you should cauterize the obesity on the back of the thigh between the ear and little finger bones, raise your hand with the cautery and do not turn it, and then raise your hand again and do not return it entirely, because the serous water will be absorbed."
"It is cauterized in this way: Then make two cauteries on each thigh, and let there be made one cautery on each thigh with the tip of the cutting cautery." "And let the cauteries be made along the length of the thigh: one below the knee and the other below the middle of the thigh; and two cauteries on each thigh."
"Then leave the cautery buried without cure for a long time, so that some water may be absorbed from it."
"And then treat it with those causes which we have mentioned."
"Chapter XXXIII."
"On cauterizing an abdominal tumor."
"When an abdominal tumor is due to heat and humidity that weakens the powers, it is because of the digestive and retentive powers which are in the stomach and bowels, and it is treated with methods of cure but does not improve, then sometimes cauterize it with a large cautery on its own stomach as has been previously described in the cauterization of the stomach, with a circular cautery and four small cauteries around the scrotum, with a cutting cautery like a keyhole; and one cautery on the inflamed area or two cauteries."
"And if the humidities are excessive and the illness tolerates it, then cauterize it over the navel and bowels, and adjust two cauteries firmly on the stomach near the groin, because this is a perfect cure for relief which you will not err in."
"Chapter XXXIV."
"On cauterizing old hemorrhoids."
When such is the nature of old hemorrhoids or one of thick humors or corrupted moisture, and they are cured with what has been said in the division, then cauterize them with three cauteries on the pus left behind of the two small and two triangular ones, and with a cautery above the navel laid across two said ones.
And if you find that the stomach is cold and the food undigested, and the face sometimes pale, then cauterize thereupon with a large cautery according to what has been said; and with one cautery on the liver, and with another cautery on the spleen with a pointed cautery, leaving it there for some time, and afterwards cure the inside which is healed.
Chapter XXXV
Of cauterization of ulcers after their incision.
When you amputate a gangrene, then ignite the cautery that is assembled like a rod. Insert that ignited cauterizer into that gangrenous wound you have cut open, and finally close the wound with your hand before the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which blood flows.
And do this once or twice, because if there are too many wounds, then cauterize each one separately according to what has been recounted, and then treat those wounds with this ointment before they heal.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery over certain areas, it will leave behind a deeper scar.
Chapter XXXVI
On the cautery of fistulas made naturally in the skin's surface.
When nature does not obey the work we have recommended for it, and the patient is frightened by this, then heal him with cautery.
Therefore, when there is some fistula naturally appearing on the skin's surface that has grown old and corrupted with humors and moistures, then it is proper to probe that with a thin needle, and also know its depth using the aforementioned needle.
Then ignite the cautery which resembles a needle. And then insert that ignited cautery into this fistula, and according to how deep the needle entered.
And repeat with that cautery burning away those corrupt tissues until they are completely consumed, once or twice or three times according to the depth of your need.
And be careful not to burn the nerves or veins; if the fistula extends into the body of the bladder or the intestine, then be careful about all those areas. And do this only when the fistula is in a fleshy location and you believe that it is not penetrating deeply.
And then treat the area until it is healed.
And if the place becomes sealed and the materials are cut off from it, and remains like this for a long time, then know that it is completely healed.
And if the materials are not removed from it, then know that either it is penetrating or there is corruption in its front part, or it may be due to those causes which will be mentioned later.
Chapter XXXVII
Of cautery of warts.
When warts cause pain due to friction or excessive growth, and the patient's condition worsens because of this, then it is necessary to cauterize them with a hot iron over each wart with an iron rod about which there will be mention later.
And make the second cautery smaller by a little bit, so that three cauteries in a line appear and thus they will be more useful in healing.
Chapter XXXIX
Of cautery of the bladder
When the bladder becomes weak and soft due to friction and moistures so that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize it in its lower part over the bladder, where the pubic hairs begin, using one cautery on its right side and another on its left.
And let the length of each cautery be according to the amount of the opening of the urethra. And cauterize it with one cautery in its lowest part or with two cauteries if necessary.
And use an iron rod about which there will be mention later for cauterizing.
Chapter XL
"Regarding cauterization of the thigh."
"When the thigh becomes dry and humid, and because of this impregnation is prohibited, menstruation is corrupted, and its onset is delayed. There occurs pain during their emission. Therefore, it is necessary to cauterize that location with three cauteries in the region of the navel, as we have said regarding the cautery of the bladder; and with one cautery below the back, or with two cauteries, and the cautery should be deep."
"Chapter XL."
"Regarding cauterization for dislocation of the ankle."
"When moist humors flow abundantly to the joint of the ankle, and their causes are responsible for its dislocation. A sign of this is that one part extends over the other when they are compared." "And the location of the dislocation can be found in it [the joint] which hurts."
"Then it is necessary to cauterize the illness over the joint of the ankle with a circular cautery, because you will have indicated with your finger in the circumference of the joint as it rotates, so that the joint falls into the middle of the circle."
"And this cautery should be of the same shape as the one used for cauterizing the stomach."
"And if this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize it with three olive-shaped cauteries."
"And let the cautery be according to the quantity of heat of the whole member. And afterwards cure the interior that has been healed."
"Chapter XLII."
"Regarding cauterization of the sciatic vein."
"When pain occurs in the joint of the ankle and its cause is friction and moistness, the illness can be cured with what we have said if it is not too old. Otherwise, you should first remove the illness by using foul pills or artificial pills that resemble them; and then cauterize it."
"And the method of cautery in this case is according to two methods: either cautery with burning medicines or cautery with fire."
"According to two known methods, one of which is to cauterize it over the joint of the ankle with three triangular cauteries in this shape, and make them go deep." "And let the space between each cautery be equal to the thickness of a finger. And if it is an olive-shaped or large cautery."
"But sometimes the cautery should be placed on the middle of the top of the ankle because there are four cauteries."
"And if you wish to do so, cauterize with the circle of which we have given the shape in the cauterization of dislocation of the ankle. Let it be a continuous circle and burn the heat of the whole member."
"And this is the method of cautery in sciatica when pain adheres to the ankle and does not extend into the hip joint."
"But if it extends into the hip joint, then cauterize it with two cauteries on the hip over the location where you feel the pain, and one cautery on the knee about four fingers' width below the right side."
"And if it is a scalpel cautery, let the depth of the cautery be according to the quantity of heat of the member."
"And if you find that the pain extends to the location near the toes, then cauterize it here with a cautery of three points or four or more as needed."
"And if the illness is found to cause pain below the hip joint, then cauterize it here with a scalpel cautery."
"And be careful in all cauteries that you do not burn nerves or large arteries with the cautery. And take care that through this you are not causing harm to the illness or contraction."
"And I have seen one and another among those who cauterized on the knee and went too far in the cautery process. The leg swelled up so much that the tumor reached the thigh, and it was necessary to perforate and cut away all the thigh." "And accordingly, a very strong solution of belly should be given, and accordingly that is death."
"And if the pain is in two locations at once, cauterize each one according to this method."
"And some wise men said in the cautery of ankle, this is its shape: make it similar to an iron circle of which the circumference should be about a palm's width; and let it be somewhat below its opening according to the thickness of a finger bone or less."
"And inside that circle let there be another third one; and let the space between them be equal to the thickness of a nut from a pomegranate. And let those circles open into two parts. And let their length be a nut or two nuts, and make their edges decently sharpened within the circles. This is its shape:"
"It should be heated in the fire until it becomes red hot and emits sparks. And then it should be placed on the joint of the ankle, with the illness located on its outer side." "And then cauterize it with three cauteries at once in one go."
"And leave it alone for three days; apply a plaster with border and leave the wound open too many days. And cure it with poultices until it is healed."
Albucasis says: "O son, regarding this kind of cautery we have used it little because of the fear of its appearance and because few are those who regard it."
"But among those who suffer from burns, some find benefit with this one, especially on that location."
"But cautery with adhering medicines is this: make two circles having an armillary sphere pierced in each of which you should place the nail of an iron door. Let the length of their sides be two nuts or somewhat greater."
"And if the space between them is equal to the thickness of a finger; and let them open below and above, and let them contain something between them according to this shape:"
"And then place it on the joint of the ankle with the illness lying on its outer side, and grasp your hand over the joint of the ankle. And then take cold water and pour it between the two circles, and let the quality of that be heated little by little on the fire for about an hour until the pain and adhesion of it cease  for this one finds biting like fire  until the biting ceases."
"And then raise your hand with the instrument and wash away all the cold water from the ankle with warm water."
"And then leave it alone for three days and apply a border over it until the blackness of adhesion disappears. And leave it like that for some days and afterwards wash it with honey. This is the last remedy."
"And then cure it with poultices until it is healed."
"If the pain extends to the thigh or calf, do to it as was done for the ankle, but let its container hold water."
"This is the method of cold water, and I have already written about it in my treatise on the correction of medicines." "Recipe for alkali and unslaked lime mixed together in equal parts. Grind them fine and place them in a new earthen pot whose lower part is pierced with a small hole according to the amount that enters it."
"And place another inverted earthen pot on the bottom of the first one. Then pour warm water over the alkali and quicklime so that it covers them by one finger's breadth. And then press down upon them with your hand using good pressure, and leave the first pot that has received cold water in the lower part of the second inverted pot."
And then adjust all that water, and pour it over another live coal and other renewed alkali, because at that time it will have very great sharpness, which is administered in many medical operations and cautery of the other members, for it makes an operation with fire.
And thus among the medicines some of which are used to cauterize widely, such as pitch and honey mixed with salt in such a way that they are mixed together.
And Galen tells of an ancient man the operation and cure with which he was cured of pain in the ankle and sciatic vein, and he praises him very much for that, saying that there is no need for another cure, and because he was healed in one visit as it is told, because that man was already accustomed to bathing and exercising.
And it is said that if verdigris green is not found, fig fresh should be taken; and much should be ground with a little bit of resin and placed on the ankle where there is pain, or on the thing, or in the chamber, and it should be tied.
And let it remain for the quantity of three hours or as much as the patient can bear from the heat of the plaster.
And then that man went to bathe and after his body was warmed, he entered into the sun because the pain ceased and he was healed.
And you should know that these medicines should not be used for cauterization but rather for evacuation of the body.
But already Dioscorides said that when with the horn of a goat the sciatic vein is cauterized, it profits very much for him; and it should be cauterized in this way: take wool and dip it into old oil, and place it between the hole of the knee and between the buttocks.
And then take a dry horn of a goat and burn it with fire until it becomes charcoal, and then place it on the wool and leave it there until it cools down. And continue doing this until you feel the sensation of biting on the ankle and then remove it because the pain will be relieved.
And this manner of cauterization is called cautery of goats.
Chapter XLII
Of cauterization for pain in the teeth.
Sometimes pain occurs in the back due to various causes, such as through coldness or percussion or excessive evacuation, and for similar causes, through the introduction of hot and humid material.
Cauterization is used only in this one particular case which is done by means of the introduction of hot matter.
"Then cautiously evacuate the disease with pills of fitha and similar ones that are made on this line three lines wide according to its length. For each line, use cauteries or more according to the amount of tolerance and strength of the patient."
"Use a cautery with a pointed tip for cauterization."
"And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cauteries with a medium-sized blade according to this form:"
"Chapter XLIII"
"Of cautery for the beginning of swelling."
"Very often this disease occurs in small children, and the sign of its beginning in children is that it happens suddenly on theiranus with elevation and movement."
"And you will find it in the last vertebra of the back and neck where it has already begun to rise above the others."
"Then when you see this and want to prevent it, immediately cauterize that area with a cautery shaped like a circle according to this form:" "That the cautery covers the entire part of the vertebra on both sides."
"And if you wish, cauterize around the vertebra with a pointed cautery two or three lines wide." "And place the points close together between them."
"And then treat the affected area that has been cauterized with what we have said."
"Be cautious that cautery is not administered in a state of chill caused by spasm of nerves."
Here's your sentence to translate:
Cauterization for gout and joint pain.
When joint pains are caused by humours that froth up and are deposited in each member of the body, therefore when pain occurs in the feet, it is usually called gout properly by physicians.
And thus, since gout caused by froth cannot be cured by medicine and the pain is not removed, therefore cauterization is applied.
Therefore you cauterize there for proper evacuation in the circuit of the ankle joint with hot irons.
And this is how to make an olive cautery:
"If it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery." "If pains occur within the joints or elsewhere and this happens often, then cauterize each painful spot with three cauteries or four on either side using this olive oil cautery."
"If you need more cauteries than those provided, then heat them yourself without pressing too hard on the handle beforehand."
"If pains occur within the two joints, then apply the cautery as described in its chapter."
"If pains are only in the flesh and there is no swelling, then prick around the edges like this: prick at those two lines."
"If pains persist in these areas, then prick around the edges of each knot and on the palm of the hand."
"If pains occur near the joints or muscles, then cauterize both sides of each helper tendon."
"And do not neglect the patient's proper regimen and receipt of medications, for if good regimen is followed and the inflammation is evacuated with this cautery alone, it will heal, God helping."
"Chapter XLVI."
"On the cautery of fractures."
"When a fracture occurs in the ankles or dislocates the tendons near the heel of the hind foot, and this is how it begins, then you should order the patient to abstain from food on that day and use gentle laxatives to relieve the blockage in his belly."
"And then place the patient between your hands on his back, and order him to keep his leg elevated so that the heel or tendon appears from under the bedclothes."
"And then return that with your fingers and feel for the fracture on the bone of the ankle with an indication that its end resembles half of a circle, like the uppermost ribs of the chest."
"And then ignite the cautery, which has this shape:"
"Until it becomes moist and gleaming." "And then reduce the intestine or hernia to its cavity, placing your hand over it to prevent it from coming out again."
"Then you have already opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion underneath them, with another servant on their legs, and another one on their chest, holding their hands."
"And then place the cautery mark on that sign with your right hand, and heat that intestine where you succeed in reaching it through the middle of the abdomen; repeat this process until you have succeeded."
"And carefully observe the movement of the intestine during your cautery process, making sure not to burn that intestine, so as not to cause harm or great injury to the patient."
"You should know that if you do not reach the intestine with the cautery, your operation is ineffective."
"And it is necessary that the cauterization of children be delicate according to their size and measure."
"And then take care of the cautery wound for three days with clean cloths so that the scar of the fire may disappear."
"And then heal it with other remedies so that it may be healed."
"And the patient should rest on their back for forty days until the wound is sealed and the plague is healed."
"And it is necessary to restrict the patient's diet according to the length of time for their cure, which cleanses their belly, and that the intestine does not protrude due to the effort of healing."
"And then when forty days have passed, food should be administered gradually and carefully, and they should continue this for another forty days."
"And they should reduce physical labor, heavy meals and drinks, and loud talking because if one uses this complete regimen of healing, it will not heal."
"I will now describe the treatment of ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and if it is at the beginning and you want it to not heal, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its quantity, and that which has been expelled from the intestine should be placed back inside as with the third part of it; and then treat it with what we have said and it will be adjusted."
"And some people have already said that a rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, which is marked with a tent:"
"and a line is drawn along its width on each side of the rupture and another line above it; then place your hand with a pointed cautery, but the first cautery should be lighter and better."
"Chapter XLVI."
"Of cauterization of twisted bowel."
When pain occurs in certain members due to blows or percussion and persists for a long time without being alleviated by medications, then it is necessary to cauterize with a pointed cautery.
And let the cautery be of appropriate size for each member, according to its magnitude and minuteness, strength and weakness, location of the torsion and intensity of the pain.
Therefore, if it is healed by the first cautery, that is good. But if not, then repeat the cautery; for such pains are often punctured from a nearby member to that one, so that you must succeed in healing those with cauteries until the illness is cured.
Chapter XLVI
Concerning the cauterization of leprosy.
Some lepers have been seen to be helped somewhat by cautery, but rarely if the species of leprosy is caused by the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
And therefore, when you wish to cauterize one who is affected by leprosy, consider if the leprosy is scattered and cure that with what we have said in the division. And if it is not, then fear over the illness, so that corruption does not spread throughout the whole body and entire complexion of the person. Then cauterize that person on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, another further away from it, even at the end of the hair; two on each of the horns; and one behind, on the nape or occupit.
And finally press your hand on the cauteries a little bit so that they impress slightly into the bone, and remove the scabs from them, so that the expiration of thick vapors may be alleviated thereby. And cauterize over the belly according to what is necessary.
And if the leprosy has already spread over the person and appears manifestly, then you should cauterize that person with those cauteries which we have mentioned for the head; and cauterize over the tip of the nose, and with two cauteries over each cheekbone, and with two cauteries over two shoulder blades of the neck, and with six cauteries over the shoulder blades of the back, and one large one over the shoulder blades near the buttocks, and one over the buttocks, and two over each ankle, and one over each ankle joint, and two over each elbow, and one over each elbow joint, and two over each knee cap, and two over the tendons of the sole of the foot; and cauterize that person over all the joints of those said members and feet, and over each heel of the feet, and over the hollows of the hands.
And beware of the nerves which are on the heel lest you burn those.
Sometimes one is cauterized with a cautery on the bone of the pubis, and another over the mouth of the stomach, and another over the liver.
And know that the more closely you apply cauteries, the greater is the benefit and advantage. And know that the person does not feel pain from the cautery, as they do from their illness, because the body of the affected person is already numb.
And it is necessary that the cauteries be large or small according to the members and joints, as is prescribed for the species of instruments.
"And then treat the burn with powder made from earthworms mixed with honey and the other treatment until it is healed."
"Chapter XLVIII."
"On cauterization of stupor."
"If a limb is paralyzed or numb and is treated with medications, oils, and poultices but does not heal, then cauterize the paralyzed limb with caustics according to the size of the limb or the severity of its condition."
"And your cautery should enter the spine a little way in." "Then treat it with ointment until it is healed."
"And sometimes it happens that some paralysis is cauterized which affects the thighs and feet, the vertebrae of the back, and the origin of the nerves which move that limb, and the paralysis disappears."
"But let not anyone presume to do this unless they are knowledgeable in the anatomy of limbs and the exit points of nerves that move all the body."
"Chapter XLIX."
"On cauterization of moles that become cancerous."
"If an old mole does not respond to any medical ointments, then cauterize it with a hot iron slightly according to the amount of thickness in the spine that enters into it so that its whiteness and color may be removed, and its color changed."
"And then treat it with a poultice made of powdered earth and lentils with rose oil and leaves of mallow, and dove's blood or hen's blood, giving each one part and mixing them all together, and apply the poultice on a cloth and place it on the spot until it is healed."
"Chapter L."
"On cauterization of cancer."
"If cancer begins and you want to destroy it, then cauterize around its circumference in the same way that it is turned."
"And some wise men say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle of it. But I have not seen this, because I fear that it may become ulcerated, and I have seen this happen sometimes."
"And it is more correct to cauterize around its circumference with a circular cautery as we have said, or with many cauteries."
"Chapter LI."
"Concerning the cauterization of deformities."
"If some deformity is delayed in maturation, and this is due to the superfluity causing it, or due to the state of the illness, since it is advancing in decrepitude, with little blood, or because of time, and you wish to hasten the maturation of a deformity; therefore cauterize around its circumference with small pointed cautery irons; and afterward leave that which has been cauterized until it matures."
"But if you wish the perforation of it with a cautery, then heat the cautery whose shape is like this: and afterward place that in the middle of the deformity until it pierces the skin."
"And if you burn at that spot which is painful, so that the flesh of the arm may be relieved; and afterward cure it until it is healed."
"Chapter LII"
"Of cauterization for corrosion."
"Roving corruption eating away at limbs."
Then if you find that corroded area affected by burning cauterization with fire, immediately cauterize it with a few small, large needles according to what is appropriate for that location where the corruption is found.
And furthermore, cauterize it throughout until you have eradicated all corruption and left no cause of it remaining.
After that, leave the patient for three days, and then treat the cauterized areas solely with oil mixed with honey until all scabs are eradicated and all corruption is gone.
And then dress that wound with healing flesh.
But if after three days the flesh does not grow healthy and free from corruption, then you should repeat the cauterization on that which remains corrupt in the affected areas.
And corrupted flesh is sometimes treated with caustic medicine because it acts like a cautery. However, cauterization with fire is the most gentle remedy.
And I have already explained in the division how to treat it with caustic medicine; so take that when you begin treatment for it.
Chapter LIII.
Of cauterization of wounds and similar conditions.
Wounds that appear in certain parts of the body due to disease known as "claw," which is a large and deep cause, affecting the flesh, are cauterized in two ways: by fire or by hot water.
But cauterization with fire is done by heating the cautery like a crow's feather pen, made of iron according to its size, depending on the extent of the wound in that part, and it should be very fine.
Then place the heated cautery on the wound and move it around with your hand within the circumference of the wound until the cautery reaches the depth of the wound. Leave it there for three days until it begins to heal and form scabs. Then apply a plaster made of three parts wild mallows mixed with salt to one part, and leave the plaster on it for one night because it will eradicate its roots.
Then treat the area with regenerative flesh balm until it is healed.
And if it does not convert and many wounds appear on the surface of the body, especially on the breasts and thighs, then you should administer cauterization with hot water in that case. Take a quill made of bronze or iron or crow's feather and place it on the wound. Then pour a small amount of hot water into the quill and hold your hand so that the edge of the quill is pressed against the root of the wound, allowing the hot water to flow to the front of the wound's root. Wait for the pain from the hot water for about an hour, then remove it because the wound with its roots will be eradicated.
And do this in those cases and also on any others that may appear anywhere else on the body.
Then treat those wounds after the roots of the wounds have been eradicated with the balms which cause flesh to regenerate.
Chapter .l.
On cauterization for trembling.
When trembling occurs due to inflammation of the nerves or fever from cold causes, or other similar causes, then you should cauterize it with four cauteries or five on the vertebrae of the back, placing one cautery between each vertebra; and cauterize also on the foot and on the stomach, using an olive-sized cautery.
And let the trembling subside and hasten the recovery of the feverish illness.
Chapter .l.v.
"Regarding the cauterization of sudden afflictions in the body."
"When sudden afflictions appear in the body and pustules form with openings made from corrupted matter, at the beginning care should be taken to cauterize the head of the fistula using a fine cautery rod dipped in pitchpine resin, the tip of which is heated over fire; or using a long erostology needle; or using a lenticular cautery."
"And in future occurrences, the boil should be caueterized at the beginning of its eruption according to this manner; and they are not believed, and the superfluity is removed, causing those, and they heal from those."
"But it is necessary that this be done near evacuation with phlebotomy."
"Chapter 60."
"Regarding the cauterization of sudden blood flux by incision with an artery knife."
"Many times there happens a sudden flux of blood that is cut open over the swelling that has formed there, or over the incision of an ulcer or cautery of a member, and at that moment it seems like it will be difficult to remain."
"Therefore when this happens to someone, immediately take your hand with the artery knife, and press over that place until you cut into those veins that are nearby so that the flow of blood ceases from there, and it does not squirt out."
"And also press in the fire some olive-sized cauteries, both small and large, by number of mouths, and breathe on them until they become hot."
"And then quickly take one of those cauteries, small or large according to the place and the swelling where the artery has burst, and press it onto that vein until you have stopped the flow of blood, and hold it there until it becomes reddened and restrains that blood."
"And if blood is expelled from the mouth of the artery when you remove your hand and press the cautery, then immediately take another cautery carefully from those that are prepared in the fire, and do not cease doing this until the blood has been restrained."
"And be careful that you do not burn the nerve that is here, and that it does not come to some other harm."
"And know that when blood flows from an artery, then it is not possible to restrain it in those ways, especially when the artery is large, except with one of four methods: either with cautery as mentioned above, or with extraction if it cannot be extracted, for when it is extracted the ends of the muscle are burned and the blood is restrained, or that it should be tied with a thread or a ligature with strong tension, or that they should be pressed upon with medicines whose virtue is to restrain blood; and they should be strengthened with a poultice and constriction."
"But he who administers proper restraint of the artery with a ligature and tension with cloth or by means of cauterizing causes and similar things, does not cause harm but rather good."
"But if this happens to someone and there is no physician present nor medicine, then he should press the index finger over the mouth of that vein as mentioned above, and extend his hand with great tension so that the blood is stopped from the upper part of the wound, and do not remove your hand from the artery; and pour on it cold water rubbed vigorously until the blood congeals and thickens; and then he should seek out someone who knows cautery or medicine."
Of incisions and piercings and cuppings and of phlebotomy and of plague boils and of their like.
We have already stated in the first chapter all illnesses in which burning with fire is necessary and beneficial medicine, their causes and occasions, and the instruments required for cauterization with their forms; we have arranged the chapters on the superiority of the head over the feet.
And you will proceed in this chapter in such a manner that those who seek it may be relieved concerning what they will have asked about.
Before you begin this, know that in this chapter there is fear of what was in the first chapter on cauterization.
And for this reason, great caution is necessary in the operation described in this chapter, as it involves many evacuations through blood, which carries life within it. This includes the aspiration of the vein, incision over an aposteme, opening of an abscess, cleansing of a boil, extraction of an arrowhead or incision of a stone and similar procedures. And all these operations are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in many cases death may result from them.
And I warn you not to fall into that which causes hesitation, for sometimes it happens that people with many bad habits are afflicted by many illnesses. Among them there are some who are angry with their illness and find death light, due to the violence of what they encounter in their illness, its duration, and the fear that it brings, which signifies death.
And among them there are those who give away their possessions and property, hoping to achieve health through that, while their illness is harmful.
Therefore, do not consent to that person who comes to you with such behavior; let your caution be greater than greed and your rapacity. Do not undertake any cause except with certain scientific knowledge that can verify it for you, and upon which successful outcome may depend.
And use prognosis and indication in the treatment of all your illnesses, for that is where you will find help in acquiring fame and memory, praise and glory.
Oh, children, may God inspire your understanding with His spirit and not deprive you of direction and protection, for this is in His hand.
And I have ordered this chapter to be distinguished into chapters according to what has preceded in the chapter on cautery, concerning the care of the head down to the feet, so that you may find what you seek and what you need.
Chapter one
Concerning the treatment of water that is retained in the heads of children
Know that this illness often happens to children at birth, especially when the midwife squeezes the head of the child without gentleness.
And sometimes it happens for unknown reasons which are not known.
But I have only seen this illness in children, and of all those whom I saw it afflicted, death ensued. Therefore, it appears to me that it is a hopeless condition for them.
And I saw an infant whose head was filled with water, and the child's head remained so swollen that it could not lie on its back due to the size of its head, and more than the moisture increased until death occurred.
And this moisture is either collected between the fontanelle and the bone, or it collects behind the bone over the forehead.
For if the operation is performed in that case where the moisture is between the fontanelle and the bone, and the swelling is small, then you should make an incision in the middle of the head in its width, with a length of two fingers so that the moisture may run out. This is the shape of the spatula:
And therefore, if the moisture has increased more and the swelling is greater, then make two incisions in this manner:
"Should the moisture be left on the bone, the sign is that you will find the corners of the head open and water squeezed out when you compress it with your hand inside." "You should make three incisions in the middle of the head in this manner:"
"Then extract all the moisture from around the incision;
"And there is another method of incision, which takes into account the size of the abscess and the collection of water, for sometimes it may be larger in the occiput, or at the front, or on the right, or on the left; therefore, make the incision where you see the abscess and the accumulation of water, and then proceed according to what is most feasible for you."
"And observe that thou shalt not cut the artery nor cause flows of blood, and let not the illness linger because of that flow of blood with evacuation of humidity."
Chapter Second
"When there occur cataracts or tumors in the eyes or the belly, and they are old, and the cure with medicines does not help, then the last resort in this is the incision of those two arteries."
"And thus when you wish to cut those two arteries which cause the illness to spread its head, and close by rub the place with rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and also press the neck of the sick person with some cloth; and also consider where the vein pulses; and the places of each over the places which are near the lower ears, and they become hidden except in certain men."
"And also signal over the artery with a thread, and also cut each one with its own spatula of sharp division made so that it enters into the bone, and this is done according to the width of the head."
"And if you wish, insert the spatula into the artery and tear it apart at the incisions previously made."
"And let the length of the incision be about two fingers' width, because when any vein is cut the blood flows out with pulsating exit, which flows forth frequently."
"But if the artery does not appear to your sight then you should measure from the ear the quantity of space for three fingers' width, and mark it with a thread, and cut into the bone."
"And this is what is necessary to remove from the blood: one pint's worth, and more or less it removes according to the quantity which appears of the strength of the illness and the fullness of the artery."
"And also consider the plague, because if something remains on the bone which causes inflammation, then cut that so that it does not cause an abscess."
"And also strengthen the wound with cotton and linen cloth strips, and cure it with ointment inside until it is healed."
"Chapter .iii."
"For extracting the bowels that are in the temples."
"When some people suffer from ancient or catarrhal migraine, due to humid heat and poor quality in the temples' arteries, or if it is an ancient and violent case similar to these ones, and if it is not cured with medical treatments, we then resort to this remedy for those ailments: extraction of the bowels in the temples, or cauterization of those areas as shown."
"The method for the operation and extraction of those is that the patient should lie on their back, with the head tilted backward; understand the artery visible in the temple when it is shown by its pulse beat, and it is hidden only in a few people due to the intensity of their hair."
"And if it is hidden, then the patient's neck should be wrapped with some cloth; and rub the area with a coarse cloth or evaporate it with hot water until the artery appears manifestly." "Then take the scalpel of which this is the shape:" "Then carefully cut the skin with that scalpel until you reach the artery; then pierce it there and extract that [the artery] at its upper parts until you have extracted it from the skin and revealed those of the tunics which are beneath it, in every part."
"But if the artery is thin, then you should wrap it with the tip of the needle, and then cut it a little bit according to how much its ends are extended and contracted, so that there will be no flow of blood, for otherwise the blood will not come out completely."
"And then evacuate the blood from this wound within three days:"
"And if the artery is large, then you should tie it in two places with double stitches of thread or linen, and do not leave it to putrefy before the wound has healed, otherwise there will be a flow of blood."
"And then tie off the excess that is between the two ligatures; and do this at that time or another time."
"And if you wish to cauterize it with a cautery, do so with a cutting cautery until the ends of the wound are burned, and this will serve in place of that work."
"And it is better to do this without causing the patient to have fever or an excessively hot complexion, for cauteries are among those causes that help the fine humidities, and therefore it is better to use them with moderation."
"And after the extraction of the arteries that were previously hidden and exposed on the wound, powders should be sprinkled over them decently, and then it should be cured with dry medicines to cause granulation and with compresses until it is healed."
"And if during these operations there happens to be a flow of blood from the artery again, then you should stop that bleeding either by tying it off with a ligature or cauterizing it with a hot iron or compressing the wound with your hand until the bleeding stops." "And if no cause of this is apparent to you, then place the tip of your finger over the wound until the bleeding stops, and bore into the wound with very cold water until the sharp pain subsides, and then compress it according to what is necessary."
"And what is lighter in extracting an artery is that you should cauterize the vein with this cautery having two points, after you have felt both locations with a finger and placed each one on fire separately, until they reach the bone and cut through the vein at two places, so that what is between its ends may be elongated, for it will not be completely consolidated by this cautery."
"And this is the form of the cautery:"
"And let the sharpness of the two points be like this:" "But if they have a smaller sharpness than two points are better, for if they are very sharp they approach each vein too closely and do not cut through the flesh quickly."
"Therefore since they have some thickness, the heat of the fire is held in them, and the flesh is cut through gently."
"And this operation is better than any other and is also gentler."
"And let the space between the two points be equal to the thickness of your finger."
Chapter Four.
"On the treatment of wounds from sharp and acidic injuries to the eyes."
"When there are acidic tears and it is a wound of those veins that are on the surface of the head, and there is no apparent cause for the cure with medicine, then sometimes the face of the patient becomes reddened and they feel as if there were ants running across their forehead, and the eyes are exhausted and humid to such an extent that the eyelashes become stuck together, and the skin is scaled by the sharpness of the tears. The old method for treating this condition with this operation is no longer used."
"And you should command the patient to shave the hairs that are on their forehead, and then incise into the forehead three grooves evenly spaced according to its length." "And if the length of the groove is equal to two fingers, then one groove should be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length slightly below the movement of the eyelids that are on the lacrimal bone, and the third on the other side."
"And be careful not to cut into the arteries that are on both sides, and extend your hand from the continuation of both jaws." "And if the space between each incision is equal to three fingers placed side by side."
"And if you have a piece of sponge soaked in water or dry cloths with which you can dry the blood."
"Then carefully insert the spatula of two sharp extremities, of which this is the form of its incision:" "What is from the beginning of the temples into the second incision." "Then cut out with it all the cord that is between two incisions with the knife which is on the bone, and now do this from the middle incision into the second incision." "Then place this spatula in and insert it into the first incision once again with another instrument called a cutellar, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other."
"And pause on the side of that sharp part close to the attached flesh near the cord, and on the side of the lion within the bone, and employ it there so that it may reach the middle fissure, and cut with it all the vessels descending from the head to the heels."
"But if the incision is continued up to where the cord appears, then do this in the middle fissure and enter into another fissure."
"And since some blood may have escaped, compress the places of the blood vessels confluent together."
"And then pause in each wound made by the knife, and apply upon those powders enclosed in wine and oil and vinegar, and ensure that no inflammation becomes cauterized."
"And on the third day untie the ligature and administer a generous infusion of cold water or tea, and then cure it with Basilicon ointment with rose oil and other remedies so that the wounds are healed."
"Chapter Five"
"Of the care of lacerations by cautery and the heels descending from the parts inside the head."
"When some veins are cauterized and continue to bleed, and the heels of the sick have become attenuated and small, and their regard is debilitated, and the eyelids are ulcerated and their hair has fallen out, and there is acute painful feeling in the forehead with subsequent extrusion, then know that these matters and cauteries come not from veins alone but from many smaller veins proceeding from within."
"And the best cure for these is this: command the sick person to wash his forehead, and then incise a fissure in that middle place of the forehead, about half an inch wide (and begin at the left temple and extend it to the right temple; and let it be an incision into the bone; and remove your hand from the lachrymal glands of the temples which are near the mastication), until the bone is uncovered."
"Dry up all the blood with sponge or dry cloth, and then fill between the two lips of the fissure with hot water or cloths heated." "And then sprinkle above with powders enclosed in wine and oil so that no inflammation becomes cauterized."
"And when you remove that and see that the inflammation has diminished, then it is necessary to scrape the bone until it begins to appear flesh-like, and then cure it with a drying regimen which causes the flesh to be born again, like this: take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony, mix them together, and make a plaster out of them, and apply it to these wounds in order that new flesh may be produced."
"Chapter Six"
"Regarding the treatment of that which falls into the ears."
"All that falls into the ears can be of four species. For it may be mineral stone or something like stone, such as iron and bronze; or it may be of plant origin, such as chickpea or bean; or it may be fluid cause, such as water and vinegar and their likes; or it may be some creature."
"And therefore when stone falls into the ear or another cause that does not fit nor cross within it, and closes the ear to the sunlight, and sometimes the stone distills in that which contains some cause of olive oil or sesame, and then promptly administers its extraction from there, and makes them sneeze conditionally, and seals their nostrils at the time of sneezing." "And also place in the ear circuit some pieces of cloth or wool, and stretch out the ear towards its parts above, because many times it is forgotten with these causes."
"And if not removed, then promptly administer its extraction using the instrument called 'epicicarious gesture' whose form is as follows:"
"And if it has been forgotten in action, then let it be; but if not, administer the extraction of it with a subtle hook of little duplication."
"And if it has not been forgotten by this, then make a cannula of silver and insert the extremity of the cannula into the track of the ear and seal around the cannula with wax and softened oil so that nothing may be opened except the cannula." "And then extract it with a small wind and strong attraction, for many times seen with this which we have reported."
"But if it has not been forgotten in this manner, then take a heated piece of ambergris or sometimes prepared with which the birds are caught one by one, and place that on the extremity of the ray, and then wrap around it carefully placed." "And then insert that into the track of the ear with facility, and then extract the ear from the humidity."
"And therefore if it has not been forgotten with all the causes which we have reported, then you may cut that before it becomes an abscess or spasm."
"And the manner of cutting that is this: first sanctify the illness of the vein sephasica and extract the blood according to the manner of the virtue of it, and then make a plaster between your hands and convert the ear to its parts, and finish with a small fissure in the root of the ear where it has been pressed." "And let the fissure be of lunar figure until it reaches to the stone, and when the stone is absorbed, remove it if you can with appropriate instruments; and then close the fissure immediately, and cure it until it is healed."
"And if the cause of the ear is one of the hairs that grow and become inflamed, then administer the cure and extraction of it. But if it does not obey your efforts, then take a fine and subtle spatula in this form:" "and use that to remove the abscess of that hair which has fallen into the ear."
"And do not do this when you think that it has already become moistened by the vapor of the ear, but rather wait for some days and then remove it with tweezers or with a subtle gesture, or with the incision as mentioned earlier, because the extraction is eased."
"But in the case of water that enters into the ear, it is necessary for the illness to use sneezing with the condition that at first, it fills its ear with some old cotton and covers that ear with it. And if through this it is forgotten, then good. But if not, then take thin pebbles and small stones according to the length of your finger, heat them a little in the fire, and the patient inserts one of those into the track of his ear and jumps on one side of that part and percusses with another stone upon the stone which is inside the ear." "Therefore do not cease this until all the water has been forgotten."
"Therefore do not cease this until all the water has been forgotten." "And now water has been forgotten so that you take paper or cotton and put one end of it in the earhole while extending the other end with fire until it is burnt almost entirely."
"And then put cotton again and do this as many times as necessary until all the water has been removed, and then remove that with cannula as it is said above regarding the stone extractor."
"If you want to extract a small beast entering that earhole, do it similarly as said above in the division; but if it is a large one causing swelling at the cheek area, then administer the extraction of it with gestures and pincers, and its cause will be easier than all other causes that can occur in the ear."
"But in the extraction of worms generated in the ear, when you treat it with what has been said above in the division and in the treatise on distillation and it does not improve, then you should examine the ear towards the sunlight."
"And then if you see any cause of the worms there, extract them with gestures or with fine pincers; but if you do not see any cause, then take a cannula with this shape:" "Insert the narrow end of an instrument into the ear according to how much the patient can bear; then suck strongly with it, and repeat this several times until all worms are expelled."
"If you do not comply with this procedure, then plug the opening of the tube with wax as mentioned earlier; then administer distilled substances that have already been proven effective in treating worms, and you will find these in the treatise on distillation."
"And this is the funnel with which you should pour the medicinal oils into the ear using this instrument, of which I have drawn a diagram:" "Make it of silver or brass, narrow and straight, with a small hole at one end and flat on top."
"And thus it should fit into the hollow of the tube that contains the oil where it will be needed." "And if you wish, take the tube and wrap its end decently with cotton; then pour some oil into the concavity of the instrument, or juice from some herb, or any other medicine you prefer in the tube  which is now placed in the ear ; then insert the tube with the cotton on top gently and squeeze it with your hand using moderate pressure until the oil is expelled into the concavity of the instrument and the patient feels the oil inside."
"And whatever is poured into the ear should be lightly warmed over fire first." "But make sure that the cause you are treating with this method does not have too much heat, as ear medications do not tolerate excessive heat."
"Chapter VII"
"Regarding the treatment of earache."
"Sometimes children emerge from the unperforated wombs of their mothers, and this has happened in some men, suffering earache due to plague or a piece of flesh entering that ear; sometimes this earache occurs in front of the opening of the ear canal which does not show symptoms, and sometimes it is located on the outside parts."
"And that one which occurs in front of it (the ear), which does not reveal symptoms, is among those with the most difficult recovery."
"And in that one where symptom appears, you should hold the sick ear towards the sun and look at it." "And therefore if earache is apparent, open that with a thin spatula of which this is its shape:"
"If its extremity where it should be small in width, of which one side is sharp and the other not; and the spatula is made of two thin sheets so that it does not harm the ear."
"And therefore if the earache is due to flesh born in the ear or in its canal, then take that with fine tweezers and cut it out forcefully until all of the flesh has been removed."
"And if earache is in front of the ear, then take a thin ray made of iron, heat it with fire for a moment, and soon place that inside the canal of the ear."
"And therefore if you feel earache with something that the patient finds with ease, due to seriousness of hearing loss, forcefully alleviate its oppression with ease; and make sure not to damage the nerves of the ear."
"And then press on the ear cloth with it according to the quantity of width of the bandage which you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the solidification of the plague. Or else take wax, soften it by immersing it in hot water, sprinkle it three times over it and use it; and if sometimes the ear is already inflamed, then you should heat the wax and replace that with other wax which you will wrap in rose oil cerot until the inflammation has been cauterized. And soon cure it until it is healed."
"But if bleeding occurs, then immerse a sponge or cloth in cold water and press it upon the ear, and use the other cure which prevents the flow of blood, which is described in the treatise on distillation."
"Chapter VIII."
"Of the treatment of swelling that occurs in the eyelids."
"Dry up those tears that sometimes gather at the corners of eyes, for sometimes they are dry."
"You must therefore have those animals with hooves or claws, and separate them according to their kinds, and then pause over the places mentioned."
"But if blood flows abundantly, you must cauterize those wounds with a hot, subtle cautery iron."
"And the best cauterization is near the incisions and openings that often return when there remains some cause of their kinds; but when they are burned with fire, those kinds do not return."
"Chapter IX."
"Treatment for swelling that comes to the eyelids."
"Many times, some cause resembling hardness and toughness appears in the eyelids, and therefore it is called swelling."
"And it is an accumulation of thick humidity in the lower eyelid."
Therefore, their operation is that you should now consider if the greatness (i.e., size) appears from beneath the eyelid and is swollen all around. The cause of this is lightness.
Therefore, make an incision along the width, and carefully examine that area all around with ease. Then suspend it with ligatures and cut it off.
And if the wound is large, then you should close it with stitches; and take care of it until it heals.
But if it's small, don't worry because the ointment will heal it and it will scar over.
And if the greatness declines within the eyelid, you should examine the surface inside. Then elevate the eyelid and suspend the greatness with ligatures, without making any further incisions, and press it from all sides. If the eyelid is elongated by incision, do not worry about it.
Also, after making the incision, wash the wound with salt water; and treat the area with something that encourages healing until it is healed.
Chapter X
Of the treatment of inflammation above the eyelid.
Axcirnath is a grayish swelling that occurs in the tissues of the eyelid above, and especially affects children. It worsens wounds and inflames their eyes, causing them to shed tears continuously; they cannot bear the light of the sun because of this.
Therefore, they must keep their faces wet all the time and sleep with their faces down. Their eyelids have swollen eyebrows above them, which are already covered by inflammation, and there is a threat of inflammation in the eye; and when you press on that area with your fingers, you feel inflammation under it.
And there is a way to operate on this condition: have the patient lie down with their head tilted back, and cover them and the area with hot water. Then make a circle around the area according to its size, and place a bandage over it and press with your fingers from all sides until inflammation has gathered in the middle of the circle. Then open up the middle of that moisture with an incision made with a scalpel along its width, making sure the incision is not larger than one made in trepanation.
"First, cover the patient's head so that you can reach their entire spine to achieve the desired arching posture, as in many cases it proceeds through a gap like a white-hare's form."
"Then, remove that cloth which you have wrapped between the patient's thighs and turn it back and forth between your right hand and left until it is dispelled."
"And make sure that nothing gets stuck in the gap, so that with the spatula you do not reach the wound and thus cause harm to them."
"But if it does not appear at the beginning of the gap, then insert a small instrument gently into the gap so that it proceeds arching. And as we have said, remove it thus; and also spread cloths soaked in warm water and wine over the location and strain out those with powders."
"And some people say that they sprinkle salt on it and pause there in the concavity of the gap so that the remainder of that humidity is absorbed."
"And also treat them until they are healed."
"But if an abscess occurs in the location afterwards, then treat it with cataplasms made of Cedar resin so that it heals."
Chapter XI
On methods for examining the wound.
When the eyelids of wounds are swollen due to the growth of hair that has not been removed, they then adhere to the wound and cause diseases such as constant tears and softening of the eyelids and skin which may lead to destruction of the wound, which is called "tactinir" of the wound. It is treated in four ways: either by cauterization with fire; or with an acrid medicine according to what was said earlier in the chapter on cauterization; or it is done by incision and suturing; or by cantharides according to what I will say.
And therefore it is necessary that you stop the disease in its beginning. Also turn back the eyelid of the wound with your left hand, and if it is turned back, well then; but if not, insert a needle into that one in which there is a seam of pus beneath the eyelid, and make the needle pierce with the thread above, and go towards the edge of the eyelid where the hairs grow, near the hairs, and pull out the thread upwards with the eyelid turned back with your hand.
And also open the seam beneath the eyelid where the hairs are attached with a sharp spatula inserted into the lacrimal canal major towards the lacrimal canal minor; and also extract the thread and place it away from the eyelid dusted with fine cotton or cloth, and then sew up the eyelid with a needle in such a way that it resembles the shape of a myrtle leaf.
But nevertheless it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity of elevation of the eyelid, for this already varies among people, because some require that a large amount be incised from the eyelid according to the quantity by which the eyelid is softened.
And then open with the spatula along the two lines that you have sewn, starting from the lacrimal major towards the lacrimal minor. And if your incision is close to the natural hairs, then it should be as thick as the thickness of a hair strand.
And then place the onion at one of the two corners of the thread, and then cut off all the thread with scissors, and then sew up the two lips with catgut or fine silk thread, wiping away the blood. And make the surplus threads adhere to both eyebrows using some sticky substance if you wish, otherwise don't bother.
"And then leave the stitches of the wound open for three or four days, and then treat it."
"And if you wish, leave the wound open without stitching it up and treat it with hot water that dries out and constrains it, because when the eyelid is lifted due to the sealing of the wound and its adhesion, stitching becomes easier."
"However, in this case, there was concern about the illness, it is a good operation, and there was no fear in him."
"And here is another way to stitch, which is to make cuts on the eyelid like a myrtle leaf and then lift the eyelid with three curved needles arranged in this way:"
"But if this is not possible, hold the needles in place, and then take a needle with thread attached to it and insert it into the middle of the figure. Then insert another thread near the larger lacrimal gland, and the second thread near the smaller lacrimal gland. Adjust these threads evenly, and then raise your hand smoothly while raising the entire chain upon which the stitching is done as we have recommended."
"And then adjust both lips of the wound with stitches, and heal the area that has been stitched."
"But if an abscess occurs after your incision or cut, remove it with cerate and its similar substances, and cauterize."
"And sometimes it happens that the edges of the eyelid become inverted. In this case, you should use the technique we have described for incision, but stitching is usually more artificial."
"Stitching with catgut is done in this way:" "And first you should invert the eyelid and cut the figure underneath as described above. Then, artificially prepare two needles or two slender probes whose length is equal to the length of the eyelid and whose width is less than the width of the palpebral fissure." "And once you have made incisions at both ends where you have the threads."
"Then gently sew each part together over the excess tissue of the eyelid edge with subtle stitches. Tightly tie off the needles at both ends and leave it alone for a few days, as the chain will die from the tightness and fall out on its own."
"But if it is delayed, then break it with scissors, and heal the wound where it has healed."
"Therefore, once it is healed, the eyelid is elevated and the hairs do not touch."
"And this is how you should make two needles according to this method:" "Make sure that the length and width are neither too much nor too little."
Chapter XII
"On raising painful hairs on the eyelid using tweezers when the hair is coarse."
"When the hairs on the eyelid are abnormal, coarse, and painful, you should take a pair of fine tweezers and grasp each hair with great subtlety using cedar oil and lion grease. Then adjust the tips of the tweezers carefully." "And make sure that the length of the threads is about a palm in quantity."
"Then quickly take another fine thread and tie it to one end of the hair if you wish."
"And then grasp the affected hair firmly with your fingers and place it close to the sun so that your work is clearly visible, as this is a delicate and precise operation."
"And then insert the tweezers into the root of the hair that needs to be removed, and quickly penetrate it through the eyelid until you can extract it from above the natural hair."
"And then pull out the hair above and insert another one in its place. Do this with one to three hairs at most."
"And then remove your hand with that hair outside the eyelid along with the natural hair."
"But if the hair is pulled out along with some eyelid tissue and not just the hair, then pull it gently apart from the sides using the thread that you had prepared earlier to ensure that only the hair is removed."
"And then close it with the eyelid tissue using vision to ensure that you remove only the hair and thread, and press gently and close the eyelid. Leave it alone for two or three days until the hair adheres to its original location and grows back."
"And if the hair grows back too quickly, then adjust one of the natural hairs that is longer and lift it with that, or leave it alone until it grows out some distance, and then lift it."
Chapter XIII
"On treating the inflammation that occurs on the eyelid from above."
"When inflammation occurs on the eyelid, it is caused by contraction of the eyelid when it contracts upwards, either to the right or left side, due to poor wound healing, sectioning, or cauterization. This is called 'lepra' and this inflammation can be natural or accidental, occurring from wound healing, sectioning, cauterization, or similar conditions."
"The treatment for this is to open up that consolidation and separate the edges of it. Then apply a piece of clean cloth soaked in warm water to it and tie it securely until it heals."
"And do not use treatments that cause drying or constriction, for if you do so, the inflammation will return worse than before and there will be no healing."
"Use treatments that soften it, such as fenugreek, and soak a cloth in warm water boiled with it or diachon ointment mixed with some oils. Then apply this to the inflammation and treat it with it."
"And the treasure of your treatment is to persevere until there is complete healing according to the form that was present at the beginning."
"And this operation we have described is merely a correction of inflammation that does not return to its original form."
Chapter XIV
"On treating inflammation that occurs on the inner eyelid."
"This inflammation that occurs on the inner eyelid, which is truly called 'alxacrati', can be either natural or accidental."
"However, accidental inflammation is usually caused by injury, incision, cauterization, or similar conditions."
"The treatment for this is to take a needle with a double thread and insert it into the flesh. Then pass it from the left tear duct to the right tear duct so that the thread comes out on both sides of the flesh."
"And then extend the flesh at its edges using the needle and suture it with the needle. Then incise widely with a scalpel." "And then if the eyelid returns to its normal shape, that is good. But if not, take a probe and place it in the opened incision, and use it to turn the eyelid over. Then make two incisions on either side of the inner eyelid."
"And make sure that the ends of the two incisions meet at two angles of the incision you have made so that when they come together, they form a single continuous shape."
"And this shape is called the Greek letter lambda ()."
"And then remove some of the flesh from the sharp edge of the inner side of the eyelid, enough to completely separate the eyelid."
"And then approximate and suture the separated parts with wool thread. Then treat them with the softening medicines and fomentations until they are healed."
"And if inflammation occurs again due to an incision, suture, or cauterization, then make a flat incision over the skin of the eyelid as previously described." "And then separate with a cloth between two lips as we have said."
"In the sum of the sermon on the cure for hernia when it descends or remains, let it run in its operation according to what is prepared in the form of alxacrati, and that is in the form of many diversities."
"And the skilled artisan always prepares in every possible manner that is possible for him to make the figure return to its natural form, or close to it, according to what suits the patient's operation and tools in the best conditions."
"Chapter XV."
"Of adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or the cornea."
"When this adhesion occurs in many people so that the eyelid is stuck upwards with the eye albumen and hindered from its easy movement and natural functions, then you should insert the tip of a probe under the eyelid and lift it up, or stretch it out with a hook."
"And then you should cut the adhesion with a fine spatula that is not sharp for the incisions, having it blunt on one side so that the patient is not bothered by the operation, and remove the spatula without letting it scratch the eye with its sharpness."
"And make your incision such that it easily cuts through that adhesion so that the eyelid returns to its natural form and all the adhesion is healed."
"And then you should put saltwater into the eye with which you wash it; or distilled water in which some rosin has been dissolved."
"And then separate the eyelid from the eye with a soft cloth and apply to the eye wool soaked in egg white, and on the third day use consolidating ointments so that it heals."
"Chapter XVI."
"Of Incision of Nail and Carnal Eminence of the Lacrimal."
"Know that nail can be of two kinds: one is nervous and resembles hard skin; the other is non-nervous and resembles compacted white humor. When you touch it with a scalpel, if it is forced to be taken with forceps, it should be cut off and the forceps should not be inserted into it."
"And in both species it begins from the larger lacrimal, gradually approaching the sight and blocking light and eye movement."
"But the manner of operating in its incision is that the patient should hold their head in the chair, and then you open the eyelids, elevate the eyelid with your hand, and grasp the nail with forceps of few folds and stretch it out towards its sides." "And then take a needle and insert into it a thread of horse, cow, or ox hide, or something similar, or strong gut, or fold the tip of the needle little by little and insert it into the middle of the nail, pierce with the needle, tie the nail with thread; stretch it out towards its sides, and cut off the side of the nail that blocks the pupil with the thread." "And so you follow it with the thread until its end."
"And then you incise the remaining nail at its root with a fine spatula or small forceps, and lift the natural carnal of the lacrimal in such a way that by cutting it there is no continuous flow of tears."
"And sometimes the nail is stretched out with one forceps or with thread, as we have said, and then it should be cut off with a lion-shaped spatula, of which this is its shape:"
"And take care that with the spatula you do not touch the corneal tunic and that it does not break in it, and that the pupil is pierced."
"Then after the incision put a little salted water or fresh honey into the eye and leave it until the next day; then cure it with water that covers it until it is healed."
"And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle or grasp it with forceps, then this species of nail can be cured with medications and healed as I have said and written in the division."
"And if you wish to incise it, then open the eye of the patient and take a sharp lion-shaped spatula like this:" "with great subtlety." "And if it is rarefied and congested and pressed at its root, then distill some of your saliva into the eye with fresh honey or rose water or salted water, and cover the eye until the next day."
"And then repeat the operation until all that is of it has been removed, except for the counter-incision cautery in the eye, because when you leave it, cure the cauterization at its beginning until it is healed."
"And then repeat your operation on it with reason until it is healed."
"The emergence of the carnal lacrimal, if noticed in the eye by great harm, should be suspended with forceps; and cut it from there on one side, and do not extend the incision too much so that you do not cut off tear flow."
"And then distill rose water and fresh honey into the lacrimal until it is healed."
"Chapter XVII."
"Of Incision of a Pterygium and of What is Born from Adherent Carnal in the Eye."
"Sometimes in the eyes of some people, rough carnal is born and it covers the pupil or approaches and presses against the eyelids so that when they close their eyelids are pressed together and assembled like a ballast."
"The operation for this is that the patient holds their head downwards and then you open their eyes and grasp all of that carnal with suitable forceps or a claw; then cut off the carnal at its beginning until it is finished with scissors, taking care not to harm the eye during your operation."
"And your incision should be with that which you cut off those or with the spatula that we have mentioned in the incision of the nail or with small forceps with which it is grasped according to its shape, as appropriate for this chapter."
"Then when your incision is completed and all that carnal has been removed, then fill the eye with salted water or distill rough powder like that of corrosive medicines into it and compress it externally with egg white until it is securely cauterized."
"And if there remains some cause of the pterygium and it is slightly cauterized, and you fear cauterization, then leave the eye and cure that cauterization with what calms it, and then repeat the operation until it is healed, and do the same for adherent carnal that occurs in this type of eye."
"But you should always refrain from any cure of the eye by natural or accidental means with iron, and do not put your hand on any of these operations until you see that that member can withstand that operation."
"Chapter XVIII."
"Of Removal of a Foreign Body in the Eye."
"There are rough foreign bodies that stick to the eye and prohibit its vision for many days."
"Therefore, at the beginning you should consider if the eye in which there is a foreign body is strong and does not have any other illness besides the foreign body, then grasp that foreign body."
"And have the patient hold their head downwards and then suspend those veins with one or two forceps according to your discretion; and let that forceps be of subtle duplication in this form:"
"or two forceps graduating in one body in this form:"
"Now carefully tie those veins with fine forceps, with delicacy, and remove the blood immediately, before you see those veins becoming empty and turning pale."
"Be careful not to cut the blood vessels at the tip of the scalpel. And if your operation is done in front of the sun, make sure you are steady during the procedure so that you only cut those veins."
"And once you have completed this, then distill on the wound's chief vein some wine vinegar or rose water so that with its sharpness it may corrode what has escaped from the scalpel."
"But if this is not possible for you, then collect all of it at that moment and later apply on it whatever relieves the pain of it, and leave it alone for a few days until the pain has ceased and assured that no abscess forms."
"And repeat this operation over it according to the manner most suited until it is healed."
"And this is the method of the forceps:"
"Chapter XIX."
"On the reduction of deviated nasal septum."
"If you treat a deviated septum with cautery or sharp medicine according to the report of it and it does not heal, then do not enter into it but rather make an incision over the abscess when it reaches maturity, and remove all the moisture that is in it until the bone appears."
"And then, once the bone is exposed and you see corruption or blackness in it, then scrape it with an instrument of which this is the shape:"
"And it is named 'sharp head' and should be made of iron. It should have a round head, like grasping something which has been punctured with the point of a lime or subtly punched with an awl, as seen in the following shape:"
"And press that upon the location of the corruption on the bone, and then twist it between your fingers little by little until you know that all of the corruption has been scraped away."
"And do this several times, and then restore the location with drying and astringent causes."
"Therefore if the location is consolidated and good flesh has grown in it and the skin has separated from the healthy part and remains for forty days without renewing or becoming abscessed or having any accidents, then you know that it is healed."
"But if not, then do not enter into it but rather reduce the fissure to the shape of the nose, and do so in this manner: First uncover the bone with a saw or sharp medicine. Once the bone is exposed, then take a chisel of this shape:"
"The end of the iron should be triangular, and the shaft should be slenderly tapered towards the point, like this:"
"And then place it upon the bone near the lacrimal duct. Extend your hand a little way from the hole and then twist your hand with the chisel until all of the bone has penetrated, and that you can feel the pain by the air that comes out through there when you move your hand."
"Then restore the location with astringent drying medicines as you have been taught."
"So when the flesh grows and the location hardens, then the matter which was flowing outwards returns to the nose. Therefore, it is easier to deal with this condition."
"Chapter 20."
"Concerning the reduction of the prominence of the nostril."
"When the nostril becomes prominent in its entirety and there is no apparent injury or diminution, then it is necessary to relieve the condition. Then follow this procedure: First shave the hair around the area without scarification and suck with good suction. Then place a liniment made of gum acacia, aloe, mallow, and tragacanth on the nostril, and finally apply a plaster made of fine powder."
"And the manner of making the powders is as follows: Take drachms of lion's mane, and fold each one in four pleats. Then pulverize them."
"And then place them on top of each other according to the amount that the nostril requires." "And then apply a hard cloth with strong compression on top of them. Then repeat the suction cups without scarification and remove them, leaving the nostril pressed tightly day and night."
"But if the bandage becomes softened in the meantime, then it must be tightened."
"And remove the bandage day and night as we have said."
"And if sometimes the nostril is already reduced, that is good. But if not, then repeat the plaster with the powders and compression and suction cups until it is healed."
"Chapter 21."
"Concerning the incision of the prominence of the uvula."
"When there is a disruption in the uvula and it becomes prominent and projects outside the eyelids like a grain of wheat, and has an elongated shape resembling that of a man, and you wish to incise it, then do so as follows: Insert the needle into the ridge of the uvula from below upwards. Then insert another needle on which there is doubled thread on the side towards the lacrimal duct. Make this penetrate and leave the first needle in its position. Then cut the location where the double thread is, and lift away the part of the uvula with that, following the course of the needle. Then pull it tight."
"And then remove the needle and place lanum infused in albumen on the nostril, leaving it there until the thread falls out with the uvula."
"And then heal the nostril with whatever comforts it until the wound is healed."
"And sometimes it happens that the entire nostril is swollen with a circular prominence. Then it should be punctured with a fine probe that comes to the front of the nostril, allowing the whitish fluid to run off, and the nostril will quickly descend."
"And then compress it until it is healed."
"Chapter 22."
"Concerning the treatment of ophthalmia (inflammation of the eye)."
"This condition called ophthalmia is nothing but moisture that is accumulated in the nostril like descending water, and it is not this."
"But the manner of treating it is as follows: Make the person sit on a prepared and upright chair. Then take your head in both your hands and lift it up so that you see the moisture running down to the lower part. Then dry it quickly before it descends, and close the eyes, leaving them to see again."
"And if it does not run downwards, know that it is water."
"But if the descent of the moisture is not prepared as we have said, then make the person sit between your hands. Then take a fine probe and make it pass through the skin surrounding one little below the continuation of the conjunctiva with the corneal tunic in the limbus (inside the eye), so that the moisture is removed."
"Then, once it has been removed, distill into the nostril warm water in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey."
"And then treat it with other causes until it is healed."
"Chapter 23."
"Concerning the treatment of descending water from the nostril."
"We have already spoken about the types of moisture in the division and which one it is appropriate to pierce with speech, declaring that according to health."
"Then you should make the person sit between your hands on a stool and pull their own nostril tightly with their hand."
Approach and place your left hand near the eyelid of the patient's left eye, if their left eye is the one with water. Otherwise, use your right hand.
Approach and with your right hand take a cloth if the patient's eye is left; otherwise, use your left hand.
Approach and place the edge of the cloth near the corner of the eye, about the thickness of a thread away from the inner lacrimal lacuna. Then gently press the cloth with your hand in that spot.
Then penetrate into the eye and feel that the cloth has reached the tear duct opening.
Make sure that the path of the cloth reaches the preconjunctival fornix as measured from the distance between the pupil and the end of the black part, which is the corner of the eye; so that you can see the pupil clearly through the transparency of the corneal tunic.
Then keep the cloth in place where there is water. Then quickly pull it down once or twice more, and then if the water flows down immediately, the patient's visual acuity will improve immediately, and the cloth will be wet with tears.
Then pause for a moment; then if the water has flowed down, pause once again but this time making sure that the cloth does not get wet.
Then when it's dry and no water flows down, gently remove the cloth with your hand little by little. Then dissolve a small amount of gemstone clear salt in the water and use that to rinse the inside of the eye. Then wipe away any excess moisture from outside the eye using cotton wool or gauze soaked in rose oil and alum. Then close the patient's eye gently with a soft cloth.
But those who are of our time pause here, having completed this operation using a thread made of wool.
And if the cloth does not enter easily into the eye due to its stiffness  for some men have eyes that are very hard  then you must take a spatula called an "albreda" which has the following shape:
Then pierce with it the conjunctiva, and do not push your hand too far in, but rather make a pathway for the cloth to enter subtly if necessary.
And then insert the cloth as we have said.
"You must prepare the final touches of your work: a sleeping area should be arranged for the patient, with dim lighting in a dark room where they can lie on their back. All movements are to be prohibited."
"And pause the nature of the water so its nature is clear and it does not harm their head on either the right or left departure."
"And arrange for the bandage according to its position within the third day."
"Remove the bandage in that dark room and expose their eyes to a gentle light, showing them some causes, and then return the bandage on the seventh day."
"And do not forget to do this during the hours of treatments or immediately after infusion." "Be careful not to spill any water due to its delicate balance between calm and strong currents."
"But if an abscess forms, you must remove the bandage on the seventh day, and apply water that softens the abscess."
"Then uncover the patient's eyes and pause over their mouth for several days so that they may regain their vision in a dark room."
"And gradually lead them out of that room, explaining the causes to them."
"But remember that in this state, it is not permitted for anyone to have visions, and therefore you must be careful about the operation."
"And now it has come to our attention that some people claim to have been initiated into the Art, and one of them said that fire was made in the Airy during the night, using a tube with which water is sucked up."
"But yet we have not seen anyone in our land who has perfectly achieved this, nor is it mentioned in any of the books of the ancient ones; and therefore it may be a new invention."
"And these are the forms of the species of Magdalen that they claim to have above those who are ignorant of them:"
"And these are made of iron or steel properly tempered, and they have their extremities adorned with this subtlety triangularly, the pointed extremity thus like that one."
"Chapter XXIV."
"Of the treatment of flesh eaten by the nose."
"When different kinds of flesh emerge from the nose, connected but with some cause that resembles a scorpion or polyp, this ailment is called 'polypus' due to its resemblance to said fish." "The flesh [of the polyp] is cancerous, decayed, of dark color; yet it is flesh lion-colored not dark."
"Therefore, in that which is in these lion-colored flesh without deceit or cancerous growth, you should remove the ailment with your hands and place it in the sun, cover its nostrils, and pierce its throat there." "And properly cut that at the parts of the body, and also separate what you have grasped with spatula sharp and subtle from one part until you know all flesh has been removed; but if something remains due to some cause where excision is possible, then remove it with one of the sharp instruments easily and skillfully until nothing remains." "But if it is accompanied by blood or an aposteme cauterize it with what is necessary; but if it is of malignant apostemes then cut and cauterize there until it has been severed, cauterized, and all cavities opened."
"And properly let it be placed on the nose close to the incision with vinegar and water or vinegar." "But if the nose is open and moisture proceeds from it into the palate, then you know that it has been healed."
"But if moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you know that there is flesh left in the pus-filled cavities of the nostrils which have not been reached by excision."
"Therefore you should insert fleece into it where there is any thickness, and pack it with packs, pressing between each pack the quantity of a finger or less, and generate warmth and insert one extremity of the fleece into the nostrils with the ray or with some other cause which is possible for it."
"And after that has been done, let him throw his breath into the nostrils until it reaches the canals of the nostrils, and let it be exhaled over the sieve, for many people have seen schoolchildren do this semblance, and it is a light cause for anyone who wishes to do so."
"And properly press the two extremities of the fleece, one extremity which comes out over the nose and the other which remains in the nose, and properly administer a lock of flesh with packs that are on the fleece, and do this until you know that the flesh is already with the packs of the fleece."
"And properly extract the fleece, and press it on the nose near the abstraction of blood once a day, and do this for three days or more until the salve has rotted everything that remains of the flesh."
"And properly at the end of the treatment, place a lead cannula in the nose for several days until it is healed."
"But if you choose a drying cure, use that one."
"And this is the form of the head purging device with which oils and medicines are distilled into the nostrils:"
"It should be made of silver or brass, resembling a small open lantern like a small cauldron, and the mesh similarly."
"And if you wish, make a closed cannula like a pipe, and the cannula of the head purging device should be flat and open; on which you can hold it when you pour oil or water into it that you want from the juices and succussible causes."
"Chapter XXV."
"Of holes made in the extremities of the nose."
Many times a thread appears on the outer edge of the nose, which becomes enlarged and inflamed during certain days when it is considered a bad omen.
Therefore, you should insert that at the beginning of its appearance and remove all of it. Furthermore, pause on the place where cauterization or burning medicine was applied, which is located there.
But if its incision is delayed until it becomes enlarged, then consider whether it is hardened, hard, of dark color and insensitive. In that case, do not touch it with iron for it is a cranky abscess; for many times this abscess was incised with great harm to the person on whom it appeared.
And if the abscess is of lion-like touch and not of dark color, sometimes incision is possible there, so evacuate the illness and incise it without fear, and cure the place with something that dries and constrains until it heals.
Chapter XXVI
Regarding the suture of the nose, lips, and ear when continuity is disrupted by plague or injury.
Know that when disruption of continuity occurs in one of these cartilages (nose, lips, ear), you should not rely on this operation except with skilled hands.
Therefore, when you find such a cause in someone, examine whether it is fresh with its blood. Then join the two lips of the wound with stitches and cure it properly until it heals.
And if the lips of the disrupted continuity are already separated and each is healthy on its own, then you must cut each part from its attachment until bleeding ceases. Then join the two lips with stitches and strain them together. Sprinkle dragon's blood powder and frankincense on it, place a piece of diaphoretic plaster or another consolidating plaster over it, and let it stay for two to three days. Then remove the plaster and replace it. Let it heal by itself until the edges are united, and then cure it with ointment until it is healed.
But the manner of stitching is that you should join the disruption of continuity either with needles as we have recommended for abdominal suturing, or join it with thread as you know how to do.
Chapter XXVII:
"Regarding the extraction of those causes that appear in both lips within the intestines."
"Very often, many men have hard swellings in the inner parts of their lips, resembling kernels of grapes. Some are smaller and others are larger."
"It is necessary that you separate the lips and make an incision on each of those hardnesses wherever they are located. After the extraction, fill the space with a bandage soaked in hot water, wash the area with vinegar, and then apply a medicine that has astringent properties until it heals."
"Chapter XXVIII."
"Regarding the incision of attached flesh in the gums."
"Often, there is a boil above the attached gum which ancient authorities called albulus. Therefore, you should suspend it with forceps or hold it with your fingers and incise it along its root, allowing the pus to flow out freely."
"And afterwards apply a bandage soaked in hot water or other powders having astringent or absorbent properties."
"If that flesh returns, incise it again and cauterize it with a hot iron, for if you cauterize it, it will not return."
"Chapter XXIX."
"Regarding the cause of toothache with iron."
"When the surface of teeth, both deciduous and permanent, as well as the attached gums become rough, reddened, and sometimes blackened or emit a foul odor causing inflammation in the gum tissue, it is because of corruption, and the teeth themselves are loose."
"And therefore you should make an incision between your teeth and grasp the head of the tooth with forceps to extract it. Clean the surface of the teeth where those rough patches appeared, resembling sandpaper, ensuring that there is no other cause for its removal. This procedure is necessary due to blackening or yellowing, and other alterations."
"So if you are not able to perform this procedure at the beginning of the extraction process, then repeat the explanation on another day and again on the second and third days until you achieve your desired result."
"And know that teeth require various types of forceps with different shapes and figures according to the preparation for your operation." "And therefore the forceps used to extract deciduous teeth is different from those used to remove other teeth. You should prepare these various forms of forceps which you will see shortly:"
"Chapter XXX."
"On the extraction of teeth."
"You should carefully examine the tooth causing pain beforehand and during every extraction procedure, for there is no reason why you would need to look at it again after its removal. This is because the extracted tooth is a sublimated substance that serves as an excuse in its extraction."
"But when the pain is so severe that it requires tooth extraction, you must be firmly certain about which tooth is causing the pain. For often, the pain may seem to come from a healthy tooth and you extract it, only for the pain to continue until the actual offending tooth is removed, as we have already seen in operations involving beards."
"So when you are certain about which tooth is causing the pain and know it well, then you should scarify the area around the tooth with a spatula containing some caustic substance to dissolve the gum tissue completely. Then gradually use your fingers or delicate forceps to widen the opening until the tooth becomes loose."
"And then apply forceps with a large mouth and strong grip for good purchase or strong leverage. Grasp the head of the offending tooth firmly between your thumb and index finger so that it does not slip away from you. Then gently pull out the tooth in a straight manner, taking care not to break it or cause unnecessary pain."
"And if it is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments and place it on either side of the tooth with ease and force to facilitate its removal as was done at the beginning."
"But if the tooth is decayed or damaged, then you should fill that cavity with wax and strengthen it using a fine wire tip to prevent it from breaking during your gripping of it with forceps."
"And you should work carefully with your scarification around the entire area of the gum and guard against using too much force so that you do not break or fracture it. Then return to the offending tooth with renewed effort to remove it, for the pain caused by its removal will be greater than the initial pain."
"And beware of doing what many ignorant barbers do in their haste and arrogance regarding tooth extraction, without administering what we have recommended. For often they cause great illnesses upon people which are more difficult to heal than they were to cause. They leave behind root remnants or some of them, or extract teeth with pieces of the jawbone attached, as we have often witnessed."
"And after the extraction, wash out the mouth with warm water or vinegar mixed with salt."
"And if bleeding occurs afterwards, as it often does, then apply some powdered myrrh and sprinkle it over the wound. If this is not sufficient, cauterize."
"The shape of the delicate forceps and tenacula used to grasp the tooth at the beginning should be long in its tip, short in its handle, and thick enough that they do not bend when you use them."
"And they should have such a thick handle that even when you squeeze them with all your might, they will not bend or be shortened at their tips."
"And they should be made of Indian iron, carefully straightened at their tips. The tips of these forceps should have teeth that interlock with each other and grasp firmly when squeezed together. Sometimes the tips are shaped like the beak of a bird called the ciconia (stork), which is broad and has strong grasping power."
"Chapter XXIX"
"On the Extraction of Teeth and the Removal of Fractured Jaw Bones"
When extraction of a tooth that is firmly set requires some cause, then you should place yourself close beside it with your hand for one or two days until the area becomes softened; and then insert a sponge or tenaculum whose ends are assembled like the beak of a bird called ciconia or guanta, in this shape:
The ends of them are made within thus like a file or rasp.
And if you do not succeed with this extraction using these forceps or tenacula, then you should uncover the root and remove all the flesh and insert this instrument called atali, which is a small lever whose shape is as follows:
And it should be of short thick extremity, not bent in such way that it is not firmly held.
Therefore if by means of this the root is removed, good! And if not, help yourself with these other instruments whose shapes are as follows: The shape of the first instrument is that of a triangular extremity with some thickness:
The shape of the second tool should be triangular and have a very fine tip.
And once you've helped with this instrument, having two branches, one is shaped like this: and there are other instruments that resemble teeth-cutters; for it is made with this instrument, which resembles an oven hook, and this is the shape:
of a triangular tip that is bent or shortened, which should be somewhat thick, and not pointed so as not to be sharp.
And you should know that the instruments for removing teeth are similar in shape to other instruments.
But the skilled and subtle craftsman finds suitable instruments for himself according to what is necessary for the operation and various illnesses. For there are certain illnesses about which ancient physicians did not devise or provide appropriate instruments due to their diverse forms.
But if the jawbone or other bones of the mouth are broken or dislocated, it is necessary to carefully examine that area with suitable instruments and forceps for extracting tooth roots, as we have mentioned previously. Here is a gesture that represents this action:
"There may be some swelling present gradually, which should be held or compressed with the mouth to prevent it from escaping until all the bone is removed; then restore the area with appropriate medicines."
"If there is a small wound in the bone, clean it thoroughly and remove any blackened tissue. Then dress it until it heals."
Chapter XXXII
"Concerning the treatment of prominent teeth compared to others."
When teeth are prominent beyond their natural course causing disfigurement, especially in women and venerable old women; therefore you should consider: if the tooth is not close to another tooth, and cannot be straightened or pulled out, then extract it; but if it is attached to another tooth, then cut it with this instrument which resembles a pig's bone, made of Indian steel with an extremely sharp tip.
And make your incision so that in three days you will have cut through the hardness of that tooth without affecting any other teeth.
And if it is an emergent tooth to be filed down, then file it with an Indian steel file which has this shape:
And let it be made entirely of Indian steel and very sharp-pointed; and let it have many small points like those of a file with which the teeth are filed little by little over many days with ease, so that no other tooth is affected or injured. And finally smooth it off at the end and polish it with sharp razors.
And if it is a tooth with one side chipped and irritating the tongue, then you should file down that edge until its roughness is smoothed out and flattened, so that the tongue does not stumble or speech is not impaired.
Chapter 33
Of restoring broken teeth with gold foil or silver wire
When teeth are broken by concussion or extraction due to a blow or fall and the patient cannot eat properly despite your treatment with astringent medicines, then you should restore those that have been damaged using gold foil rather than silver wire, because silver tarnishes quickly and becomes smooth in just a few days, whereas gold never changes.
And let the foil be of such fineness and thinness according to the quantity that can fit between the teeth; and the way to prepare it is to take the foil and fold it double in length between two healthy teeth, then carefully twist the folded foil between one or more broken teeth until the cloth reaches the healthy part on the other side. And then insert the wadding into the beginning of the broken part and gently press with your finger with skill until it is well placed without causing further damage.
And let your pressure be such that you push the foil deep into the roots of the teeth so that it does not slip out.
And then trim the excess ends of the foil with forceps or scissors, and gather those in each place with wax, and hide them under the healthy tooth and the broken tooth so that they do not harm the tongue. And then let it set firmly like mortar.
But if it becomes loose or broken, press it again with more foil in the same manner at all times.
And this is the form of teeth and the method of restoration for two healthy teeth and two broken ones, as shown in these illustrations:
And when one or two teeth return to their proper places after extraction and have been restored as recommended, but still feel loose
Only a skilled and knowledgeable artisan can do this.
And sometimes a bone from an ox is prepared in the shape of a tooth and placed in the space where a tooth is missing, and it is pressed down as described earlier, and it remains there and serves for a long time.
Chapter 34
Of cutting the frenulum that comes on the tongue and obstructs speech
This ligament, which sometimes naturally attaches to the underside of the tongue or is accidentally attached due to a healed wound, can obstruct speech.
And the procedure for this is to open the patient's mouth with their head held back, raise their tongue, and then cut the nerve ligament diagonally until the tongue is freed from its attachment.
But if there is hardness or stiffness in that ligament due to scar tissue from a healed wound, then use tweezers and cut it diagonally until you have completely severed the ligament and released the stiffness.
Be careful not to make a deep incision in the front of the flesh, and cut carefully so as not to cause bleeding.
Then rinse the incision site with warm water or vinegar or fresh water; then apply a linen bandage to the underside of the tongue. This is how the patient should hold their tongue in place at all times to prevent it from healing again later.
But if bleeding occurs, apply a wet cloth soaked in vinegar to the area; but if the bleeding continues, then cauterize the area with a hot iron specifically designed for this purpose. And then treat it with the other causes until it is healed.
Chapter 35
Removal of a ranula from under the tongue
Sometimes, tumors develop beneath the tongue, preventing it from functioning normally and making speech difficult.
The operation involves opening the patient's mouth wide while they face the sun, examining the tumor closely
And if you find it dark or black in color and hard, such that the patient feels no pain thereupon, do not touch it for it is a cancer
And if it appears white and wet, then you should place the cautery on it and cut that thin mucus membrane completely with a scalpel; but if blood appears during the operation, then pause briefly until the bleeding stops before applying the cautery
Then return to your work and complete it until it is healed with care using wine mixed with salt and water; continue treating it with the other cures until it is fully healed
Chapter xxxvi
On the extraction of tumors from the ears and those that are located in the throat, as well as other tumors.
When tumors appear in the throat area, they are usually glandular and consist of adipose tissue that extends outward. These are called "ears," and if you treat them with water as described earlier but they do not heal, then consider whether the tumor is hard, dark colored, and insensitive. If so, do not touch it with an iron instrument.
And if it is red in color and the root is large, then do not touch it with an iron instrument due to the flow of blood. Instead, wait until it matures, and then either extract it or let it break open on its own.
And if it is white in color, hard, and has a thin root, then it should be cut.
And before performing the operation on it, consider whether the tumor has already rested after being cauterized completely or if it has decreased in size. Then perform the surgery early in the morning and with the sun behind you. Hold the patient's head firmly in place, open their mouth wide, and have your assistant press down on the tongue using a fine instrument called a "mouth gag," which is shaped like this:
And it should be made of silver or bronze, thin as possible and sharp as a razor.
Then, with the mouth gag in place and the tumor exposed, make an incision over it using your scalpel. Then grasp the tumor with forceps and hold it firmly in place while you cut away as much of its outer portion as possible. Then, after cutting away some of the connective tissue, make a deeper incision into the tumor using an instrument shaped like this:
Then, after cutting away some of the connective tissue, make a deeper incision into the tumor using an instrument shaped like this: This instrument resembles forceps, but its tips are curved so that the cutting edges of each tip face inward towards one another. It should be made of hardened steel.
"If this tool is not available to you, then cut one using a spatula, the shape of which is as follows: sharp on one side, not sharp on the other."
"And since you have cut one hole, cut the other in this same manner of incision, and then rinse the patient's wounds with warm water"
"But if there is bleeding, rinse with water of decoction of oak bark or myrtle leaves and similar remedies that have astringent properties to stop the bleeding, and then dress the wound once it is healed."
"Sometimes there are other abscesses around the wound, and you should cut those as I have described for the incision of two equal holes."
"And I had already treated a woman with an abscess that had grown in her wound, which tended towards a dark color and little sensation, the wound had already closed, and the woman was breathing with great difficulty, she had already been forbidden to eat or drink water, and she would have died if not for my care over one or two days."
"And the abscess had grown so much that it had sent out two branches through two passages."
"So I inserted a cauterizing tool and left it in one of those openings, and pulled out what I could, then cut off as much as possible from the other passage, and I opened that mouth and compressed her tongue to prevent her from swallowing her own blood."
"And so you removed a large part of it, and only a small amount of blood was flowing from it." "Therefore, it is absolutely necessary to heal that woman immediately. She should start drinking water right away and then promptly take food. Even though the boil was incised many times over a long period, another boil appeared in its place, which continued to spread."
"So I applied a poultice and cauterized the boil on her, then added some more. And promptly, she got up and walked around, not knowing what God had done for her right away."
Chapter XXXVII
Of the incision of a boil when it is swollen
When pus comes out of the boil, and it is swollen and elongated, then it is called perpendicular; but if it is at the start quite thick and round, then it is called a bubo.
But when it is cured with what we have said in the division [of medicine], and your remedy does not help, and especially if sometimes even after cauterization the boil remains hard and subtle, then you should incise that which is rounded and joined together; and if it is of that length, and it is bleeding, of dark color or black, and there is no heat in it, then you should be cautious about incising it, for there is danger over the illness.
And when you find it according to the manner that I have told you of its whiteness and length, then make sure that the illness is gone and press its root with an instrument whose shape matches it exactly, and hold the onion in the new place, and pull it downwards and incise it with one of the instruments mentioned for the incision of boils.
And you should not incise it more than what is appropriate to its natural term without addition, for if you incise too much of it, you will cause it to speak [i.e., cause it to fester or become worse].
And at the time of incision, use what we have recommended for the incision of boils, and treat it afterwards until it is healed.
But if the illness is frightened by the incision of it, then you should use fire in its cauterization without fear, and the manner of cautery on it is not but with hot water, that is to say: you take hold of the head of the boil in your hand, and press its root with the instrument that we have mentioned, and then take some of the water that we have mentioned in the chapter of cauterization, and apply it with that live fire, and pause on that neither thick nor thin, and fill with that the concavity of the instrument whose shape is this:
Let the extremity of its concavity in which the medicine is placed be like the concavity of a spoon, and place the instrument with the medicine on the boil, and let the boil lie on its side so that saliva or mucus from the mouth of that person does not fall into it through the inward medicine, lest some cause for harm come to it.
And then place your hand on the medicine, and squeeze it on the boil for about half an hour until you see that it has become blackened and softened by the bite of the medicine.
And if you wish, take cotton and wrap it around the extremity of the boil, and immerse the cotton in the medicine, and insert the boil with the cotton into a cannula [i.e., a hollow tube] until the cotton adheres to that cannula, and do this many times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the boil, and then leave it alone for about three or four days until it dries up and falls off.
And if you need to repeat the medicine, then repeat it, and at the time of cauterization clean around the boil with cotton dipped in border, and remove from around it what is of the medicine, and wash it with hot water, and afterwards treat it with embrocation, and finally guard it until it is healed.
And this kind of treatment is safer than incision and cautery without fear.
Sometimes the boil is cured with something so subtle that it surpasses cautery and incision, for it is treated by sublimation in this manner: take calamus, hyssop, origanum, rue, Arabic scented sage, chamomile, briony, and other similar herbs of this kind, and join together all those causes or some of them in a pan, and immerse them with sour wine, and boil them; and the pan should be well covered with decent clay, and in the middle of the pan there should be a tube, upon which is placed a concave instrument made of silver or brass whose shape is this:
And the extremity should be inserted into the mouth of the boil so that the steam can reach it through the cannula until the boil is completely obscured.
And then repeat this treatment many times until it is dry, and be sure that you do not perform this cure at the beginning of the appearance of abscesses, for it would be too intense on the abscess, and you should not do this but declare the cautery of the boil.
But if this instrument is not at hand, then take a reed and make at its extremity a wad of wool, so that the mouth of the boil is closed because the wadding of wool prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
And this treatment is good for health.
Chapter XXXVI
Concerning the removal of splinters and that which adheres in the throat, and other causes.
Many times there adhere in the throat a fish bone or some other cause.
"Then you should remove that which is visible from them, over which the cat's eye presses, because you press the tongue with an instrument beforehand, so that what is in the throat may be declared to you."
"And that which does not appear and is hidden in the throat, you should make the patient vomit before the food has been digested in the stomach, because very easily the cause annexed to the throat may be forgotten by vomiting; or else let the patient swallow a piece of bread or a mouthful of lettuce leaves or a cup of dry bread; or take a sponge moistened with lemon juice and tie that firmly to the patient's forehead, for when it reaches the place where its thorns are extracted, then they will be forgotten." "And more you should take an eel and boil it with fennel tied on, and let it be within the table and suddenly it is extracted; or else take a jar and suddenly put it in and suddenly pull it out."
"And if those causes which we have mentioned are not forgotten, then use an instrument of lead according to this form:"
"And it should be thicker than a little finger, and at its end there should be concavity which you insert into the patient's throat with ease."
"And the patient should raise his head upwards and take care that he does not touch with his mouth of the throat, lest it go into his body with that which scrapes bone or spine, or else the physician with his hand."
"But nevertheless the patient should insert it himself, according to his knowledge of the place where the cause is annexed and scrapes downwards, and pulls his hand with the instrument upwards, all this according to the quantity which was prepared beforehand so that it may be forgotten."
"Chapter XXXIX."
"Of the extraction of sanguisuga annexed to the gullet."
"When the sanguisuga is medicated with that which we have said in the division of cure with medicines and it does not confirm itself, then consider the throat of the patient towards the sun, because you should have prepared the tongue of him with the instrument which we have recommended."
"Therefore if you see the sanguisuga, extract it with a hook small or with a subtle gesture appropriately."
"And if it is not possible for you to extract it with that, then take a concave canula and insert it into the throat of the patient, and properly place in the concavity of the canula an iron wire heated, and do this many times (until the sanguisuga is dead and removed from the throat) and keep the patient away from water all day."
"And take a vessel full of warm water and place the mouth of the patient in it, and wash his mouth with that; and do not let any cause or water go through, but rub the water with his hand once again after another hour, because sanguisuga quickly feels the water."
"But if it is not forgotten with what we have recommended, then fumigate the patient with incense or with asafetida through the instrument which we have recommended in the fumigation of the uvula."
"Therefore do this, so that he may be cured."
"And there is another way of operation in fumigation of that (sanguisuga), which is that you take an iron pot in which there are hot coals and the pot covered with a lid in the middle of which there is a hole, and place the extremity of the instrument at that hole; then give the fumigation from above; and make the patient put his mouth at the extremity of the canula, and close his mouth so that the fumigation may not be forgotten until you know that the fumigation has reached the sanguisuga, because sanguisuga will fall quickly."
"And if (the sanguisuga) does not fall, then repeat the fumigation many times, and keep the patient from drinking, and let him eat salted foods and almonds, and do not drink water, and thus it is necessary that with this regimen it may be forgotten."
"And this is the form of the instrument with which sanguisuga is extracted from the throat when it is seen; and it is similar to forceps as you see, except that it has some curvature:" "which is placed in the throat and the extremity of it is like a heron's beak, which is smooth, so that when it takes some cause, it does not let it go."
Captulo XL.
"In this chapter is the sum of the sermon in opening of abscesses and in section of them."
"The abscesses are many species, of many manners, according to how they are remembered of them, each one in this book."
"And they are diverse in perforation and section of them by two manners, of which the one is for the species of abscesses in itself putrefactive; and because of what it takes from humidity."
"And the second manner is proper to the places where they occur in the body, because an abscess that occurs in the head is different from an abscess that occurs in the buttocks; and an abscess in a fleshy place is different from an abscess that occurs in joints; and each one of them has its treatment by operation."
"And more, there are some abscesses which should not be perforated but rather at the maturity of the sanies in those or completion of them."
"So there are other abscesses which should be extracted when they are hard, and not mature according to their completion, such as abscesses that are close to joints, because an abscess when it is close to a joint its being prolonged until it can putrefy what is in its circuit, and very often the ligaments or nerves of that joint are corrupted by it, which causes contraction of that member; or it is an abscess close to a main member, and if you delay the perforation of it until it is fully matured, no harm will come to the main member; or it is close to the buttocks, therefore perforate that not yet matured; and it is not necessary to perforate a hard one with incomplete digestion, but rather that which is close to the buttocks, so that you do not elongate the probe of it into the inner parts of the buttocks and make a fistula, or that it may be made in its term that cannot be healed." "But you should know the hour of the perforation of the abscess, and this is when it is matured."
"And know that it is matured when there is relaxation of the pain and cessation of the fever, and rather the diminution of redness and pulsation, and the sharpness of the head of the abscess, and other signs."
"And because it is necessary that you know the perforation to fall in the place where there is little pus near the abscess and coming from the cure of the prominence."
"And perforation is always made along the length of flesh or skin if abscesses are in the parts of arms or legs and at the elbows, of nerves' tendons, of arteries; and finally in all places where there is no reflection; because those that are reflected use perforation according to that member."
"But when the abscess is in a fleshy place, it is better to leave the perforation of it until its digestion is confirmed according to completion, as we have said; because if you perforate it beforehand, the skin around it will be prolonged and much dirt will accumulate, and often the lips of it will become hardened and its depth."
"But some abscesses are perforated according to the width of flesh or skin due to necessity, or according to what that member requires."
"And it is necessary that you make a small perforation in the case of small abscesses, and a large one with many sections according to the diversity of the size of abscesses."
"And other boils are those which require the chain to be hollowed out and cut when they are made thus that bread is made, as happened in times of plague and swellings."
"And those which are incised in section having three angles; and of these is one that is cut thus like the figure of a fir leaf, like the boils of the lepers."
"And those where round section and moon-like section are administered, resembling them."
"But that one to which it is not done like its superficial boils, for you must perforate it with superficial perforation or flat alone."
"And when the boil is large and has collected much pus, you should perforate it but not worry about extracting all the pus at that time; having extracted some of it one day, then apply a poultice to the boil overnight, and again extract more the next day, doing this many times according to its degree until it is completely opened."
"And especially if the patient is of cold virtue, or a pregnant woman, or a young child, or an elderly person in decay, because many times the animal spirit is resolved with the exit of the pus, and the patient dies easily, and you operate on them."
"Therefore, guard this chapter with great caution, and especially the perforation where you perforate these boils. You must cleanse the wounds and examine whether the boil's wound is little or flat sectioned, then you should apply the poultices of lint or old cotton. And if the boil is large and the fissures of the perforation are many, then you should pause a moment in each draw until they come together."
"And if in the boil a part of the skin is abscissed or has concavity that surrounds it, then you should fill it with old cotton or thread made from linen cloth without moisture; and strengthen it on the third day, and then proceed to heal it with what is needed for dressings until it is healed."
"But if blood flow occurs during your operation, then you should apply water and vinegar in linen cloth, and pause it over the location of the bloody flow many times."
"But if the bleeding persists, then you should apply remedies and dressings and powders which are recommended in many places of this book and division."
"But if it is wintertime and the boil is located in many nerves, then you should apply powders made of hot wine and oil, and pause them over those locations."
"And if it is summertime and the locations are fleshy, then you should pause powders mixed with water and oil or with wine and oil, and all of this should be done until the third day, as we have said. And then you should drain the boil and cleanse it and apply to its dressing what is appropriate for it until it is healed."
"And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the treatment of boils universally, but according to the way of distinction, I have already said how each boil should be treated specifically in its own chapter."
"Chapter 41."
"Of the Incision of Boils which arise on the Neck."
"On the neck there are small boils, and they are like species of knots which contain tunics that are made from them; and their species are many."
"And among them are pimples, and those that contain moisture similar to lime." "And those that contain moisture like dust, akin to them; and those that are stony, hard."
"And in the section of all, and in the extraction of these there is no fear, since their extraction does not cause any damage."
"And the operation in section of those is that you express them with an instrument whose shape appears as follows, which is called 'entromes', until you know what it contains."
"But if that which it contains is moisture, then cut it open along its length with a surface incision in this form:"
"And begin at the section of line B-E, then proceed to line G-D. Once the moisture is evacuated, then remove that which contains that moisture, and do not leave it any cause of pain, for wounded parts quickly return if there remains any cause."
"And if possible, immerse it in Egyptian gum, and if not available, in water and salt. Fill it with that and leave it for another day, for with that you will corrode all that remains of that skin."
"And if necessary, repeat the application of Egyptian gum on that part a second and third time, until you are confident that there remains no cause for that skin to heal. Then dress the wound with ointment until it is healed."
"And if an abscess contains hard knots, then cut into it according to this shape:" "With a section having the form of a cross, and make incisions between the two lips of the section and scrape it from all sides, and use your strength to extract the tunic which contains that."
"But if your artery opposes you, then do what I told you first."
"And similarly act with an indurated abscess in section and cure according to what I have told you. And the incision on an indurated abscess is easier because it contains little blood and moisture."
"And sometimes there are such abscesses which occur in the head of some men who have little humidity; this cause is that once you incise an abscess on the head of an old woman and it becomes like deaf stone, rough, white, which could not be crushed, and if someone struck it with that, they would harm her."
"But in other accidental abscesses on the head that are not of this kind, such as those that appear on the heads of children and behind the ears, the section of these should be superficial."
"And pause the perforation of those in which the pus is low from below so that it may alleviate the body from the lower parts."
"And then dress those with what you consider appropriate for their cure."
"Chapter XLII."
"Of the incision of scrofula that occurs in the neck."
"Often these abscesses occur in the neck, armpits, and groin; sometimes they also occur in other parts of the body."
"And those that occur in the neck are many and often generated among them. And all scrofula of these is within its own tunic, like the knots and abscesses of the head, as we have mentioned."
"And there are many kinds of these scrofula because some are indurated, others contain moisture, and still others are malignant and do not submit to cure."
"Therefore in that which you find in good condition at the Touching, whose color is similar to the color of bone, and it is enlarged in all parts, and is not annexed with the nerve of the neck, nor with the veins, nor with the artery, and is not hard, then cut into it with a superficial section from above to below on the body line from G to the line of B, scrape it from all sides, and extend its lips with incisions or several incisions if you need them, like we said in the abscesses of the head, and extract it little by little."
"And more caution must be taken not to cut into the vein or nerve."
"And let the spatula not be too sharp so that you do not hurt yourself with the incision or cause harm to the patient. And cut into what is necessary to cut and avoid cutting into what is not necessary. For if you should cut into a vein or artery, then pause in the wet plaster of treacle or other powders which stop bleeding, and sprinkle the wound, and let it rest until the sharpness of the abscess subsides and the wound begins to soften and become purulent." "When blood is separated."
"So return to your operation when that is accomplished."
"And then inquire with the little finger if there are any other causes of the remaining small scrofula. Then cut into those and clean them."
"And if it is at the root of a large vein, then do not cut into that scrofula from its root." "Then wrap it with folded lint and let it rest until it falls off by itself without harm."
"And then fill the plaster with cotton wool which you have already immersed in Egyptian ointment, and dress that wound."
"And if you cut into the entire scrofula, then bring together the two lips of the wound and dress it immediately so that there is no remaining emptiness."
"But if you find that there remains emptiness due to the size of the scrofula, then understand how to cut into its root, extract it and apply suture and what is said."
"And that of the scrofula which contains moisture, pierce it with a superficial perforation where you see its point of maturation. Pause piercing from that where the pus is low in the body, as we have said."
"And then apply a dressing with ointment and similar things to remove what remains of the corruption." "And then when you see that the wound is clean, dress it with an ointment for generating flesh until it is healed."
"Chapter XLIII."
"Of the section of the piloth of an accidental abscess inside the cheek."
"The ancients called this section 'the epiloth,' and we have not seen any man in our land who has performed it."
"And this is the inscription of the speech on that."
"But in men there is squinting, therefore the extraction of the epiloth should be avoided because it does not bring any benefit since all the veins and large ones of the disease are here."
"But in those who have abscesses cauterized in the mouth or cheek or ears when the disease is not on the bone, then use the section of the epiloth to avoid the damage that would be caused by perforation."
"Therefore when we want this, let us cut the epiloth on the outer three circles of the circles of the epiloth, or four with a small section across its width between two circles in quantity. Let the section be made in the bone, not in the cartilage. This place is suitable for cutting because it lacks flesh and its blood vessels are removed."
"And if the physician is afraid, then let him extend the cheek of the cheekbone with incisions, and next cut into the bone until it reaches the canal, but avoid the blood vessels if he sees any cause."
"And then cut the ciphalic as we have recommended, and it is signified above by the inflammation that issues from there with what is of its disruption and by the absence of voice."
"Leave the wound open for some time."
"Once the expected healing time has passed, add two lips of skin from the wound's edge and cut only the cartilage."
"And apply medicine that promotes flesh growth to ensure complete healing."
"Albuccasis said that the main point of this discussion is to open veins that some have closed due to these boils, as the patient has come close to death and their breath has been cut off. Some will go on to incise the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe over the wound for a short while, thus saving them from death."
"And therefore command to leave the wound open until the evil of the disease is consumed; and the evil of it lasts for three days. And then afterwards close the wound, and care for it until it heals."
"And I have seen that a servant took a knife and cut his own throat, and I was called to cure him. When I arrived, he was groaning like a dead person, and when I opened the wound I found blood pouring out from it."
"Therefore I concluded that he had not cut any vein or artery, and the wind was coming out of the wound. And so I cured him until it healed."
"And it did not happen to the servant that he lost his voice, and after some days I returned to examine his condition."
"And now you say that in the section of the epiglottis there is no danger."
"Chapter XLIV."
"About the incision over an abscess that occurs in the throat externally, which is called a herniation of the throat."
"Hernia of the groin named apostema is a large swelling according to the color of the body, especially in women."
"And it occurs in two ways, either naturally or accidentally."
"It is not in nature to heal."
"There are two kinds of accidents: one resembling varicose veins and the other resembling an ulcer caused by the rupture of an artery. Fear is present in both." "And only the one that is called for should be approached with iron, not any other." "And if you find that one resembling varicose veins but not suspended from any vein, then cut it like nodes and remove it with water containing salt and turpentine. But first examine the whole of its being and apply appropriate treatment until it is healed."
Chapter XLIV
"On the sectioning of types of nodes."
"And concerning these kinds of knots, all their species have already been discussed in the division."
"Therefore, it is necessary that you explain here the difference between a knot and an exitura, as there may be doubt about this."
"Therefore, I say that an exitura is characterized by heat and fever with intense pain until the boiling of the surplus has been quieted. It is a completed putrefaction which then ceases the fever, the pain, and the heat."
"But a knot does not have heat or fever or pain. It contains only chyle in its own sac."
"The condition of the body and its onset resemble that of a pig, with swelling similar to an empty barrel, large or small. There are two types: one is fatty and contains moisture, and the color of this moisture varies as I have described in the division."
"Therefore, when you arrive at the treatment of a nodule, examine it and ask about its beginning, which is called 'intromes', according to what form it takes as described in this chapter."
"And this is the manner of inquiry for apostemes and all kinds of nodes: take this instrument and insert it into the moist place that you find in the aposteme, then slowly turn your fingers with it until you know that the instrument has pierced through the skin."
"And finally, press your hand down according to the size of the aposteme, then extract the instrument and observe what has come out in its wake."
"And if the current moisture is forgotten, regardless of its color, then cut it with a superficial section as I have said for other apostemes."
"And if there is no moisture from the trail of the instrument, know that it is fatty."
"And if you dry it with a section having the shape of a cross in this form:" "So do it as you've been taught, suspend that limb with its tip pointing downwards, and carefully cut the cord on all sides. Guard the placenta or sac if possible over that and extract the afterbirth by pulling on the umbilical cord."
"But if it breaks during the operation, it is not possible to extract that afterbirth, and many times it stays there. Therefore you remove it piece by piece until there is no more cause for it."
"And if any part remains, little or much, the cord will return according to its own manner."
"And if you find that a small piece remains, then sprinkle some powdered corrosives on it, burn the wound and cover it with a hot cautery to heal. Then treat it with other cures until it is healed."
"And if the cord is long, then cut both lips of it and cure it as it is."
"But if the umbilical pulse is against it, or non-pulsating, then cut and cauterize the place where it was attached with a hot iron. Leave that area alone for two or three days until the wound heals and the bleeding stops; then return to cutting what remains of the cord."
Chapter XLVI
"Concerning the forms of instruments necessary for section and perforation."
"These are the shapes of inner organs, and they are of three kinds: some are large, some medium-sized, and some small."
"The shape of the large inner organ is as follows:"
"The shape of the small inner organ is this:"
"They are made of iron, aluminum, and carefully crafted extremities, so that they can be inserted into the wound without causing pain."
"And these are the shapes of experiences, called albereds; one of them is called berid."
"And they are of three kinds: some are large, medium-sized, and few."
"The shape of the large experience is shaped like a moon:"
"The shape of the medium-sized experience is also shaped like a moon:"
"The shape of the small experience is also shaped like a moon:"
"It is convenient that they are used for wounds, exits and fistulas, and buboes, since among those there are also cases of bones and other causes."
"And they are made redondas, thick, pointed, just like large needles with which the sutures are sewn, and they are made of citrine glass, or of iron, or of silver; but the best ones are those made of citrine glass."
"And they are made of black feathers, which agree that through them the fistulas are opened in whose concavity there are reflections, which are reflected with their own levitation with those reflections."
"And they are of three kinds: some are long, others medium-sized, and still others short, depending on the quantity of the width of the fistula and its stricture."
"Shape of the large lead experience:"
"Shape of the medium-sized lead experience:"
"Shape of the small lead experience:"
"The shapes of the hooks are of many kinds, for some are simple ones that have only one curvature, and they are of three sizes: large, small, and medium-sized."
"And among them there are curved hooks, and they are of three kinds:"
"And among those that are curved there are some with two curvatures, and they are of three sizes."
"And among them there are some with three curvatures, and they are of three kinds:"
"All these things are necessary in their place."
"A single claw-shaped form, a form of it."
"A large claw shape with two curves." "Smaller claw shape having two curves." "Small claw shape having two curves."
"A large claw shape with three curves."
"Smaller claw shape having three curves."
"And these are the shapes of the scalpels used to cut and scrape off nodes and scabs, and they come in three sizes: large, medium, and small."
"Large scalpel shape"
"Medium scalpel shape"
"Small scalpel shape"
"The tips of those used for sectioning are sharp and the others are not sharp but blunt, not in such a way that it may cause injury to veins or nerves during the scraping off of nodes, and so that healing may be promoted and tranquility obtained through the abrasion which follows the scraping off of the scab."
"And these are the shapes of forceps, and they come in three sizes: large, medium, and small, as you can see."
"They are made of iron and resemble rods with which alcohol is distilled."
"And at the end there is a hollowed-out point covered with a spatula and on both sides there are partitions inside and outside, as you see."
"The shapes of spatulas, which are used to hide between the aforementioned devices during the perforation of scabs and not perceived by the sick, come in three sizes: large, medium, and small." "And these are the shapes:"
"The shapes of forceps used to absorb blood flow and come in three sizes: large, medium, and small."
"They are made of citrus iron, round with some length, and they are thin."
"And it is necessary that these sizes of forceps be available to you in large, medium, and small, so that through them blood flow may be absorbed quickly in case of necessity, and also when medicine is not immediately available."
"But do not use them to absorb blood in all parts of the body, and only use them in fleshy places, such as in the armpits, groins, breasts, belly button, buttocks, and similar moist flesh."
"And sometimes these instruments are made in another small shape similar to tweezers according to this form: through which blood is absorbed when it is done by phlebotomy or incising veins or arteries."
"And sometimes they are made round like this:"
"Chapter XLVI."
Of the care of the breasts of men which are similar to those of women.
Some men's nipples may become erect during sleep due to the coldness and they may appear similar to those of women, becoming tumescent.
And with regard to that which you have read above, if it occurs on the lunar section according to this shape, from line B to line G, and then remove all thickness, and then fill in the wound with medicinal wax, and then join the two lips of the wound with stitching, and care for it until it heals.
But if the nipple declines towards its sides and becomes softened by its size like that of women, then it should be cut in two on both sides with two sections resembling a crescent moon shape, each contained within the other at their ends so that the major line contains the minor according to this form from line B to line G. Then remove the skin between the two lips of the wound and cleanse it, administering what has been said regarding suturing and powders as necessary for its healing until it is healed.
And if you do not perform the incision of that which ought to be incised due to the restlessness of the illness and flow of blood, then you should fill in the wound with a cotton swab dipped in corrosive ointment and let it remain until it has eaten away all that is rotten from its thickness, and then care for it until it heals.
Chapter XLVIII
On the perforation of boils that come up on the testicles.
These boils that arise on the testicles are of the species of scrofula, hard ones which contain a head that can be squeezed out.
And those which contain moisture should be incised with a crescent moon section according to this figure: from line G to line B. And once everything that is inside the boil has been evacuated of its impurity, then fill it with cotton wool and leave it for another day.
Then remove the cotton and care for it with an appropriate ointment until it heals.
"If the aposteme is of the species of knots, and of scrofula, then you should incise it as we have said in the section on unequal scrofula."
"If the plague has spread to such an extent that there is putrefaction, then you should apply a caustic as we have said earlier."
"Chapter XLIX."
"On the section of apostemes that occur by chance or by vein."
"When an artery is broken and the vein above it is thrombosed, often an aposteme occurs. The signs by which it is known that inflammation and aposteme are due to an artery or a vein: for when an aposteme is due to an artery, it is elongated towards the chest; and when you press on the aposteme with your fingers, you feel stridor."
"And that which is due to a vein is round in appearance."
"And the section about this aposteme is erroneous, especially in those that are on the left side of the belly, and in the anus, and neck, and many other parts of the body; and it is very large, therefore its cure with iron should be avoided, and that which is on the extremities or on the head should also be avoided."
"Moreover, about that which occurs due to inflammation of the orrifice of the artery, cutting into the vein section in its length; and approximate the section with hooks and approximate the artery, removing the tunics until it is exposed."
"And approximate thus: place that needle and make it penetrate through to the other side; and then twist the artery with doubled silk thread in two places,  which causes you to see how to extract both arteries which are located on the temples."
"And approximate thus: puncture the location that is between two ligaments with a spatula until all the blood present there is discharged, and so the aposteme will be dissolved."
"And approximate thus: apply treatment that produces pus, until the ligaments fall; and then cure it with proper dressings until it is healed."
"And if it is an aposteme due to a vein section, then you should have with your hand whatever is possible of the aposteme with the cord, and approximate the needle from the side of the location that you have held in your hand, making it penetrate; and place it in doubled silk thread so that you can extract it from the other side, and then ligate the aposteme with good ligature according to what I told you about the grapevine, on both sides with two extremities of the thread."
"But if you fear that the thread may be extracted, then insert the silk thread with that needle from both sides of the whole aposteme along the incision of the first needle, and twist your threads in four places."
"Then dry the aposteme in its middle part until when it is dried out whatever is present in it, then incise the superfluity of the cord, and leave what is tied of it."
"And then pour over it powder that you have submerged in wine and oil, and then apply the treatment that is done with compresses and dressings until it is healed."
"Chapter 1 about the aposteme that occurs due to torsion of nerves."
"Just as an aposteme occurs in the artery and vein, likewise it also occurs in nerves when they are struck or occur due to excessive labor, and for similar reasons."
"And the majority of them occur in the locations of the tendons or the heel, or in any location where joints are movable."
"And it is a severe aposteme, resembling the color of other flesh, and its disposition is mostly without sensation when it is squeezed with violence, there is in it a similar sensation to stupor."
"And it is not an aposteme attached to the chest wall, and therefore it is detached from the cord, and it moves with all its parts but does not move forward nor backward."
"Therefore, those that are in joints should not be bandaged with iron, because it would cause severe contraction."
"But that one which is on the head or forehead should cut off the cord with a scalpel." "But if it is a small aposteme, then take it with forceps and excise it with razors."
"And if it is large, then suspend it with forceps and scrape it out, and then cauterize it; and adjust the wound with suture, and treat it until it is healed."
"Chapter LII."
"About incision of an aposteme that occurs due to cholecystitis that occurred in the abdomen."
"Therefore, some people observe in the bellies of those and in the other parts of their bodies certain fungous-like tumors, which have a fine root and a large head; whose lips are turned inward, and they are both small and greatly magnified."
"And I have already seen one, in whose belly there were two tumors resembling fungi, and there was no difference between them except that they were white with fine roots."
"And the lips of those were turned inward and parted, and moisture flowed from it constantly."
"So I incised them and found that one weighed eighteen ounces and the other six."
"And during the operation of incision, if you observe that the pain is humid and the color of it is white and humid with a fine root, then cut it with a wide scalpel and have ready cautery in the fire nearby, because many times much blood will be expelled from its section; and if blood flows out, cauterize it."
"And if the pain is fearful and dreadful, guard against incision with iron; but instead take fresh lead wire and stretch it over that tumor in the manner which we have said; and leave it for two days."
"And then adjust in the constriction of the lead wire; therefore do not cease to stretch the lead until it is entirely cut off and falls away by itself without working."
"But if the tumor has a coarse root, then during its incision there is some cause for fear and dread, especially those that are in the belly."
"But it is possible for you to incise most of it, and then cauterize it so that it does not return."
"And then treat it until the wound is healed."
"And guard yourself against presuming to incise a tumor that is of dark color, with little sensation, and regularly observed, for it is an abscess."
"And I recall here a case of cancer."
"Chapter LII."
"About treatment of herniation of the umbilical cord."
"Herniation of the umbilical cord is caused by many things: either by fissures of the ciphac that is on the belly, or by the tissue or bud that ends up in other ruptures; or by blood flowing from vein or artery, as mentioned earlier, or by constricted wind."
"If it's due to an opening in the hip and discharge of fluid, then the color of the abscess is like the color of the body; there is no pain, and it appears suddenly." "And if it's due to an exit of the bowel, then its position is much more varied than what we have described above. When you press on it with your fingers, it hides and suddenly returns; its sound is loud, and it causes much greater pain."
"If due to moisture, then there is no pain, and when you press with your hand, it does not hide, nor is it tense or swollen."
"And if it's due to blood, then the abscess appears blackish."
"But if it's due to raw flesh, then the abscess is hard, thick and firm, and it is filled with a considerable amount."
"However, if it's due to windiness, then touching it causes no pain."
"And the operation in this case is that you should consider whether the prominence of the navel is due to arterial or venous blood, or windiness. However, you should refrain from treating it, because there is fear and danger in this case, as I have taught you in the chapter where I spoke about abscesses caused by arteries and veins."
"And if the prominence of the navel is due to the bowel or the tissue, then you should command the patient to lie on their back with their arms extended. Then, signal with your finger around the entire navel area, and next command them to turn onto their hands and knees over a pillow placed under their buttocks. Next, circle the navel area with a broad spatula, pressing on the spot you signaled with your finger. Then extend the swelling of the abscess upwards using a large spoon; finally, ligate it around its base using strong thread or string, tying in the proper manner."
"And then, grasp the middle of the extended abscess with your hand and introduce your finger into it, seeking the bowel. If you find it and grab it with your finger, then carefully extract it and push it back inside the abdomen."
"But if you have found only tissue, then grasp it with a spoon and remove its excess."
"However, if it's against your artery or vein, then encircle that spot and return to your operation. Then take two needles and insert them into two strong threads. Insert the needles into the circle you made around the abscess in a cross-like manner, making sure they penetrate. Finally, stretch the abscess in four directions over the needles."
"And if you wish, remove the needles and allow the stretched skin to fall back into place. Or, if it's thin enough, cut it when it has become suppurated and can be removed, and then treat it with water that is suitable for healing wounds."
"If the prominence of the navel is due to fat or humidity, then you should treat the abscess as we have said and remove the blood or moisture that you find inside it. Then treat it with water suitable for healing wounds and consolidating the area."
Captulo LIII
Aqu est el texto en cataln medieval:
"We have spoken, in the division of kinds of cancer and the manner in which it is approached for treatment with medicines, that surgery can be avoided to prevent ulcers; we have spoken of cancer generated in the breast and caution in its treatment."
"And the ancients said that sometimes cancer is in a place where eradication is possible, as with cancer found in the breasts or in the skin and around the limbs, especially when it starts out small."
"But once cancer is advanced and grave, there is nothing that can be done about it, for I have never seen anyone cured of it nor heard of another who has."
"And the operation on it is as we have said: you should precede by removing and cleansing away black humors sometimes, and then cauterize it if there is manifest tumorous swelling."
"And prepare the patient with preparations appropriate to where it is located for operation, and then prohibit certain foods which are harmful to that person, and also cauterize all parts with a hot iron after good excision so that there remains no cause for cancer's return." "And let the blood flow freely, and do not remove it too lightly; express the places and wipe away the thick blood with your hand or with an instrument which is at your disposal among the instruments."
"But if there is difficulty with thick blood in the incision of a vein or artery, then cauterize it until the flow of blood has ceased, and then treat it with another treatment so that it may be healed."
"Chapter 50"
"Of the Treatment of Dropsy."
"We have already discussed, in our division, the varieties of watery dropsy and their symptoms, as well as treatments for them using medications."
"And that which is treated with iron is only the species of hydrops alone, and it is not appropriate to approach with iron the species of tympanitic dropsy or the species of hypochondriac dropsy, for these are fatal."
"And when you have treated this tympanitic dropsy species with medications and find that your treatment is ineffective, then consider whether the patient has already reached debility from it, or if there is another kind of dropsy present, such as in cases of coughing or abdominal distension and similar ones. Then be careful not to treat it with iron, for fear of harm."
"But if the patient has an abundance of strength and there is no other illness present besides simple dropsy, neither infantile nor senile, then the manner of its operation is as follows: elevate the patient between your hands, and have the assistant press the patient's abdomen with his hand, pressing out water from it near the navel, and then take a pointed spatula in this form:"
"It should be long and pointed at both ends like a spatula; however, it should also have some shortness little by little, so that during the operation with it you do not pass into the bowel and thus damage it."
"And then consider whether the dropsy is generated from the bowels, for if it is, then you should make your incision along with the navel by three digits' breadth towards the sides, on the right side above the pubis."
"But if the dropsy is caused by an illness of the liver, then your incision should be on the left side of the navel by three digits."
"And if its cause is from the spleen, then your incision should be on the left side."
"And do not make your incision over the side where you want to draw off the fluid, so that it does not run back to that spot."
"And then perforate the entire cord with the instrument and enter through that incision. Then elevate your hand with the spatula between the cord and the syphon, and draw it out; and if there is a quantity of one fingernail or less."
"And then pierce the syphon within until the spatula reaches the desired spot, and this is where the water is located." "And then remove that one (the cord) and insert an instrument of which this is the form:" "And it is similar to a thin silver cannula. It is made of silver or brass or lion's hide, and at its lower end there is a small hole, and on its sides there are three holes: two on one side and one on the other. And its tip is cut obliquely like a feather quill."
"And at its upper end there is a ring, for when the instrument reaches the water, then that water will immediately rush out onto the instrument. Therefore, be careful not to evacuate too much water at once, because if you do so more than necessary at that time, either the patient may die from dissolution of his vital spirit, or he may become unconscious and approach death."
"But evacuate according to the quantity of his strength, and also consider the disposition of the illness, the strength of his pulse, and his general condition."
"And then remove the instrument and retain the water that is drawn off, because immediately it will be retained by the cord which retains the hole that is above the syphon, of which you should pierce it in this manner."
"And then repeat the procedure on another day if the patient tolerates it, and draw off a small quantity of water. And do this for several days in succession out of fear that there might remain only a little water."
"But if you are afraid of harming the patient and draw off too much water, then treat him with a burial in hot sand, and give him a bath with plenty of salt, and expose him to the sun for a long time. And also treat him with drying medicines until he is healed."
"And cauterize the stomach, spleen, and liver near the site of water removal, as I have described previously in this book."
"Chapter LIV."
"Of the treatment of children who are born withimperforate urinary openings."
"Sometimes, some children are born from their mother's womb and the head of their mixture is not pierced (or is drawn too narrow or not in its place).
Therefore, you must cut it immediately after it is born with a very fine spatula following this form:
Then pause in the draw a subtle lead awl and tie that, and leave it for three days or four.
And when they want to urinate let them move away and piss; then return that (i.e., put the awl back in its place).
But if you do not pause with the lead, it is possible that the urine which goes over that place will not let this close.
But that one whose draw is narrow should be treated with a lead awl, as we have said, for several days until it becomes widened.
But those in which the draw is not in its place are said to be led, whose cause is that some, at birth, have the end of the penis crooked due to which they cannot urinate correctly, until they raise the penis with their hand towards the top; and this is not due to generation because sperm cannot reach the mother correctly, and it is a very serious illness.
And the manner of the operation in this case is that the sick one should be placed on his back, and then stretch the head of the penis with your left hand with violent traction, and cut off the end of the head of the penis from the opening of the urethra with a sharp spatula, just like plucking a feather, without removing any part of it, so that the middle of it resembles the head of the penis and the draw falls into its proper place.
And be careful during your operation of blood flow, because many times this happens; pause at the point where you cut off the blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
Chapter LV
Of whiteness which occurs in the foreskin at the head of the penis, and of roughness and blackness and adherence of the foreskin to the head of the penis.
Often this whiteness occurs on the penis and it is a fleshy protuberance.
And of that one, some are malignant and others are not malignant.
The non-malignant one, it is necessary to suspend with a fine hook and cut it off until it is completely removed; then pause on that cut with cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment; then cure it with soft ointment until it is healed.
And if the whiteness is malignant, of a dark color, then you must apply cautery immediately at the incision and removal of it.
But if the whiteness is on the foreskin of the uncircumcised head of the penis, and one part of the whiteness is inside the foreskin and the other part is outside, then you should remove the whiteness that is inside at the beginning until it is consolidated; then you should cure what is outside because if you cure both together with the foreskin, it is not certain that it will not be gripped.
And it often happens in the groin and foreskin blackness and roughness, then you must remove everything that is already darkened and about to corrupt or has already corrupted; and then line over it with honey, which is thickened with ground millet flour and three parts of well-sifted barley flour.
And then cure it with the other cure until it is healed.
"But if blood flow is excessive, then administer a cautery lunar according to this form:"
"The cautery jugulare consists of two positions at the same time: one for blood flow and another for the plague when it is putrefied."
"And if the head of the glans is destroyed and all in one hour, then you must insert a lead cannula into the meatus of the foreskin so that the patient can urinate through it."
"In the adhesion of the foreskin to the glans (and this adhesion occurs only in those for whom the foreskin is short, and over it circumcision is not required; and when adhesion occurs due to plague or abscess) you must excise with a blunt spatula until the adhesion is dissolved and the head of the glans is completely freed from all parts."
"And if it is difficult to distinguish those parts precisely, then you must excise with a spatula some cause from the head of the glans and foreskin, and this is how: when the foreskin is thin, it is easily perforated by its thinness lightly."
"And then separate the foreskin from the head of the glans with thin thread, which has been moistened in warm water so that they do not adhere again."
"And then it should be treated with astringent wine until it is consolidated."
"Chapter Fifty-Seven."
"Concerning the care of children and the treatment of what occurs during their circumcision."
"Circumcision is not a cure for continuity like other plagues: yet since it is our operation and done willingly, especially in the case of children, it is necessary that we assign to this procedure the best method and easiest path so that they may lose their health."
"I say that the ancients did not call it circumcision in some of their books because they did not use it in their laws. This is because, through experience, we have discovered this practice, which I have found most artisans and barbers use for circumcision and purification with a razor and torches; and they also use liniment made from pitch and make an incision with the nail."
"And I have already tried all these methods and found that purification with forceps, liniment made from pitch used for purification with the nail causes many escapes because the frenum of the foreskin has two tunics, and the inner one remains after the outer one is removed. It is very difficult to make another incision safely without causing pain." "And in the purification that is done with forceps, which is called digital, used by the Sabbath-keepers, it is not assured that the incision at the tip of the male member will be made safely because it often goes into the tissue."
"Moreover, in the operation done with a nail, often blood will flow and spoil your operation." "And the child's spine is naturally short, and many times it appears in this manner so that there is no need for correction, and I have seen such."
"Moreover, with respect to the correction that is done using forceps and ligatures with pitch, the good quality and experiment demonstrated to me that these forceps have proportional incisions because the sharpness above is equal to the sharpness below. And therefore when you press your hand so proportionally on both sharp edges, you will cut evenly according to a comparison in one time; and there will be compression of the pitch with a figure containing the spine of the whole cord, with which there can be no error at all."
"And the manner of the first operation is that you make the child lie on its back if it is one of those who understands a little, so that you do not do anything else except cut the skin over the spine and leave it to heal for another day."
"And properly do thus as much as is possible according to what you have received of his understanding." "And properly make him lie between your most prepared assistants, and let there be no noise or fuss; and hide the forceps in your hand or behind his head so that the child does not see them nor anyone else of the instruments."
"And properly put your hand on the spine of the child and blow on the cord, and pull that part out which is above the head of the spine, and properly cleanse it from what has adhered to it from dirt."
"The form of forceps for cleansing is as follows:"
"Let the outer ones be not-cutting and sharp, so that the branch of the key is not seen outside, and let their length be as much as the length of two equal handles."
"But the error in cleansing is when you pull out the cord too strongly entirely or partly from where it was cut."
"Therefore, you should stretch that out with your thumbnail in front of the aposteme of the place and cut it evenly."
"And if you cannot hold it with your thumbnail, then extract it with forceps and cut it."
"But if three days have passed and that which is inflamed behind the spine remains, then you should let it be until the aposteme is cauterized, and remove it easily, and cut it according to what has been prepared by you."
"And beware of the head of the spine, for it does not have any fat on it."
"And then treat him with what the plague consolidates from the powders which we have recommended in the treatise on powders."
"If it is cut evenly and you follow the sections above, there will be nothing wrong with it."
"But also treat him with what we have said until he is healed."
"Chapter LVIII"
"Of the treatment of urine retained in the bladder."
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction due to stone or congealed blood, or by poverty or debility, and it resembles that which we have mentioned concerning the methods of treatment in this section.
And if the urine is not dissolved even with what we have said above and there is still retention in the patient, then it is necessary to perform extraction using an instrument called a syrinx, which has this form: It should be made of silver and be very fine and smooth, like a quill pen with subtle thickness similar to half a palm, at whose head there is a fine canal.
And the manner of using this instrument to extract urine is as follows: Take the thread doubled and tie it at the extremity of the wick or cotton with a good knot; then insert the extremities of the thread into the part below the syrinx, and cut away any excess cotton with scissors, but insert the thread into the canal with vehemence. Then proceed to introduce the syrinx gently along the border and with oil.
And then lie the patient on their back and insert the syrinx into the bladder along with olive oil and warm water.
And then gently introduce the syrinx until it reaches the bottom of the bladder; and then bend the patient's back upwards at the level of the navel; and then push the syrinx down into that; and then push it further until it reaches the bladder, and when it feels that the urine has reached its cause, withdraw it in this order, but if there is difficulty due to tortuosity, change the position accordingly.
And then slowly pull out the thread along with the wick little by little, because the urine adheres to the wick.
And then remove that and perform treatment with urine, using the syrinx until the bladder is emptied and the patient feels relief.
Captulo 9 (LIX)
On the quality of catheterization of the bladder using a clump cedar and similar instruments that are suitable for this purpose.
When it happens that there is ulceration or an abscess in the bladder, or congealed blood appears in it, or it becomes obstructed by stones, and one wants to drip water and medications into it, then it should be done using an instrument called a clump cedar, which has this form:
but at its extremity, it is blunt, so it is closed. And it has three holes: two on one side and one on the other.
"In the beginning is the hollow place where this thing called 'whirlpool' resides. Its quantity varies according to what enters it without addition; when any cause draws out its humidity, let it be drawn out. And when something is expelled from it, with that, let it also be drawn out. The longer it expels, the more like a clapper it becomes, with which naphtha is struck in the battles of the sea."
"Therefore, when you want to expel humidity from the bladder, insert the tip of the syringe into the humidity and draw with it that which is expelled upwards, for the humidity is drawn into the concavity of the syringe."
"And likewise insert the tip of the syringe into the urethra as we have described in the operation. And similarly expel the humidity with that which you expel, for that humidity reaches the bladder immediately, and the illness ceases thereby."
"And this is the form of the subtle syringe with which the bladder is rinsed:"
"Let there be made from silver or lead, of which the end should resemble a small feather, and place it within."
"And then take a bladder from the animal, place in it the moisture you wish to crystallize, tie the mouth of the bladder tightly with strong thread doubled over, and heat that moisture over the fire."
"And then insert the tip of the crystal into the crucible."
"And then, with your hand on the bladder containing the stretched moisture, wait until that moisture has completely penetrated into the vessel."
"But if you do not have a bladder present, then take a piece of parchment and make from it a circle; pierce that circle throughout its entirety; and then insert strong thread into those perforations, so that they may be rotated; and then attach the circle in such a way that it is attached as aforementioned, because you will place in that one what you wish to extract moistures from, oils and waters."
"And then tie that (sc. the circle) onto the instrument and do with it as you have done with the bladder, and press with your hand until the moisture has penetrated into the vessel."
"Chapter .lx."
"Of extraction of urine."
"We have already spoken in the division of the species of urine and cure with medicines, and the difference between urine generated from the kidneys and urine generated from the bladder, and the signs of that."
"And we have said about urine in which cauterization and section are operated."
"And the urine generated from the bladder properly speaking is that which remains in the bladder."
"And I now tell this story with manifest exposition and abbreviation."
Therefore, stones generated in the bladder mainly affect children. And among its symptoms are that the urine expelled from the bladder resembles water in its subtlety and appears in that region; and the patient rubs their genitals, often pants, and is suddenly erect. At this point, the anus becomes open to those things.
"And it would be easier to heal children of that illness who have reached fourteen years old; and difficult cure in the elderly." "But among young people, this is halfway between those things."
"And from that one where the stone is greater and its cure easier. But if it is small, it is contrary to this."
Therefore, when we arrive at the treatment of this, it is necessary at the beginning that we cleanse the patient with a clyster that draws out all the feces that are in his bowels; for that crack sometimes prevents the descent of the stone due to its examination.
"And then let the patient be taken with his feet and stretched out and shaken until the stone descends to the neck of the bladder, or what comes out of its place sometimes."
"And then let that clyster be administered between the thighs, and more of it be poured onto those things there, so that the bladder may be entirely inclined towards those parts."
"And then let him urinate and all of that deficiency."
Therefore, if you feel the stone in its place, immediately cut over it with an incision.
And if you cannot grasp it all with your fingers, then you must anoint your left index finger (if the patient is a child) or your middle finger (if they are an adult) with oil and insert that into their anus. "And then let him urinate until it stays there with your fingers." "And slowly bring it out little by little through the neck of the bladder,"
"And then press on it with your finger and expel it to those parts outside where you made the incision."
"And command the minister to press on the bladder with his hand; and command another minister to extend the testicles upwards with his right hand, and with his other hand draw back the cord that is below them, towards the place where the incision is made."
"And then introduce a spatula beveled thus: "And cut into him what is between the buttocks and genitals, not in the middle place, rather towards the left side; let the incision be over that bone, and keep your finger on the anus during the incision, making it transverse so that the outside is wide but inside narrow according to how much of the bone can be safely removed without compromising the integrity of the anus."
"And know that part of the stone has some angle and edge, making its removal difficult because of this."
"And of that which is like an acorn, round, easy removal can be made from it."
"Therefore if it has angle and edge, adjust it into the groove."
"And if it is not thus forgotten, then press upon that with a suitable gesture decently, the end of which should be like a chisel with which you press upon the stone, and do not let it slip away; or else insert that subtle instrument with curved extremity into it."
"But if you cannot press upon that (the stone), then widen the incision a little; and if you see flow of blood, cut deeper upon it with a sharp lancet."
"But if the stone is more than one, then at the beginning press your hand upon the mouth of the bladder and cut above it; and press a little on that; and similarly act if there are many more than two."
"And if it is a large stone, then ignorance would be to cut upon it with a large section, for the sick person suffers from one of two causes: either retention or inflammation due to continuous distillation of urine, because the place is not entirely consolidated."
"But if expulsion of that which is forgotten inside cannot be achieved, then use forceps within the fracture to extract it in pieces."
"Therefore once you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with powder of Aloes and dragon's blood, and press upon it." "And place over that cloth infused in oil and wine, or in olive oil and washed with water, so that the wound may be sealed against inflammation."
"And then let the patient lie on his back on a bolster for three days without allowing him to get up from bed."
"And when that air is released, envelop the area with hot water and much oil, then treat it with fine ointment of dragon's blood until it is healed."
"But if in the hernia there occurs an aposteme that is hard and corrosive, like when blood congeals in the bladder (and this is known by the exit of blood with urine), then insert your finger into the hernia and remove that blood, because if it remains it will provoke corruption in the bladder and from there putrefaction."
"And then wash the hernia with vinegar, water, and salt, and use an opposing remedy according to what is appropriate for its cure until it is healed."
"And during all the hours of the treatment, you should lie down with both knees raised and adjust the medicines that were placed on the affected area."
"And if the stone is small and it is in the middle of the urethra, embedded there, and emission of urine is prohibited, then cure that with what I recommend before you come to incision, because many times this cure has been attributed to incision; but now I will tell you about it: take a fine iron probe, which has this shape:"
"of triangular shape at the end, sharp, inserted into wood."
"And then take a thread, and tie it with that around the urethra on the side of the stone so that it does not return to the bladder."
"Then carefully insert the iron into the foreskin, piercing it gently until the piercer reaches that point." "Slowly rotate the piercer with your hand in that point, and continue piercing until you feel it come out on the other side; for urine is about to be released."
"And now press your hand over what has been torn from the foreskin's departure point; for it is clenched and forgotten with urine, and the patient is healed."
"But if this procedure is not suitable for some reason which prevents it, then tie one string below the foreskin and another above it." "And now cut the foreskin between those two ties." "And now remove that (the foreskin)." "And then untie the thread and cleanse the clotted blood, which has formed in the wound."
"And there is no need for the lower string around the foreskin except to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and the upper string only serves to keep the wound open when it is untied near the exit of the foreskin."
"And therefore, when you have tied the string above, it is necessary to elevate the penis upwards at its base so that it does not return to its original position and close the wound as we have said."
Chapter LXI.
About the removal of foreskin from women
The foreskin in women is rarely formed.
"If any stone appears in that region, then the cure is difficult, and it is prohibited by many methods."
"One of them is if the woman's thighs are very close together."
"And another one is if you cannot find a woman who knows how to uncover whether she could have sex with the doctor when she is chaste, or if she is among married women."
"The third one is if you cannot find a woman who knows this craft, especially the operation concerning men."
"And the fourth one is that the location of the section about stone in women is far from the location of the stone, so it requires a preliminary section, and there is fear in that."
"But if necessity forces you to do this, then you should take a female doctor who knows well and is rarely embarrassed."
"But if you are deprived of that [a female doctor], then seek a clever and subtle physician, or present a mature midwife experienced in the deeds of women, or a woman who has some partition in this craft."
"So have that one [a female doctor or midwife] present, and command her to do all that you will order, from the examination about the stone at the beginning; for this reason: so that she may observe whether the woman is a virgin. If she is, then it is necessary that she puts her finger in the vulva of the woman and seeks the stone."
"So if she finds it, then remove her finger, and then command her to insert [a catheter] over that [the stone]."
"But if she is not a virgin, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the vagina of the patient and examine for the stone, because by placing her left hand on the bladder, she will understand it well."
"So if she finds it, then gradually move her finger from the opening of the bladder to its parts, with the sum of her strength, until she arrives at the reason for the matter."
"And then insert [the catheter] over that position of the opening of the vagina where you have stopped and found the stone, and do not remove your finger from the stone until it has been removed."
"And the incision should be small at the beginning. Then insert the catheter over that section, and if you feel the stone, then adjust the size of the incision according to the quantity that you know will be expelled from there."
"And know that there are many species of stones. Some are small and large, some are round and sharp, some are long and round, and some have branches."
"So you will know how many species there are from that which you specify about what you want."
"And if you see blood flow, adjust the position of the catheter and leave it there for an hour until the blood has been absorbed. Then return to your operation so that the stone is expelled."
"And make sure you have prepared all of the instruments which are mentioned in the extraction of stones in men, so that you may be helped by them during your operation."
"And if you see blood flow and know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery that has been cut, then place powder over that location and strain it with a fine and tight bandage. Do not repeat this; otherwise the woman will die. Leave the stone there and do not extract it." "And then dress the wound."
"So once the acute bleeding has stopped some days later and the location has healed, then you return to your operation so that the stone is expelled."
Chapter LXIII.
On Incision for a Strangulated Hernia.
Hernia is an accumulation of moisture in the white cylinder that is left by the cord of the genitals containing the egg, and it is called cylinder.
Sometimes it is located within the abdominal wall itself, which nature prepares in advance at the time of birth of the child or before another pregnancy; and it is the cord of the genitals between the white cylinder we mentioned earlier, but this is not all.
The cause of this hernia is weakness in the area where it occurs, allowing the contents to protrude through and sometimes occurring due to blows received on the genitals.
This moisture has various colors; it tends towards yellow or reddish or red, or it is black and earthy, or watery-white. This is what happens most often.
The signs by which it is known where this accumulation of water has occurred are as follows: if it occurs in the white cylinder mentioned earlier, then the swelling appears elongated and somewhat inclined towards the length, like an egg shape, and the genitals appear because the moisture contains them on all sides.
If the moisture is located in the abdominal wall itself, then the swelling appears round and separate from the testicle, and it is believed that it is another testicle.
If the moisture is between the cord of the genitals and the white cylinder, then one can feel both sides clearly.
To determine the color of the moisture, you should examine the color of the moisture in the swelling using a fine probe whose shape has been prepared. Based on what is seen at the tip of the probe, you can judge the nature of the moisture inside.
Therefore, when we come to treat it with iron (i.e. bloodletting), it is necessary that we command the patient to perform a thorough cleansing of their bowels if possible, and also to drink plenty of fluids.
And let him lie on his back on some causecloth, slightly elevated, and cover him with blankets.
Then sit on the left side of the patient and command your assistant to stand on his right side. The assistant should stretch out his arm across the patient's groin towards the navel of the abdomen.
"Then take a wide spatula and cut through the median raphe of the scrotum along its length near the penis."
"Then make an incision according to the method described above, keeping a sufficient distance from the line that marks the skin of the scrotum, until it reaches the white line encompassing the opening."
"Then strip him, observe and note well that you do not incise there; and when stripping him, part the skin as much as possible and examine it carefully with your eyes according to what is possible."
"Then make a wide perforation through the scrotum full of water and extract all the water."
"Then separate the two lips of the incision with forceps and stretch open the scrotum from above; and do not touch the median raphe of the scrotum, making the incision in such a manner as is possible for you." "Then cut along its entire length or in pieces and especially if it is thick, for unless you examine the incision carefully, there is no guarantee that water will not return."
"But if the wound extends beyond its midline during your operation, then after you have completed the incision of the scrotum, return inside it and immediately join together the two lips of the median raphe of the scrotum with sutures, and then dress it as with other wounds until healed."
"And if you find the wound corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary that you ligate the vessels that are near the suspensiony ligament and remove the wound, and afterwards dress it with what has been said."
"But if water collects in two separate parts at times, then know that there are two hernias. Therefore incise that part according to what you have done with the other similarly; and if it seems to you that it is an operation, then perform it."
"And then cleanse the blood and enter into the incisions with wool submerged in oil or rose oil. And pause outside with other wool that you have submerged in wine and oil, and spread it over both testicles and the miracle of the abdomen (the navel). And place it upon doubled cloths and powders, and tie those above with ligature made in this way:"
"And then take two cloths and fill them with wool carded in this way: and make the ends with which it is tied of cotton or wet wool, and attach them with a bandage to the fly of the breeches, and one of the ends shall take hold of the buttocks within the other, and the second shall take hold of the partition of the perineum, and two endings on both sides and two other endings above the thighs, and all tightness is adjusted in the fly of the breeches."
"And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with a cautery instead of an incision with iron; and take a scalpel-like cautery and incise the median raphe of the testicles with it, and heat it according to what has been recommended until the white scrotum containing water is revealed, and then take cautery in this way:" "And it resembles the letter gamma."
"And then pierce with that cautery, and heat until all moisture is discharged."
"And then stretch the scrotum with forceps and scrape it with forceps, and scrape it with a fine heated cautery; and incise it according to what is possible for you until you eradicate all moisture; and guard yourself that fire does not touch the wound."
"And know that this operation is safer and longer-lasting without bleeding, and better than an operation with incision."
"But if it happens to you that there is an aposteme caut in the time of incision or in the time of cautery, or bleeding occurs, then you should cure what opposes you for this, with cure which is suitable according to what has been said."
"But if the patient is timid and does not hope for a second operation because of its horrible nature, then perform perforation according to what has been recommended for this. And this is when you are certain, by that which has been said about significations, that that hernia is hydrocele."
"And then you should make the patient sit upon some elevated chair, and then perforate the aposteme in its lowest part with a broad spatula, and pause the perforation according to the length of the body."
"And let the opening be wide enough so that all water may run out."
"And then press upon the place with cotton and tie it, and leave it, so that the remaining water may drain." "And then dress it until the wound is healed."
"But if there is opposition to the evacuation of water at that time you perforate it: and this happens only because the white panniculus in the opening of the wound opposes and prevents the exit of water. Therefore, you should place a wick or instrument with which water can be extracted from hydroceles, as described earlier; or adjust a small tube into the opening of the wound."
"And know that water returns, and it becomes absorbed in about six months or less; and when it has become absorbed, then it should be perforated again in the same manner, for the patient will thus pass his days."
**Chapter LXIII.**
"On Incision of a Carnal Hernia and Its Cure."
You know that in the section concerning this hernia, there is fear of losing it due to danger in most cases; therefore, I have seen its dismissal and it should be saved by this remedy.
And you are reminded of the operation performed on that one and the species of abscesses.
Therefore, I say that abscesses are born in the bodies of those whose veins are compressed and this happens for many causes: either by acute painful congestion or by percussion.
And the color of the abscess follows the color of the body, but it is not accompanied by pain, and it is a severe abscess.
A thick yellowish abscess, whose color is dark and which has no sensation when touched
And sometimes it happens due to blockage of the arteries or inflammation of those areas that have already been perceived as having memory of it, or by inflammation of veins.
But what happens due to inflammation of the arteries is known by the dispersion of the abscess when you compress it with your fingers, without needing to touch it.
But what happens due to inflammation of a vein does not disperse from it for any reason despite compression with the fingers.
And it is possible that on this species there may be an incision made and on the other flesh; and it is done thus: you incise the chain of veins and then stretch out the skin upwards to its openings, and remove the white matter from it, loosen the suspensory ligaments of the vessels, tie them up, and also cut away the suspensory ligament that has been loosened from all its attachments to the skin.
Therefore, if the skin is already adhered to those flesh parts, then you must remove the skin and make an incision there.
And if there is adhesion inside for any cause of the white matter, or between those that are between the vessels, then you must remove all that adhesion and make an incision with a round cut
But if there is native flesh in the place of the adhesion that is behind it, then you must cut all that which belongs to it, and remove the skin as we have said.
Therefore, once your operation is completed, then you should fill the wound with lanolin infused in rose oil and wine; and also cure it with another ointment inside so that it may heal.
Chapter LXIV
Of the treatment of hernias that are due to wind.
Wind is an abscess enclosed by some enveloping substance like a bud with softening of the testicles. It becomes difficult to perform exercises and walk around due to this condition.
And the treatment for this ailment is through fear of that from which it is preceded by recall.
However, I must say operation in that according to what was first said.
And I say that you should make an incision on the hernia above an elevated thigh; and then peel away the suspensory ligament of the testicles from its attachments on both sides; also tie up the chain of veins with your fingers, taking care not to squeeze them too hard. Then have another assistant help you extend the scrotum vigorously.
"Then make an incision with a sharp scalpel through a transverse section on the right side of the vessels where they are exposed."
"And then remove all parts that we have mentioned earlier in the extraction of arrows, which are located on the temples."
"And then place in that area a needle with doubled thread and tie it at the first point where you saw the wound, and tie it again at the last one." "And then cut that area in a straight section along the length of the body and remove what has accumulated from the foul and corrupted humidity."
"And then treat the wound with cure for other wounds where you want healthy flesh to be generated, because veins which nourish one of two testicles are affected by this."
"But if all the vessels are affected, then it is necessary that the testicles be removed or that they be tied off with the vessels, because they should be deprived of all nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and they should be cauterized, or else they will not be useful."
"Chapter 65."
"Regarding the treatment of intestinal hernias."
"The occurrence of this hernia is due to a separation that occurs on the diaphragm expanded over the abdomen by the angles of the hole in the abdomen, allowing some intestines from that rupture to protrude through it."
"And this rupture is either of the diaphragm or of an incision in it, and these two kinds occur due to many causes: namely, percussion, blows, coughing, crying out loudly, elevation caused by some heavy cause, or sneezing."
"And the symptom of that, when it is due to an extension of the diaphragm, is that it occurs gradually over a long period of time and does not happen suddenly. It becomes a swelling inside the abdomen because the diaphragm presses upon the intestines."
"And the symptom of it is when it is due to a separation of the diaphragm, because at the beginning it suddenly causes intense pain; and it becomes a distinct swelling apparent near the navel or apparently gone, which is due to protrusion of the intestines, with the body of that protruding through the defect in the diaphragm."
"And sometimes the intestinal tissue is forgotten outside the intestines and this type of hernia is called 'incarcerated'.
"And sometimes there is flatulence, and sometimes the intestines slip through the hole in the abdomen and get caught there, which causes great danger of illness. And sometimes it causes very painful pain, especially when pressed upon."
"And in the treatment of these kinds of illnesses with iron, there is fear because care must be taken not to cause further injury in that place."
"And the manner of operating on this is that you command the patient to reduce the intestines with his own hand into their natural position if they obey, and then cover them up quickly with a dressing between your hands, raising the edges."
"And then, after that, you stretch the cord which is above the cord of the testicles to that side and incise it throughout its length, and then place two clamps on both sides of the incision according to your needs to open the incision with them."
"And if the incision is made as much as is possible so that no part of that wound may be forgotten."
"And then, you dissect away those membranes which are near the cord of the testicles until the white, hard abdominal wall is discovered on each side."
"Then you insert your finger into that which is the testicle, between the white abdominal wall, which is near the wound of the cord and behind the second membrane, and separate with it any adherence that may be there."
"And then move with your hand the cord of the testicles to its proper place, and at the same time extend the white abdominal wall upwards with your left hand, elevate the wound with the membrane at the side of the incision; and command the assistant to extend the wound upwards while you dissolve any adhesions behind with cold water."
"And then carefully examine with your fingers that there is no cause of the intestines being wrapped in the white abdominal wall." "But if you find any cause there, then remove it to the abdomen outside."
"And then make an incision on the side of the cord of the testicles through which blood and pus may flow out in the manner that we have described earlier."
"And then apply lanolin soaked in oil and place it on the wound; and apply the stitching that we have recommended (and sometimes cauterize the white membrane which we mentioned near the incision of the blood vessel, for many times this happens) and leave the stitches so that they fall by themselves."
"But if the closing of the wound is delayed, then hot water should be poured over it and placed on it until it falls according to what we have said."
"And then treat the wound with other methods for treating wounds until it is healed."
Chapter LXVI
About ventral hernia.
In this type of hernia, there is nothing that can be burned with hot irons to treat it.
"The first days said that it is done thus as we have recounted in the case of hernia with urine; which is to tie the vessels near the section with ease and speed; and immediately seal in the middle place around the abscess with whatever works that."
"And treat the plague according to what we have said until it is healed."
"What is chapter lxvii?"
"The dressing done on the veins"
"Sometimes there is rupture in the veins as we have said, and inflammation occurs."
"And do not give any cause for the bowels to the jenny; and if you do, it is little; and returns in all hours."
"But if the time is prolonged with this, an adjusted fissure occurs in the scrotum through which the bowel enters the scrotum; and this happens because of the extension of the scrotum which is in the veins as we have said, which causes the scrotum to be softened, and the place becomes abscessed and inflamed."
"And the treatment for this is with caustic as it is preceded by its narrative."
"And sometimes it is cured with iron in this manner: that the patient lies on his back between two pillows, and immediately cuts off the swollen area of the ruptured abscesses inflamed by section through the width of three fingers."
"And then strengthen the scrotum with cold water that is below the neck until it is exposed."
"Then take a piece of cloth and place it over the inflamed area of the scrotum, and press it against the front of the abdomen."
"And then cut off both inflated areas at the end of the scrotum's vein, and adjust them with stitching one to the other."
"And then extract the end of the vein, and do not insert anything into the scrotum at all, nor extend it, nor any other cause such as you may know in the treatment of intestinal hernia."
"And then cure it with the treatment of wounds, and when you incise the skin, cleanse it and restore the wound until it is consolidated; for the scrotum is contracted and the swelling of rupture is not adjusted."
"And caustic is better in this location, because it is closer to health."
"Chapter lxviii."
"On the softening of the neck of the testes."
"Often in some men, the chain of the testicles is softened because the flesh between them is softened. It is said that this is the cause."
"Therefore it is necessary for the one who seeks care to make the patient lie down on their side, and cut away all the softened chain above the natural one; then immediately join the lips with stitches."
"And if desired, first excise the excess of the softened chain with three or four stitches and firm suture."
"Then cut between the sutures, and afterwards cure it with treatment for other sores until it heals and the skin falls off."
"Chapter LXIX."
"Of castration."
"Know that castration is condemned in our law, but for the sake of knowledge it is permissible for me to remember this in this book; and it is not necessary to remember it except for two methods, one of which is so that this may be known by the science of medicine when it happens, how the treatment of it should be performed; and the other method is because we often have need of castration in other beasts for our own profit through them, as with dogs, goats, pigs, and similar beasts."
"And therefore I say that castration is performed in two ways: either by tearing or by cutting with an incision."
"But in the one which is performed by tearing, the manner of performing it is that we seize the beast in cold water until its testicles are softened and relaxed and hanging." "And then take them with your hand so that they are resolved and do not appear loose from the touch."
"But in castration performed by incision and cutting, it is necessary that you hold the beast and press the cord of its testicles with your left hand."
"And then cut the suspensory ligament, and make an incision above each one with a single cut so that two openings are produced."
"And then cut those that appear protruding." "And do not touch the scrotum with any instrument, but only use the sharp scalpel which is on the vessels."
"And this manner of castration by tearing is better because it leaves no cause for the testicles so that the beast desires copulation."
"And then dress the wound so that it heals."
Chapter LXX
Of the treatment of Hermaphrodism.
"Hermaphrodism in men occurs in two ways: one is when it appears in what should be the space between the testicles, where there are two testicles that resemble a vulva with skin at their base."
"And sometimes urine flows from where it should be the cord of the testicles."
"But in women, it is one type: that is when the vulva over the pubis resembles two testicles of a man, somewhat diminished at their connection to the fornix like the penis of a man and two testicles."
"And its treatment is of three types: two for men and one for women." "And it is necessary that you make an incision in those attached flesh where the opening appears and then dress it with the dressing of other wounds."
"And in the second type of men where urine flows from where it should be the cord of the testicles, there is no cure nor operation for it."
Chapter XXII.
Of Lentigo and protruding flesh due to causes of women.
"Freckles are naturally attached and appear as raised spots, which are caused by gazing too much and observing carefully. And sometimes they are larger in some women to the extent that they are spread out like those of men and even enter into copulation."
Therefore, it is necessary that you grasp the excessiveness of freckles with your hand or with an ointment and cut them.
"And do not finish cutting off completely, especially on the surface of the skin, so that bleeding does not occur."
"And then dress it with the dressing for wounds so that it heals."
"But flesh that is born is flesh that grows in the horrorific of the mother until it fills that space, and usually appears at the fornix according to its resemblance to excrement (and for this reason some people first called it excremental disease); therefore, we should cut it like we cut freckles and dress it so that it heals."
Chapter LXXII.
Of the treatment of hemorrhoids.
"Hemorrhoids are when the vulva is not perforated or when it has a small opening." "And they can be either natural or accidental."
"Accidental hemorrhoids are caused by previous illness and are made either by attached flesh that is born or by a thin scalp or thick skin."
"And they are formed either on the surface of the mother's pudendum, or on its sides, or above it, or below it, and prevent copulation and pregnancy and childbirth, and usually prevent menstruation."
"And the diagnosis of hemorrhoids is made by observation of the vulva if the opening is visible, but if not, you should examine it with your fingers or with a speculum."
"But if the opening is due to a thin scalp and appears between the two lips of the vulva, then you should cut it with scissors."
"And if it is paused on both sides of the pudendal lips, then press your fingers at both sides close to its edges."
"And the woman should be on her back with her buttocks spread wide, and then extend both lips of the vulva with force so that the thin scalp is broken and the opening is uncovered."
"And then take some wool moistened in oil and press it over that place, and leave it there overnight so that the wound does not adhere."
"But if the scalp is thick and coarse, then you should cut it with a broad or sharp scalpel made of myrtle."
"But if the opening is due to attached flesh, then suspend that with an ointment and cut it."
"And use medications that stop bleeding without biting, such as aloes, dragon's blood, and mallow mixed with egg white."
"And then insert a wide lead cannula to prevent the wound from adhering lightly."
"And keep it like that for several days and apply a poultice of dried flaxseed."
"And then dress it with the other dressing for consolidation until it is healed."
"But sometimes it happens that during childbirth other flesh grows naturally in the mother's pudendum, and then you should cut it like this:" "But if this is due to a hard boil in the mother's pudendum, then do not use any iron instrument in any way."
Chapter LXXIII.
Of the treatment of hemorrhoids and tail and red boil that occur in the vulva of women.
"Hemorrhoids are caused by many veins in that area, from which blood flows continuously; and when these hemorrhoids become old and hard, they are called piles."
"Now I have mentioned the types of hemorrhoids and their characteristics, and let me say which ones require treatment and which do not."
"I say that hemorrhoids and piles, when they are in the front of the anus and cannot be felt, there is no need for treatment with iron."
"But those which are at the opening of the anus and can be felt, are those that require treatment."
"And it is necessary to put the woman in a warm bath and then extend her anus with tweezers or rough cloth, and incise those with the scissors."
"And then sprinkle over them the flows of blood from one of the incised veins without biting it, such as cinnamon and similar to that."
"And then let her rest on her back for an hour, and then immerse her in warm water."
"And if the bleeding persists, then make her drink a decoction of sumac and buckthorn and oak bark and similar things."
"And also take barley flour and mix it with honey and vinegar and make a plaster with that over her back."
"And if the bleeding is stopped, then it is good. And if not, then make it adhere with two compresses, and to the nipples without incision."
"And also take wool and immerse it in juice of coriander or juice of rue or juice of guaiacum with white wine, and make it adhere to the place. And then cure the place with egg white until it is healed."
"And cure it until it is healed."
"Chapter 74."
Of the perforation of a hollow accident in the hand.
Many kinds of accidents happen in the hand, such as cancer and stone apostumes and ulcers and adhesions and serpents and fistulas and hemorrhoids and wounds and other apostumes. "And I have already said these illnesses and their kinds and their signs and their cures in the division."
"But it is necessary that I say in this treatise of cauterization how one does it when it happens in the hand if it is of those apostumes that heal, and if you want to know in what manner the operation is done with iron."
"Therefore you must consider if the pain of the apostume at its beginning is sharp with percussion and swelling and fever, and if it becomes reddened and if it seems to catch on something, then do not cut it with perforation, but cure it with what helps maturation until the sharpness of the accident ceases."
"But then you must make her lie on her back on two pillows; and let her recline on her two sides and adjust her feet toward the foot of the bed a little below the navel, and let her thighs be expanded, and tie her arms away from her breasts, and bind each with cloth appropriately."
"And then the midwife follows on the right side and administers the instrument with which the perforation of the hand is done, whose form will come in those causes that they will do later."
"And it is necessary that when you want to administer this instrument, you put on the wrist of the woman's hand, and only let what enters the hand from the instrument be the wrist of the hand and the sick part." "But if the instrument is larger than the wrist of the hand, then you must put poultices on the texture of the wrist of the hand so that it may be prohibited the entrance of any instrument into the wrist of the hand."
"And it is necessary that you put the point of the instrument on the left side above and that the one administering holds the instrument and turns the point until the perforation of the hand is done."
"And when the exit appears, and it is touched with the hand and is swollen and moist, then you must dry it with a linen cloth."
"And when the healing is evacuated, then you must put in the wound a wool wick immersed in rose oil or green oil with some astringency; and press the bandage on the section of the wrist of the hand."
"And then put on the hand, and on the wound, clean wool immersed in water in which mulberries have been boiled."
"Then let it be cured for two days with this ointment that is convenient until it is healed."
"And sometimes the hand and the wound are washed with water and honey, and sometimes with water in which rose leaves or long pepper has been boiled, and then it returns to the ointment."
"And if the wound is deep in the hand and infected, then you must be prohibited from curing it with iron, having cure of it with what we have said in this division."
"Chapter 75."
"To teach midwives in what manner they should medicate the living babies that come out deformed according to figure."
"It is necessary that the midwife knows at the beginning the figure of a natural childbirth by its signs, and it is that when you see the woman pushing at the openings below and desires to smell the air, and then she is comforted by what is coming out on top of her, and hastens the exit of the baby, then you would know that this birth is according to nature's figure, and the baby exits headfirst, and the second one with its arms or suspended or hanging from the umbilical cord."
"Therefore when you see those signs, then it is necessary that the belly of the baby be pressed so that the embryo comes out gently when it comes out headfirst, and the second one with its arms or suspended or hanging from the umbilical cord, and is cleaned from those superfluities with good cleansing."
"But that which is other than this birth is unnatural and blameworthy, for when the baby comes out on its feet and its body comes out in front of its head and its feet, and one hand or the foot is out, or the head and one hand are out, or the belly is out, and it turns its face up and has similar blameworthy figures."
"It is necessary that the midwife be wise and subtle in all those causes, and guard against error and deception."
"And here we show all figures of those, and what kind they are in those so that it may be signified by this and stood upon."
"When the feet are out headfirst by nature's error, and that one is violent on the woman and its birth is difficult, and you see its strength already weakened, then do this: have those women hold it, and evaporate its congealed blood with ground fenugreek and moist oil."
"Then the midwife should insert her little spatula and split it with that, or cut it with her nail until what is in it of moisture comes out." "And press the woman's belly until the fetus comes out."
"But if it does not come out, then have the woman be rinsed with poultice of pitch and poultice of fenugreek with hot water."
"And then command her to be pressed again and have her sneeze with condition; and close its mouth and nose for an hour, because the fetus will soon forget."
"If both hands of the patient are forgotten at the beginning, then you must return them gently, one by one." "But if the patient does not obey, then pause the woman on one knee and lift her feet up, and then quickly hit the knee on the ground. And the woman must be careful not to fall due to the blow."
"And if the hands are not properly returned and the patient dies, then cut them off and remove the remnants of the fetus or tie the body with cloth and remove it evenly, because that will be forgotten."
"When the fetus is lying on its seat, then you must push those down, and immediately turn the fetus gently, and immediately that you equalize it, and immediately that you grasp one foot and gradually extend it."
"But when it is extracted inside the womb, then you must command the patient to squeeze, and make that sneeze with condition, because she will be forgotten if God wishes."
"And if it is not forgotten with what we have recommended, then you must gradually return the fetus inside until you pause it according to its natural figure, because that will be forgotten at that time with easy extraction."
"And if it is prohibited with all that we have recommended, then take some muslin and dissolved gum Arabic, and grind them well in the mortar with good percussion, and immediately line the woman's womb, the lower part of her belly with it." "And immediately make that sit in warm water until she achieves hypothermia."
"And when the parts of it are cleaned, then do fumigation with myrtle and immediately apply compresses to her." "And when she has had fumigation for an hour, then make her sit on a chair and immediately make her sneeze and extend the mouth of it, and remove that, and apply gentle pressure to the lower part of her belly with a compress, because the fetus will be forgotten shortly."
"Lateral extraction of the fetus by one of its membranes." "It should be gently reduced with her hand, but if she cannot reduce it, then raise the woman and make her walk."
"And if she cannot walk, then make her lie on the bed, and strike her buttocks violently with your hand, and immediately administer remedies that you know and have recommended of mucilages."
"And if childbirth has come, then make her sit on a chair and immediately study the reduction of the hand and twist the fetus according to its natural figure, and make the woman sneeze and command her to press herself until it is forgotten."
"Extraction of the fetus over the occupit with its membranes expanded and its face towards its mother's back." "It is necessary for the midwife to have her hand on the fetus and also turn it little by little, and make that come out with ease."
"And when it is coming out and when it has been twisted, then pause on its crown what we have recommended of oil and of mucilages."
"And also command her to push little by little, and when you have done that, then make her sit on a chair and command her to lean over the right side, and also command her to press herself; and make her sneeze conditionally." "Prepared exit of the fetus over the side [of the uterus]."
"When it becomes horrible for the mother in this manner, consider her and then incise the second one with your nail until it is emptied of humidity."
"And if the fetus is suspended over its face and occupit, then incise that of the amniotic sac so that it may not be retained and die."
"And also push the fetus downwards until it pauses according to what is necessary, and command the woman to press herself several times, and it will be forgotten with gentle extraction if God wills it."
"Exit of twins or multiple fetuses." "Know that many times twins are born, and sometimes three or four, but that is strange and rarely happens; but their cause is natural and not violent."
"And count them if they are multiplied, there should be one amniotic sac for each of them, and they are separated by chiasmus, distinguish them by the ligament in the umbilical cord of each of them. And sometimes they come out just like one fetus through natural gentle extraction, and sometimes they come out through non-gentle extraction as we have recommended."
"And if some of them are difficult to deliver and come through what we have said about the unnatural figures, then care for them as we have recommended."
"And if the midwife is subtle and does what she does with ease and subtlety, and with diligence, and acts according to all figures as it is prepared for her in leading towards health."
"Reminder of what forms in the matrix from embryos and aborts."
"Sometimes one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and even ten are formed in the mother's womb, and it has been verified that one woman aborted seven, and another ten all formed, which cause was made by the measurement of the glorious wise men."
"And also it is necessary that the midwife knows well how to examine this small form and therefore pause according to what is necessary."
"Chapter 76."
"Of the extraction of the fetus when it is dead."
"When you care for the dead fetus with what we have said in the division of medicine and it has not come out yet, and you wish to use an operation by hand, then it is necessary that you consider if the woman is of sound virtue and not affected by any of the accidents by which she might suffer harm."
"Then it is necessary that the woman be placed on the bed on her back and her head reclined downwards and her buttocks raised."
"And the assistant should hold her from both sides or be lying in the bed to prevent the body from stretching out during the extraction of the fetus."
"And also you should moisten the mouth of the mother with oil and mucilage of marshmallow, fenugreek, and linseed."
"And also the midwife should anoint her hand with those oils and mucilages, and also insert her hand gently into the mother's womb, and also search with her hand for where the hooks will be placed on the fetus."
"And the convenient places for this are: then you should consider if the fetus is prepared to be delivered headfirst, and therefore place the hooks in its heels, or neck, or mouth, or palate, or jaw, or furcula, or nearby the ribs, or below the hypochondria."
If the discharge is over his feet, then in the groin or middle of the back.
And one must have the hook in the right hand and pause its curve in that place which is between the fingers of the left hand, inserting the hand gently and keeping the hook in one of those places we mentioned earlier until reaching the cause of the blockage.
Then pause and place another hook, or the third one if necessary, in such a way that there is attraction equally on all sides, and not only extension according to its own rectitude.
And let it be moved in every part so that the discharge of it is alleviated just as it is done in the extraction of a tooth.
And it is necessary that the extension be softened in water; and if any part of it is retained, then the midwife must grease some of her fingers with oil and insert them carefully and move them around with the water that is retained.
Therefore if the part of the fetus has been expelled, then the hooks must be changed to one that is larger; and do this until the entire fetus has been expelled.
But if the hand is already expelled but cannot be reduced by traction of it, then a cloth should be wrapped around that one and immediately cut it at its junction or at the wrist.
And similarly you must do with the other hand and both feet.
But if the head of the fetus is large or there is difficulty in its expulsion, or it is in a caput fixed position, then one must insert spatulas between those bones and cleave the head and extract the water, or dilate that with an instrument called "alundat" whose form will come along with the forms of the other instruments in the chapter which follows this.
And similarly do if the fetus is naturally large headed: and then you must cut it with an emollient or dilate it with an alundat as we have said; and immediately extract the bones with forceps.
And if the head is expelled but is obstructed by the foramen magnum, then you must cut it until the humidity that is in the pituitary gland is drained out.
But if there is no complication or obstruction to its expulsion, then you must cut the head as much as it is possible for you.
And if the left side of the abdomen is inflamed or it is in a hydrops condition, then you must pierce it until the humidity that is within it is drained out.
But if the fetus is lying on its back, then the traction of it will be easy and directing it towards the mother's vulva will also be easy.
But if it is obstructed near the abdomen and the pituitary gland, then you must extract that with cloth which you will have wrapped around your hand, and then cut the abdomen and the pituitary gland until that water flows out of them.
But if the other members are obstinate and the head returns back, then insert your left hand; but if the mother's vulva is obstructed, then insert your hand into the lower abdomen and encircle the head with it, and pull it towards the mother's vulva, and immediately insert a hook or two hooks and pull it with those.
And if the mother's vulva is obstructed by a hard clots of blood which has accumulated there, then you must not rub it over it. Rather, you must administer an injection of hot water to dissolve the thick and fatty causes. And apply plasters; and follow up with the patient in waters that soften and moisturize.
And if the fetus is lying on its side, then if it is possible, you should turn it; and administer to it what we have said for a live fetus.
But if that is not possible, then cut it in pieces and extract it.
And you must not leave any cause behind in the uterus.
And when you have completed your operation, then administer to her what we have said about the treatment of hard clots of blood that may have occurred in the mother.
And if there is bleeding, then apply styptic waters and administer the other treatment.
And I have seen a woman whose uterus contained a dead fetus, and later she became pregnant again, but the second time also the fetus was dead. It happened that for a long time there was a hard clot of blood in her uterus; it became inflamed and started to expel, but the fetus died.
And I was called to treat her for this, and treated her for a long time, but the illness did not improve.
Then I applied to her some plasters with strong attraction, and about three days later she expelled one bone, and after a few more days she expelled another bone. And I was greatly amazed, because there are no bones in the uterus.
And then I thought that they were the bones of the dead fetus.
Therefore I healed her illness and extracted from her many bones, the woman living in good health ever since, except for some slight bleeding.
And I do not affirm that this is strange, but rather it shows the knowledge and skill of the doctor who with his hands administers treatment to cure.
Of the forms of the instruments necessary for extracting the fetus
Form of forceps with which the mother is opened:
This is the form of a forceps in which the tongs are attached to two pieces of wood. However, this forceps must be more slender and made either of iron or brass or boxwood.
And let each piece of wood be two fingers wide and the edge of each one a finger's width apart, and its length one and a half palms; and in the middle of the two pieces of wood there are two joints for fitting together these pieces of wood which are already fastened, and their length is about one and a half palms, and their width two fingers or a little more.
And these two additions are inserted into the mother's vulva so that it is opened with them when you turn the two prescribed forceps.
Another similar form, but more slender and lighter:
Let it be made of brass or boxwood according to the shape of forceps. But instead at its end let there be two additions like this: and the length of each addition is about one palm, and their width two fingers.
And when you want to open the mother with these, then have the woman lie on her back with her feet raised up high, and open what is between the lips of it. And then open your hand with the instrument as you do with forceps attached according to how much you want of the opening of the mother's vulva where you want the uterus to be opened.
The form of forceps described by the ancients:
Form of a probe with which the fetus is pushed:
Form of a hook with which the large head is grasped
And it is like a forceps with teeth at the end like this: and sometimes it is made long like this forceps according to this form, like this: with teeth like those of a rake with which it is inserted and grasps. Form of a small hook:
"A shape having a spine."
"A shape having two spines."
"A spatula having two ends where the head is severed."
"Form of two spatulas lying side by side."
"The more these instruments are exercised, and the more species of them there are prepared by the artisans, the easier their operation becomes, and the greater the number of people they benefit."
"And you should not neglect any of those instruments, for the need for them is not excusable."
"For extracting the afterbirth."
"When the afterbirth is retained at childbirth, you must order the midwife to hold her breath, and then make her sneeze with conditions, and press your hand over her mouth and nose. If it comes out by this means, so much the better."
"And if not, then take a cloth and pierce it with a hole in the middle, and put it over the mother's mouth, having first burned some herbs such as calamint, rue, aneth, chamomile, Arabic scordium, cassia wood, and Saint John's wort." "All these herbs or some of them should be immersed in water in the cloth, and then placed on the fire."
"And immediately place a reed cane into the mother's mouth, and hold it there until the steam comes to the concave part of her."
"And then make her sneeze as we have said, and the afterbirth will be expelled with great speed."
"But if even with this treatment the afterbirth is not expelled, then you should order the midwife to immerse her left hand in olive oil or an emulsion of althea, and then insert it into the womb and search for the afterbirth with that, and when she has found it, take it out little by little. But if it is adherent in the entrance of the mother, then insert your hand as we have recommended, and when you have found the afterbirth, remove it little by little according to rectitude so that the mother does not suffer from violent traction." "It is necessary that they be changed on the right and left sides with ease."
"And if the mother's mouth is obstructed, we have already recommended the treatment with sneezing and the medication of the cloth with herbs."
"But if it is not expelled with all the causes we have recommended, then be sure not to weary yourself in repeated attempts at traction, but rather what has come out from there to the mother's mouth should be placed on the thing of the woman, and then dress that with grease and tetrafarmacon; for that will cause it to rot there after a few days and will be dissolved and expelled."
"But when it has rotted, it causes bad odor to the head and stomach, and that leads to illness. And then fumigations and appropriate remedies should be administered for that."
"But some of the Ancients used fumigation with nasturtiums and dried figs."
"Form of an instrument with which a woman is fumigated due to the retention of menses and afterbirth:"
"It should be made of glass or earthenware."
"And the subtle extremity should be placed in the womb and the wide extremity over the fire, and the fumigation should be placed on the embers of the fire."
"And keep that there until that fumigation is consumed, and repeat another one."
"On the treatment of the unperforated anus of a child:"
"Many children are born with their anuses unperforated, which are often narrow and closed." "Therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to perforate that closure with her finger; and if not, then perforate it with a sharp spatula, being careful not to touch the intestine."
"And then place over it wool soaked in wine and oil, and treat it with grease until healed."
"But if you fear that it is closed again, then place in the anus a cannula for several days, and remove it when the child wants to defecate."
"And it also happens that the anus becomes closed due to consolidation of a plug or an abscess. Therefore, that consolidation should be incised and then treated with what we have said about treatment and lead."
"On the treatment of fistulas that develop in this place:"
"The fistulas that develop in the lower part of the buttocks are usually hard and thick, which develop near the anus or in the space between the two buttocks."
"And it is one fistula or more."
"And when that hardness has become ancient and corroded by moisture, it is usually accompanied by offensive white pus or subtle putrefaction. And sometimes there are penetrating fistulas in these fistulas."
"And these penetrate through what comes out of them through the exit and through windiness. And sometimes the condition is that of exit, and often worms come out from them."
"And sometimes there are penetrating fistulas in the space that penetrate into the bladder and into the urethra. And these penetrations also occur into the junction of the vulva and into the anus."
"And that which indicates a penetrating fistula into the anus and a non-penetrating one is when you insert your finger into the anus, and when there is not tortuosity, insert a thin probe of earthenware or iron into the fistula."
"But if there is tortuosity in that one, then insert into it a thin probe of lead or horsehair until you feel the probe or the hair on your finger."
"And if you do not feel it at all and there is no evidence of exit or worms or windiness from the anus, as we have said, then know that it is non-penetrating. And then proceed to treatment."
"And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the urethra, then its sign is the exit of urine from it. And prohibition of it until that place has healed with medicine."
"But if it is penetrating into the vulva or into the bone and accompanied by pain in the area, then its sign is that a probe passed into it here does not have tortuosity. And there is pain in the area of the bone; and there is always putrefaction from it; and no medication is beneficial for it, nor can it be consolidated with grease."
"And in all those penetrating fistulas there is no complete cure. And the treatment of these is difficult and beyond the ability of many physicians."
"But in that which is not penetrating and not ancient, healing with iron is hoped for according to what I will recommend to you, and what I have already said and proven."
"And it is that the condition affects you between your buttocks, mainly over the two bones, elevates the cheeks of the buttocks internally, and inclines the vulva towards its belly. And then insert a probe of lead or earthenware if there is tortuosity in the fistula, until you know where the probe passes."
"And if that condition affects around the anus, then it is necessary for you to insert your finger into the anus."
"And if you feel the probe already penetrating through your finger itself, other than what you feel between your finger and that siphac or flesh, then know for certain that it is penetrating. And do not treat it there, because there is no healing of it, as we have said."
"However, some say that it is beneficial in certain cases."
"For the treatment in which improvement is hoped, you should cauterize with fire subtly according to the width of the fistula, as is described above, and insert that heated metal into the fistula until it reaches around the bone; and repeat this process two or three times until you know that all those flesh tissues surrounding the fistula have been burnt, which resemble a bird's feather quill."
"And then dress that with damp cloths wrapped in wool until all those burnt flesh tissues have healed, and then treat it with medicines that generate and consolidate flesh, and if it has healed, good; but if not, at that time it will not heal with any other treatment."
"And if the probe enters and does not penetrate within the aforementioned opening which is in the anus, and there is between that and the probe a veil of skin or membrane, then close up that fistula so that its surface area matches the thickness of the probe; then cut off the probe at the beginning of the fistula, and you will see it dried with the probe inside the fistula until the section reaches the place where the end of the probe had reached, and through the probe it is freed and removed."
"And then cleanse those flesh tissues that resemble a bird's feather quill with the cautery without breaking any of them due to some cause."
"But if pus starts flowing between you and your operation while dissecting those flesh tissues, then it is good that it should be cauterized with fire or with a sharp instrument, because cauterizing with fire has two advantages: it is an adjustment of those flesh tissues that have adhered, and it is evacuation of the pus, and drying of the moisture."
"And then treat it with damp cloths wrapped in wool or fine linen until the place becomes warm, and at that time treat the wound with soft flesh-generating and consolidating ointments."
"And these are medicines in which astringency and drying are predominant; when the wound has healed, it is restored and there will be no recurrence."
"But if the fistula has already reached the perineum and is elongated from the surface of the skin, then insert the probe into the anus and explore with it."
"And then if the probe meets and there is between it and the veil of skin or membrane an obstruction to penetration, then it is not an operation on that site but rather through trust and hope."
"And there are three ways to deal with this: either cauterize it in the way we have described; or dry it up until it achieves concavity so that you can enter your probes and perform the cure proposed; and do not proceed with cutting lest you injure the contents of the colon, and thus cause discomfort through a surgical intervention without consent. And then treat it with what has been said because it will be healed quickly if done correctly. Or else dissect that veil and clean out that pus which dries up within the anus in the way we have described, either with a probe or with another instrument of sharp point; and then cleanse those fistulous flesh tissues which are in the section through cautery. And then make sure to restore all the wound with cutting, and if the opening above is not consolidated, and the fistula remains open at the partition of the anus, and pus continues to flow from it." "And some fistulas are ended in this way: when you insert the probe into the fistula, and it goes towards the side of the anus around the surface of the skin with the cord and the margin of the anus, then take a probe with a perforated tip, which is like a needle for preparing hearts in this shape:"
"and insert it into that vein wrapped in veins or around those; and then insert the probe with a thread into the fistula until it achieves concavity."
"But if it penetrates into the margin of the anus backwards, then you extract that thread from that tract in such a way that you insert your little finger into the anus; and pull out the end of the thread and tie the two ends together, and burn each one separately, and leave it like that for one or two days. And when you incise the thread in the flesh, burn it well so that those flesh tissues which are between the two ends of the thread and which have been injured may be healed."
"And then treat the wound until it is consolidated and healed."
"But if the opening of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate in whatever way you are prepared to do so, but do not do it too deeply into the perineum, lest you injure the colon. And then treat it until it is healed."
"The shape of the spatula used to split open the fistula is like this: its curvature is very sharp and the other end is not sharp, so that you do not injure anything unnecessary, as happens sometimes."
"About the suturing of hemorrhoids from which blood flows in the incision of those."
"Hemorrhoids are of two kinds: for some are between the buttocks and resemble coal, or else those which have the appearance of fatty tumors." "And some are small and large, and blood flows from them continuously, and they are singular or multiple, and they are outside the anus or at its extremities."
"But those hemorrhoids that are outside the anus are according to the laws of little moisture, from which yellow water or a little blood flows continuously, and they are according to the color of the body."
"The treatment for those hemorrhoids that are inside the anus is to have the patient sit down and squeeze so that the anus empties out and the hemorrhoids appear to you." "Then you take hold of them with forceps or with your fingers and suspend them, and then incise them at their roots."
"But if the forceps do not hold them because of the moisture and softness of those hemorrhoids, then take them with rough cloth or with cotton or with a wool pad, and extract them with your fingers, and then incise them and sprinkle some powdered myrrh on them at the incision so that they may adhere to them instead of cauterizing; or else cauterize them according to what has been said in the chapter on cauterization." "And then treat those with another cure until they are healed."
"And if the anus does not obey to evacuation, then have the patient rinse with a small rinsing syringe and wash it with water that is in the anus so that it may easily evacuate when the patient squeezes."
"But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then their cause is light, and it is because you take them with your fingernail or with forceps and incise them, and then treat them with what has been said until they are healed."
"And if you make an incision, then you must administer a suture to them in this way: take thread wrapped and insert it into the needle and then extract the hemorrhoids from the parts above and make the thread penetrate with the needle into the root of the other part, and wrap both ends of the thread around the part below the needle, and tie the hemorrhoid tightly, and cut the thread."
"And do this to all of them, and leave one and do not tie it, so that the excess blood may flow from that one."
"And then apply over the anus a cloth dipped in rose oil or cerate, and have the patient rest on their back." "And then let that one enter what box; and when it's closed, care for those with gentleness or with another cure until they are healed."
"And since those remedies are old and do not work in this medicine, you should now use a spatula point or your fingernail to penetrate into the fistulas so that they become humid and then remove the pus on top of them, which prevents consolidation. Then treat them until they are consolidated."
"Now you remove as much pus as possible with the first entrance so that it does not sanctify and they are healed. Then treat them until they are healed."
"Know that haemorrhoids are like keys and if they are not red, they resemble the head of a nail. They occur throughout the body but more so in areas near the buttocks and genitals, where they cause pain."
"And then you should excise what resembles the head of the key with scissors or a nail clipper, and remove it from its root. Then treat it."
"If you wish, cauterize the second one that is precedent in its chapter."
"Verruca is a small, rough, fistulated elevation on the surface of the body, often seen in many children."
"The treatment for it is to stretch and excise that, or shave it with a file or tweezers until it bleeds." "And if you wish, cauterize it with fire or with an acute medicine, as we have said."
"Molluscum is a small, fatty or fistulated elevation on the surface of the body, occurring mostly on the face. When it is rubbed against, it feels like an ant bite and it spreads around the body."
"The treatment for it is to take a quill of an owl or eagle feather and make it strong. Place the feather on the molluscum so that its circle encloses the parts around it. Then rotate your hand with the quill to excise what is around the molluscum, pressing down on the skin, and eradicate the molluscum from its root."
"And if you wish, do this using a needle made of bronze or iron as follows:"
"The opening of the urinary canal should be drawn out with care, closed (so that it is not perforated), wrapped in such a way that the said part can be washed and rinsed."
"And if you wish to cauterize the wound as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cautery."
"Regarding the shape of the instruments used for giving Communion."
"Some Communion wafers are made of silver or pewter or melted lead; and sometimes they are made in various sizes according to those who are administering them, for the one used in the care of small children should be small; and those for sick people or the dying, their wafers should also be small."
"The shape of Communion wafers is large and few:"
"The head of the cannula through which the purse is tied should be wide in this manner; and let it be at that distance where the purse is tied, as you see fit."
"And the bottom end of the probe, which is inserted into the anus, should be blunt (i.e. not open) with a certain amount of subtlety; and on one side of it there are two grooves, and on the other side there is one groove, and the width of the groove should correspond to the thickness of the ray or probe, according as it is thicker or thinner."
"And let the bag in which medicines are placed for urinary tract disorders or made from sheep's skin, and its opening should be one palm wide."
"And let it be pierced with many holes as it is rolled up; and the space between the holes should be about the thickness of a finger."
"And appropriate put into those holes strong strings of flax thread which are made of ten threads, or wind them around them; and fasten the bag with that; and when the bag is placed in it, tighten it at the head of the wafer between two distances with strong constriction, and crimp it with that each string: But know that the quality of crimping it is such that you fill the medicine bag which has been heated according to the quantity of the patient's tolerance; and see to it that it is not too hot nor too cold."
"And then the patient should lie on their back and elevate their hips up high, and place beneath them one cover upon which will be the bed or cloth; and appropriate anoint the extremity of the cautery with oil or egg albumen or fenugreek mucilage or similar substances; and appropriate insert it into the anus gently; and then the assistant takes the bag and squeezes it strongly two or three times until all that is in the probe is expelled from the bowel; and then remove the probe, and the patient lifts their hips up against the wall."
"And if the medicine forces that out, hold it until it stops flowing; and if they sleep with it like that all night long, it is better for their recovery."
"But if you cauterize it in cases of diarrhea and abdominal pain where the cautery comes out with pus, then repeat the cautery until it is healed."
"And if there are hemorrhoids or ulcerated anal fissures, then the probe should be very fine and smooth like those with which children are cauterized."
"Regarding the treatment of plagues."
"I have already said in the division on the treatment of plague what was necessary for the book, and I say thus the treatment of those with more severity and medicines according to their degree."
"Therefore, I say that plague is differentiated according to what part of the body the plague affects and according to the location on which the plague appears."
"And the causes for which plague often occurs are such as injury by stone, or incision by sword or knife, or piercing with lance, club, arrow, or other similar causes."
"But plague that occurs in the different parts of the body are such as plague that affects the head, neck, chest, belly, thigh, and similar to those of the limbs."
"And I am recounting the treatment of some plague because this reasoning and rule apply to other plague as well."
"And I will begin with simple head wounds, for the memory of those that are compound will come at the beginning of the third chapter."
"Therefore, I say that when a simple head wound occurs and it is not a fracture, then consider: if it is from an injury by stone or similar, and the chain has broken only on one side and it is large and you suspect that there may be an abscess forming later on that patient, then immediately perform trepanation of the cephalic vein and flebotomy; do not delay this. And extract from that blood according to the quantity of its virtue if no other cause prohibits flebotomy, especially if little blood comes out of the wound."
"And the flebotomy should be on the opposite side from where the wound is located; and keep the patient from being hit, drinking wine or strong drinks, and eating heavy foods."
"But if due to minuteness you prohibit any cause, then reduce the food and do not approach it with meat or wine."
"And pause over the wound if an abscess forms later on; cut off the hair around it and apply hot oil or wine in which has been steeped some styptic substance."
"But if you are sure of an abscess forming later on, then pause over the wound while it is still fresh with its blood and before the air has changed that powder which I will recommend to you appropriately."
"And if the air has already changed it, then pause over the abscess until it is healed."
"But if the wound is large or it is from an incision by sword or similar and the edges are not adapted for pus, then adapt those edges with sutures according to what I will recommend regarding the suture of wounds."
"But if the wound is already exposed to bone and membrane, and there is only a small suspension of it, then incise that and appropriately treat the wound with medicines and restore the flesh appropriately in place of chain; and command the patient to be fed on foods that are coarse: heads of cabbage and similar ones until it is composed."
"And if you find putrefaction in the chain and it does not adhere to the bone, then incise all that is rotting and throw that out, and appropriately treat it."
"But if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which blood flow can occur and it is not severed by medicines, then inquire about the artery; and if you find that it has not been incised, then incise that with a spatula or ligate it. And if necessity provokes that what we have said does not conform, then cauterize until the blood is severed."
"And if these wounds are simple and small, then the cause of them is light. Therefore, you powder those with this powder, for it solidifies that before the air changes it."
"And the manner of the powder is this: take oil of sesame one part, dragon's blood three parts, and un-extinguished incense five parts; grind it all together and sift it, and with it fill the wound, and constrain it well until it adheres to it, and coagulate it with the blood."
"And appropriately constrain that from above with powders and leave it; do not remove it while it is like this until it becomes an abscess because the medicine does not eradicate it before it is healed."
"And sometimes you can use just cautery when you do not have incense and dragon's blood available."
"During great plagues, perform this operation: place and tighten them over those areas; these recent plague sores have not been altered by the air."
"And if the air has altered them, especially in summer time, it is not intended to use this powder. Instead, treat those with the remedy we mentioned earlier: apply a poultice made from honey and flour mixed with water or apply an ointment made from these ingredients. Also treat them with another cure until they are healed."
"And if there happens to be a small bone fracture during the plague, then do this: extract it using gestures."
"And you should say that there is no cure for skull fractures in this case."
"Regarding plague of the neck:"
"But if the plague happens in the neck, there is no difference in treatment between that and simple head plague."
"But if the nerves or arteries of the neck are cut, then if it is a nerve, there is nothing to be done except to avoid treatment with anything that causes vehement constriction, such as zinc and vitriol. These things resemble them in color and can cause paralysis." "And do not apply any treatment for plague caused by heat, because the substance of nerves is hot and their continuation is with the brain, which is the source of all members."
"And if it is treated with light medicines, such as washing with sweet water, sometimes mixed with rose or non-rose oil, and turpentine when washed with sweet water, and other stones ground in this way, and moistened."
"But if the plague is large, then stitches should be applied, or the lips of it closed, and afterwards treat it with powders until it is healed."
"But if there is depth in the plague or it has happened at a low point that has become corrupted, then perforate it where it is most pressed."
"But if an artery has been cut in the plague and there is bleeding, then separate or dry it out, ligate it, or cauterize it if necessary to provoke it."
"But if the vertebrae of the neck have been injured or all, and if the veins of the neck are saved, then sew up the lips of the wound over the spine of the neck and do not touch that; afterwards equalize it and reduce it to its natural figure, and then strengthen it with decent strapping, leaving it for a few days; afterwards treat it with things that have constriction and excitation until it is healed."
"But if the plague has already reached the bone and caused damage, then percuss it, and if there are fragments of bone in it, remove all that you can; and what cannot be removed, leave it until the plague putsrefies, separates, and its inflammation is alleviated."
"And if the plague is fresh, then powder it with that powder which I have recommended to you." "But if there is a fistula in the plague, then treat it with what is remembered above in its chapter."
"If it is a wound from a lance or a knife and the depth of it is not known, then consider whether there is wind coming out of the plague when the patient breathes; if so, know that the plague is mortal."
"And if it is not deep and the plague is fresh with its own blood, then pause in it for the first hour with the powder recommended above, and do not strengthen it so that the blood is not retained in the depth of it and does not return to the heart and aggravate the illness, but rather pause in it with attractive ointment, and cleanse it twice a day."
"And if the ointment is not available to you, then pause in the opening of the plague with cotton moistened so that it may absorb what comes out from the humidities; and make sure that the patient sleeps on the plague so that what is collected in it may flow."
"But if three days or more have passed since the plague and no spasms or palpitations of the heart or constriction of the lung occur in the patient, and all other conditions are good, then know that the plague is saved; and therefore treat it with poultices and the other treatment until it is healed."
"But if its healing is delayed and a long time has passed, then know that there is already a fistula; therefore treat it according to its chapter."
"And if the plague is from an incision made with a razor or a knife and is simple on the surface of the flesh or the back, then treat it with what has been mentioned above about suture, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small."
"But if there has already been damage to the bone and small pieces have formed in it, then turn the plague inside out and try to extract those pieces if they are separated." "But if they are not separated, then leave them until the plague putsrefies, as extraction of them will be alleviated."
"And for other accidental wounds in the other members, their treatment is the same as what has been said above."
"About wounds of the belly."
"The condition that occurs in the belly is either great, or small, or moderate."
"Request for disruption is made difficult by another manner, and so it seems that the reduction of them is more difficult if you do not immediately return them to their own place, because they break and swell up so that the introduction of them becomes difficult."
"And therefore the best disruption is middle, because in that one the reduction of the bowel is not difficult, as it is difficult in the two species before mentioned."
"And know that suture of the belly is done in four manners, but two sutures are common that are useful in sutures of the other wounds of the body."
"And the two other proper sutures communicate with others, but however they are more proper in the suture of the belly."
"And I recount to you each one with exposition and declaration."
"Therefore I say that when the wound is small and some cause of the bowel comes out through it, and it is difficult to reduce it, then this is in one of two manners: either by the smallness of the disruption as we have said, or when the bowel has come swelling up because of the coldness of the air."
"And therefore when this is so, it is necessary that you scarify that until you immerse a sponge or wet cloth in hot water only, or you take it in water with soap, and cypers, and spice, and embrocations with that the swelling may be resolved."
"And sometimes this is done in wine, where there is astringency, and it is better that the water alone in the resolution of the swelling."
"And therefore when you see that the swelling is resolved, then you moisten the bowel with water in which white althea and mallow are cooked, because by this it is eased from within with few causes."
"But if the bowel has not been emptied from its contents by this treatment, then incise the disruption a little with an instrument with which you can cut out hemorrhoids."
"And the first cure is better when it is appropriate that there is no sectioning, and there is no occupation to cut off except necessity and deficiency."
"Regarding the instrument, see its form:"
"The one end of it is cut acute and the other not acute, and the extremity is subtle but not too much so as to be like a spatha, rather let it be blunt somewhat."
"And therefore when the wound is enlarged and the bowel comes out, then its reduction should be according to its natural form, in its proper place if that is possible, because it is better."
"But when the disruption is large and it is in the lower part of the belly, then you should make the patient lie on his back and raise his hips up as high as his head; but if it is in the upper part of the belly, then you should raise his head and place him on his side."
"And similarly if the disruption is in one of the two sides of the belly, then you should always have your intention and consideration towards this so that the part where the wound is may be raised up more than the other."
"And thus it is necessary that you administer this in large wounds and in medium-sized wounds."
"And in small wounds, pause what is prepared for you, and let it be that the minister between your hands is between the most skilled ones, who will hold the disruption entirely with his hand and adjust the lips of it, and let him uncover from this to that which secures some cause or other."
"And this is the common way of suturing: one that you take the needle or count of needles according to the quantity of the breadth of the wound; and then leave it at the extremity of the disruption from the ring finger, and thread the needle through once, but do not put a knot on both ends of the cord, with two ends of the ciphac which is left the cord of the parts within, until you have made that penetrate that part; and you already have four orders done."
"And then thread with double thread around the needle, and sometimes two parts together, and then join both lips and the wound by a decent joining; and then leave the thickness of the finger and place another needle in that, and then tie it with thread like the first one with the needle; and do not cease doing this until you have completed all the contraction of the wound."
"And let the needles be medium-sized between thickness and subtlety, for thin needles cut through the flesh too lightly; and thick ones are difficult to insert into the cord, therefore it is necessary that they be medium in thickness and subtlety."
"And it is not necessary that the needle be fixed too much in both ends of the cord, so that the flesh is not cut lightly and the wound closes before its consolidation."
"And do not make stitches too long lest the wound be hindered from healing."
"And also cut the ends of the needles so that they do not bother the patient during his sleep; and you will place over the stitches powder spread out from every part, which will hold the ends of the needles; and leave those until you know that the wound has already healed."
"And this kind of stitching with needles in whatever way is more suitable for small wounds, because it suffices to use one needle or two or around those."
"But the second stitching is like this: it is that you administer with stitching the four ends, of the cord and both ends of the ciphac, at once, with a needle in which there is thread wrapped around it in subtlety and thickness."
"And then when with the needle you have penetrated these four ends, reduce the needle from that same part from which you began, so that the thread draws back from the uppermost part of the wound to the lower part, so that the stitching is like stitching cloth in which the cloths are stretched."
"And place between each stitch the thickness of a little finger."
"And this stitching is known to men."
"And with such stitching I closed a wound that had happened to a man in his belly, which had been caused by a knife, and the disruption of the wound was more than a palm, and it extended from the bowels around two palms of the bowel of the middle place, and the disruption was in the middle of the member; and then I reduced it after twenty-four hours since the bowel had been forced out by the wound."
"And the wound was healed in the space of fifteen days or so, and he was cured; and this lived for many years, and is still conversing in his dispositions."
"And the other doctors had judged that he would not be healed; and by miracle it was, for I did not cure him with ointment, because it was in a place where no ointment nor any medicine could be applied, but I placed cotton on the wound twice a day and washed it assiduously with honey water until it was healed."
"But I will tell two kinds of stitching proper according to the narration of the Word."
"And it is that you begin with stitching the cord, and then enter the needle from the outer part to the inner part."
"And then with the needle penetrating into the cord and in that part where it enters, according to its length and width throughout the body, leave the end of the thread in which you have entered the needle; and make the needle penetrate from within outwards in the other end of the thread."
"Once you have inserted the needle, then insert it again in the same point of the skin from without to within; and let go of the extremity of the sinew that is on this side, and insert the needle into the other extremity of the within part towards without."
"And make your penetration such that you penetrate into the sinew at its extremity which is in the within part that everything penetrated."
"First start from this side and pierce with the extremity that is on the other side of the sinew, remove the needle from the cord that has been penetrated, then reinsert it into that cord and join it to the extremity of the sinew which is on the other side with this extremity of the mirror; then remove it from the cord which is from there."
"And do this once or twice, and do it once again inside out as you see fit according to that example."
"And the summary of this manner of suture is that you should use suturing with silk thread, so that you pierce the sinew once from the side of the cord's extremity and leave it for another time to complete it."
"But the second species of suture which Doctor Guainerio describes explicitly is that you should pierce it according to semi-circumference, as some physicians do. Thus they join each part to its corresponding part conveniently by nature; and they apply one extremity of it to another extremity and the other extremity of the mirror to another extreme, and this is done according to how you recommend."
"And that you leave the needle in the extremity of the mirror near the part outside, and make it penetrate into the inside of that part, leaving two extremities of the sinew; and then turn the needle around and make it penetrate from outside to inside at both extremities of the sinew."
"And then turn those loops around and make each loop penetrate from inside out into the outside of that part at both extremities of the mirror, except for those on the opposite side."
"And this manner of suture is better than common light suture, and it is the suture which was previously mentioned."
"This is the speech of Guainerio"
"And some say that abdominal suture is rectified with two needles, so that you insert into each loop a thread and begin with needle insertion from the side where it should be done, making it penetrate inside to the other side according to the suture of those who sew the bowels together."
"And know that when the rupture is in the middle of the abdomen, then the suture of it is more difficult than in other places of the abdomen."
"But the judgement of treatment of plague is judged by other plagues."
"Which is why, when you first notice a wound with blood clots due to altered air, reduce the hernia and cover it properly, then apply healing powder."
"If the wound has already become inflamed, then cover it with an egg membrane that you have at hand. Make sure they are fresh and clean, dry them thoroughly, and examine them carefully; apply the same treatment as for other wounds until it heals."
"But if you are not present, then apply this treatment immediately, as the wound begins to form blisters and scars. Change the dressing every two days, just as you have taught, until it heals, since simple wounds require no other medication in many cases."
"But if you fear that the wound may communicate with the main limbs, then you should soak lion's wool in high-quality olive oil or rose oil and apply it to the area between the joints and arteries."
"And if there is pain or putrefaction in the intestines, as often happens, then apply black stiptic powder with wine. Especially if the decay has reached the intestines and requires urgent evacuation from within the concavity."
"And know that wounds of the large intestine are easier to heal than those in the small intestines."
"And it is difficult to heal the wound that affects the "cecum," as no healing can occur if it cuts into it. This is due to its large number of veins and size, as well as its delicate nature and proximity to nerve tissue."
"But if the injury affects only the skin and you can reach it easily, then cut around it according to your discretion, carefully reducing the intestines."
"But if the wound has spread widely and appears black or livid, then apply a poultice of bran to the discolored area to draw blood from it, since there are veins and arteries in the skin."
"And then cut away anything that is attached to it, and tie off the two ends of the thread from which it hung before removing the wound, so that when you have eased its attraction, you can cleanse the skin and express the fluid from the wound."
"
"When rupture occurs in the intestines and is small, it may be possible for some people to recover. For example, I have seen a man who was struck on his right side by an arrow, causing a wound in his stomach that had healed over time but still had a fistula opening. He was able to manage it with medications and diet."
"So I advised him to cease trying to heal the wound further once it was clear that it would not be cured. Instead, he should focus on cleaning and bandaging the area so that it could consolidate."
"And I saw that once the wound had healed over, he suffered no further illness due to the injury in his stomach. He did not complain about any discomfort and maintained good health by eating well, drinking moderately, bathing regularly, and exercising."
"Some experienced practitioners have said that when a small rupture occurs in the intestines, it should be treated in this manner: take figs with large heads and place one on each side of the wound. Then wrap another fig around both sides of the wound so that its mouth is open. When it absorbs onto those sides and tightens its mouth, cut off its head, as it adheres but does not dissolve."
"And then place another fig near the first one, and continue this process with figs until all of the wound is covered according to its size."
"And then reduce and sew up the wound. Leave those attached heads inside the intestine until it has healed, without causing any harm or discomfort."
"And it is possible to suture the intestine with a fine thread made from the gut of an animal, as it is more like a needle. You should take the end of this gut thread and make sure it is well-scraped, then tie one end of it around the end of the intestine with a double knot. Then pass that tied end through a needle and suture the intestine back together at the site of the rupture."
"And this method of suturing with figs is merely a matter of trust and hope."
"But if the wound is large and extensive, especially if it is in one of the small intestines, then suturing alone will not suffice, as it will only result in a fine scar without healing the wound completely."
"On treating fistulas and abscesses:"
"Know that all plague and boil when it empties and becomes ancient, and is made into an ulcer, and is not consolidated and gives off a bad smell at all times, then in any member it is universally called fistula, which we call azukem."
"According to truth, fistula is a hard, rough, white nodosity that causes no pain and has concavity like the concavity of chicken bone; therefore it is called that swollen tumor, which means chicken bone."
"And in some people it is moist, which gives off a bad smell; but when the moisture is cut out in certain hours, it becomes firm." "Sometimes this moisture is thick, scant, coarse, and subtle."
"I have already shown all those causes, and the signs of them, and the treatment of them with medicines in the division."
"And therefore I will tell you about the treatment of fistula which is done by operation with my hands."
"And you should know that fistula occurs in all the members of the body: for there are fistulas that pertain to large veins and arteries, or to nerves, or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to some of the vertebrae of the back, or to some of the compound joints formed by composition like those of the hand and foot; and there are those that occur near the principal member and similar ones."
"And therefore those of these fistulas that are according to this manner are difficult to heal and do not receive treatment; occupation with them is hard work and ignorance."
"And if there is any of these fistulas whose depth does not reach those places that I have mentioned, and you hope and trust in its healing, and you want to find out about it, then take a thread or an iron probe and try to feel it with it."
"But if the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a lead probe, because lead with its weight and malleability is straightened out and curved along its twists."
"And if the fistula has many horrible openings, it will not be possible for you to determine anything about it with a probe."
"Then close the opening by its openings, because the humidity with which you perform the clyster will go through the other openings and come out of them."
"And therefore investigate carefully to find out in which way it is possible for you to know if here there are arteries or nerves and whether the fistula is long or short, or whether it has many openings and is located above all this with the greatest effort of your strength, with your examination, with which you examine the illness, and the discovery of pain through compression with your hand on the place, and similar signs and causes of accidents to ulcers."
"And when you have examined all those causes with true observation, then come to the treatment according to your judgment: and it is whether you consider now if it is an apparent fistula near or in a healthy place, long or far from joints, nerves, arteries, veins, or any of the places that I have told you about."
"Then dry the fistula according to what has been said before about its narration, and remove whatever is in that filtration and of decaying flesh, and whatever is born in the opening of the flesh or of bile and similar things, and cure it inside until it is healed."
"But if the fistula is of great depth and is straight, then you should insert it into the probe as much as possible, and clean it thoroughly of all its decaying flesh; and apply dressings wrapped in sharp medicines, and introduce them into the cavity of the fistula that you have pierced with iron."
"And do this several times inside until the sharp medicine burns away all the decay in the cavity of the fistula due to corruption."
"And then restore it with ointments that generate healthy flesh until it is healed."
"But if it does not heal with this, then cauterize it according to what we have recommended."
"But if the cause of the fistula is bones and you are certain of this, then investigate it and dry it according to what we have recommended, provided that you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or main member as we have said."
"But if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and blackness in it, then scrape that inside until all the corruption is removed; and cure it with something that will make it flesh again until it is healed."
"And if it does not heal and throws out again as it did before, then know that you have not reached the complete eradication of the corruption; and therefore expose it again and carefully do the reasoning about it and the cleaning of it with your strongest forceps, and then restore it."
"And therefore if it is healed, good. But if not, then know that the corruption is in the deep and distant part of the body, which has not been reached, and therefore in this case there is nothing else to do but leave it alone."
"And if the corrupted bone is small or if you are able to pull it out, then pull it out with fine forceps that are suitable for that."
"And if there are many bones, then carefully perform the extraction of all of them, and do not leave any cause with your strength."
"But if you encounter any difficulty with the humidity and there is no fear or mistake in its incision, then cut those membranes or flesh if it is here, and free the bones."
"But if you are not able to expose the bones at that time, then press on the wound whatever can cover it and leave it there until that is around those bony flesh and membranes, and guard the wound so that it does not heal and so that the section that you have cut in your operation is kept open."
"Have them, if you fear, compress it with a cotton cloth soaked in olive oil, or cotton cloth soaked in Egyptian pitch, or in one of the green ointments, because when these membranes dry out and the bones are separated from each other, the extraction is made easier."
"But if it is a large bone like the thighbone or shinbone or similar ones, and only the surface of it is corrupted, then scrape that inside with sharp steel only until that blackness and corruption are exposed, and then restore the wound."
"But if most of it is corrupted and the corruption has reached the bone marrow, then it is necessary to close that and cut it open where the corruption has reached, and then treat it until it heals."
"I advise you to have someone help hold that man in place so you can perform your operation."
"A young man of about thirty years old was brought to me complaining of pain in his groin. An examination showed that the swelling was on the inside of the lower abdomen and had extended into the scrotum, forming an abscess with a large amount of pus, which was not caused by any external injury."
"And thus much time passed with that abscess growing larger because of the error of some physicians. Much matter accumulated, and its treatment was delayed until a fistula formed in the skin, through which all sorts of pus and moisture from the body could flow."
"And then many doctors tried to treat him over a period of two years, but none of them had any knowledge or skill in this area until I was called."
"I saw the fistula in his groin and the abundant matter that flowed from it over a large area. His body was already greatly emaciated, and his complexion was yellowish."
"And then I inserted my finger into one of those fistulas and reached the bone."
"Examine all the openings promptly and find those that come from every part of the chamber."
"And then you will cut and open one of those openings where you discovered a fracture in the bone, and you will find that it is rotten, and already earthy and decayed; and a part of the chamber through which it has entered is also decayed."
"And then you shall close what was revealed to me about the discovered bone."
"And you ensured that it was not the bone but rather that decay which you cut and closed, and you had already cleared it."
"Indeed, the treatment of plague with medicine has been paused for a long time, and it is not yet consolidated."
"Indeed you investigated again and discovered on the bone secondly on the first discovery, and you found continued decay with the bone."
"And closed what seemed to me from that decay, and indeed you were perforated fairly the cure of it and restoration, and it is not restored."
"And then you discovered again on it and did not cease to incise the bone little by little particularly and persistently pursuing its restoration, but it was not restored until you incised around a palm's length of it, and that extracted with its marrow, and indeed restored it with medicines, and it is now lightly consolidated and healed."
"And iteration in the operation and section of it is not necessary except for the disposition of its fragility and for the scarcity of its tolerance and fear of death, for it has drowsiness at all times due to superfluity of evacuation and bad syncope."
"And healed is for complete healing, and nothing remains in place of hard flesh; the disposition of it in its body is good and has returned its virtue; it is converted into its dispositions and does not do anything contrary to it in movement nor harm in any cause."
"But if it is prominent in place of the body already troubled, then you should cut that according to this manner: and thus take linen and strengthen that at the extremity of that prominent bone, and command someone to extend that in his hands; and pause that linen with wool thicker than the first linen; and indeed tie that over the flesh which is next to the bone, and extend the extremity of it so that you draw the flesh away from its sides, and uncover the flesh on the place where you want to saw so that the saw does not touch the flesh."
"And pause a bench or table next to the bone properly placed, for when you do this it prevents the saw from cutting the corrupted flesh."
"And the sawing must be done little by little on the place of corruption, for if it is in the concavity of the bone where there is decay and does not appear in its appearance to touch, then it must be sawn again."
"And if the bone is decayed but not prominent, then one part continues with the other, and the decay is in the middle place or at its end, then uncover the flesh from all sides; and indeed pause a bench next to it, and indeed saw that from the first part where there is decay until it is continuous with the sawing of the other part."
"And let the sawing be according to the place of corruption, little by little, as we have said."
"And if the decay is at the joint, incise that decayed joint, and saw the bone where it continues with the other part."
"And if from the decay there is continuity between two joints, then it is not in its ratio but ingenious."
"And if the decay is in the palm of the hand or foot, it is very difficult; nevertheless you must inquire how the decay appears to you, and abrade that, and cleanse that according to each disposition which is possible for you, and with every ingenuity let it be rectified by you when it does not do harm to vein or nerve."
"And know which are the incising tools and saws for incising these bones are many according to the situation of the bones, and their preparation, and their thickness, and their subtlety and greatness and smallness, and their hardness and rarity; therefore you must prepare all kinds of suitable instruments for that operation."
"And know that this operation implies to you about the kind of instrument which you need; for when you have great learning and long knowledge and experience in the ways of this art, and testimony of ways of illnesses, then already you had by yourself what is convenient for it among the instruments for each illness."
"And here I give you forming at the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you will pause with these simple ones with which you will proceed to your prohibition which you will experience on the others." "Form of saw:"
Another form of saw:
"Another form of large saw:"
"Form of a ray:" "The head of this ray is in the shape of a star-headed key, and its points are in the shape of asterisk."
"And it would be convenient if with that [saw] the heads of the joints could be rubbed together when they are broken or if the mouth is too wide."
"Form of a smaller razor:"
"Form of a broad-bladed razor:"
"A well-made saw in another form: let it be made as curved as possible and its edge sharp like iron, and its handle made of good-quality horn, well-fashioned." "Form of a sickle:"
"Form of a razor with concave edge:"
"Another form of subtle razor:"
"Form of another razor with curved tip:"
"A small form of razor resembling an arrowhead:"
"Another smaller form of cutter:"
"Form of another cutter; this one resembles a saw, with its tip like a serrated edge, and it is used in many places for cutting bones."
"The form of a saw which is convenient for cutting through bones that have been drilled."
"And its tip is triangular and sharp-pointed."
"And it is made of Indian steel, similarly suitable for all the uses that we have mentioned concerning razors and cutters and saws."
"For cutting into bones and for sawing through them."
"Extremities decay either from an internal cause or from an external cause. If you have treated that decay with medications and the treatment does not help, sometimes the decay may spread to a nearby limb without any apparent cause. In this case, it is necessary to cut into that limb where the decay has occurred, so that the disease may be cured by cutting out that part which is causing death or harm, as this is the greater remedy for the limb."
"And the sign of this is that the limb becomes black where it has been burned, even if there was no fire to burn it, or the decay approaches the blackness so that putrefaction reaches throughout that limb and spreads throughout the body. Therefore, it is necessary to cut into that."
"And similarly, if decay is caused by the bite of some venomous creature like a scorpion or a viper or a rat or similar."
"If the decay or bite is at the tip of the finger, then you should cut off the finger and not give space for the decay to spread into the hand."
"And similarly, if it reaches the hand, then you should cut off that part of the wrist, so that decay does not spread into the forearm."
"If instead it reaches the arm, then you should cut off the arm at the elbow joint."
"If decay passes beyond that and sometimes reaches around the elbow joint, then in such a case death from the disease is inevitable. And administering any other cause for cure besides amputation at this point is merely a matter of quantity of virtue."
"And similarly, if decay reaches the toe of the foot, then you should cut off that toe at its joint."
"If it affects the heel of the foot, then you should cut off the whole foot." "But if it can reach the knee, then you should cut off the leg at the joint of the knee."
"But if decay has already reached above the knee, then there is nothing else to be done but to let it take its course and leave the disease to its natural death."
"The manner of cutting off or sawing through a limb is as follows: first you should stretch the ligaments on the side where you wish to cut, and then stretch another ligament above that place. Then the assistant should extend one ligament towards the sides, and the other assistant should extend another ligament upwards. And you should separate the flesh which lies between two ligaments with a broad knife so that all the flesh is exposed. Then it may be cut or sawn through."
"And care must be taken to apply a bandage of linen to all parts so that the place is not touched by anything else, and so that the wound may heal properly with an appropriate scar."
"But if bleeding occurs during the operation, then you should cauterize the place carefully, or apply some powders that will arrest the blood. Then return to your medication until it is completed."
"And afterwards bind up the limb with a bandage at its proper place, and care for it until it is healed."
"And I will tell you what happened to one man in his foot, which I and you are discussing, namely that he suffered an accident where the blackness appeared on his foot with burning such that it resembled fire-burnt."
"And this decay first affected his toe so that it spread throughout the whole foot."
"Then that man prepared for himself puts on a plaster where the cure goes to the member with the intensity of its heat that overcomes pain and burning, and he enters that foot into the joint, and it is healed."
"For a long time, it happened that this plaster fell into corruption in his hands."
"Then it came to me, and so I was perforated by that superfluity with the water that I had placed on his hand for the medicine, near the purification of his body; and the superfluity was not contained and began to go to another finger where it began in his hand."
"And he told me to incise his hand, but I did not want to do that hoping for the containment of that superfluity, and more than that I feared for the incision of his hand death, because the power of illness was strong."
"And although he persisted with me, he returned to his land and it came to my knowledge that this man prepared and incised all of his hand, and he was healed."
"And I have not recorded this narrative except to serve as an aid for what may befall from this illness, and that there may be significance for which it is signified and according to which it operates."
"On the treatment of sinus conditions and the quality of enemas with medicines."
"When an abscess occurs in some fleshy members and the space of the abscess extends until it makes collection of pus, and then it bursts and perforates, and the pus comes out from it, and the place remains empty as if it were a vessel, and the cord that is above it appears thus like a thin cloth, and no corruption has reached behind, and does not impress on bone or nerve or ligament, it is called a sinus, and it is not called a fistula."
"But if the space extends within where corruption impresses on some member, then it is called a fistula and not a sinus."
"And its treatment is to incise that cord entirely as it appears, especially when it is thin and made like cloth, and you ensure that it does not adhere to the place by its corruption."
"But if you hope that the cord will adhere and that corruption has not yet reached behind succession, and there is secretion from the face of the cord, then treat it with an enema."
"And if you consider the sinus and then it is large and the arm that extends has a foul odor, then apply an enema with Egyptian medicine which is made of oil, sour wine and cinnamon powder, mixed equally in one vessel and cooked over the fire until it reaches the consistency of honey."
"And then you take from it what is necessary and dissolve it with water and honey; and apply the enema with that to the sinus, and strengthen the opening of it, and leave the medicine in it for the duration of two hours."
"And then remove that with a probe; and do this for so many days until the sinus is cleansed and the corruption is removed."
"And sometimes an enema is applied with water of ashes when this medicine is not present. And if you take the ash of grapevines, put it on the water, and then boil that and apply the enema with it until you are satisfied that the sinus is cleansed."
"And if the patient cannot tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the water of ashes, then apply an enema with water and honey mixed together three times, and also apply one with wine and honey mixed, because the property of honey is to cleanse and wash, and wine makes the sinus adhere, especially when there is surplus of astringency and dryness in the wine."
"And when you do this several times and are satisfied that the sinus has been removed, then apply an enema with what causes flesh to grow in it."
"And if you take some diaphoretic unguent and dissolve it with rose oil and astringent wine, or apply the enema with other medicines and unguents that have the properties that have already been written in the treatise on unguents."
"And if the opening of the sinus is narrow and cannot receive the cannula of the enema, then dilate it gradually with a small iron probe, and pause in it with warm water wrapped in Egyptian unguent or basilicon unguent until it is dilated."
"And similarly, if the opening is wide, then gather its lips with a suture and leave in it the quantity that is between the enema without addition."
"And if the opening of the sinus from which the arm emerges is elevated above the parts above it, then close that in the pus below its place so that the arm may run down easily, because when the arm is compressed by the narrowness of the sinus, flesh can be generated there."
"And if it is not possible to close the sinus in the pus below according to what you wish, then prepare the member with preparation so that the arm may run out of it lightly as it appears to you and that there is no cause of the arm retained in it."
"Remove that which is over the opening of the sinus, which removes it at all hours so that it does not hinder what is adjusted in it regarding the arm." "And so that you may know if what runs out from the sinus of the arm is much or little, whether it is digested or undigested:"
"And with this consider also the place of that sinus, if the patient feels pain there or not, and if it is in the apostema."
"And when your treatment has lasted in this manner and you see that the matter which is cast upon the opening of the sinus is already adhering or begins to adhere, then remove it on the third day, and when you remove it, then change the cloth for another and renew the unguent."
"But if the sinus already has some subtle virus, then do not despair of its adhesion, because its healing is approaching, for there are some people in whom the generation of flesh takes a long time in their wounds, and among those there are also those in whom it happens conversely."
"And if the arm is undigested from the sinus for many days, then know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and the cause is prolonged, then adjust drying medicines, and if the medicines are humid in their substance and virtue, they become dry like lion unguent when there is an excess of addition of zein."
"And the last thing with which it is treated is that you take lion unguent and dissolve it in rose oil, and put old, thick wine into its substance, and then apply it over there, and use it."
"And it seems to me in that action, when there is no arm, to use lion unguent with honey when it is cooked until it is thickened, and apply it; or you may take myrrh and aloe and incense, grind all of them together and powder over the honey when it is on the fire, and then spread that over a cloth and apply it over the sinus; and also spread that with the honey which you have cooked until it is thickened, and powder over a cloth and apply it."
"And sometimes, a long-winded discussion and cutting of celestial lilies (and these are celestial lilies) along with acorn flour and centaurea is administered, and use is made of those simples or adjusted ones, crushed them and sifted them and powdered over the honey that has been recommended; and thus it is done."
"And if the pain continues and is not cured by this treatment, you will know that the corruption is in the head of it, and then make inquiry into the bones or other hard members or membranes. Then you treat it with a fistulous cure, as was said above."
"For the treatment of blisters, crushed onion and adding garlic juice and cutting the finger."
Wart is an aposteme that appears under the nail of the big toe of the hand or foot, and often appears on other toes as well. When it becomes prolonged and its cure is less desired, it is called a cauterized aposteme, or it is corrupted and emits a fluid that corrodes the root of the nail, often corrupting the entire nail. And sometimes this corruption reaches the bone, which then has a foul odor, making the tip of the toe red and the color dark.
And so, when you have that which we have spoken of in the division and your cure does not take effect, then it is necessary for you to incise around all the superfluity that remains from the nail and properly cauterize the wound around it, for cautery is very helpful in this case.
But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, but the corners of the nail begin to press on the flesh inside, causing pain and discomfort, then it is necessary for you to make a small incision at the angle of the nail that is pressing on the flesh, and gently lift up that edge and cut away the excess flesh with ease. Then apply medications that are corrosive and burn away all that remains of the excess flesh. And properly dress the wound with ointment until it heals.
But if the corruption has already reached the bone, then it is necessary for you to cut into the bone and remove it, for there is no time when the bone can be healed once it is corrupted.
And if the corrosion and corruption have reached the finger, then you should cut into it on one of the joints according to its memory, and properly dress the wound until it heals.
But if the nail has suffered percussion or attrition and there is severe pain in that area, then at first you should gently bleed the affected part. Then carefully cut across the nail from top to bottom with a sharp spatha, taking care not to let the cut reach the flesh beneath the nail, for this would cause severe pain and result in the birth of excess flesh in that location. And then dress the wound with something that will relieve pain.
A finger that is well-formed, the flesh of which is thick and fleshy, and the bone of which is strong and hard, or a nail that is hard and tough.
And some are born at the root of the joint, or else their birthplace is in some of the joints of these fingers. "Yet he who was born in certain joints of the finger does not suffer pain, but he who is born in strong joints suffers greatly."
"And among those that are born flesh-colored, the section is light, and you should incise it with a broad blade."
"But of that which is born in the joint's root, cure is difficult; therefore guard against its incision."
"But in that which is born in those fingers, it is necessary to incise at the beginning the flesh of it with a round incision into the bone, and then saw with one of those suitable saws for that purpose, and then cure it so that it may heal."
"But consolidation which occurs in these between their jointed bones or by the birth of man that is born so, or by consolidation of phlegm or combustion of fire, or by similarity, then it is necessary to cut away that consolidation until the said joints return to their natural form."
"And then pause between their membranes of the lungs with rose oil infused so that they may not become consolidated lightly, and separate them one from another, or place a thin plate of lead between them so that it may be consolidated as necessary."
"And similarly if consolidation occurs in some of these with the palm, then cut away that consolidation according to how it is prepared and convenient for the figure of the member."
"Of incision of veins, there are many ways."
"Veins are many and there are large veins wrapped around thickly filled with superfluous black bile which come out in the joints of the limbs of the body, and their greatest abundance is in the thighs, especially in those of travelers, laborers, and porters."
"Therefore it is necessary to administer purgation of the body from black bile several times with strong evacuation, and then bleed the patient from the basilic vein."
"But the cure of them with iron is according to two ways: one way is that it should be incised and that black blood should be drawn out, and another way is that the vein should be raised up and all should be extracted."
"The section of the leg is according to this way: first anoint the beginning of the thigh with cold water much so that thick blood may be resolved, which is sediment of the thigh, and then bind the thigh of the sick from the upper part of the hipbone down to the lower part of the groin with a bandage, and then cut the vein in one place or two or three with broad section, and then raise out black blood with a sponge from below the part above the thigh into it up and down so that as much blood as you wish may be taken away and that times may suffice, and which may tolerate the virtue of the sick."
"And then bind it up and command him to abstain from foods generating black bile."
"And repeat the cure by phlebotomy when veins are full and as much as is necessary for the sick person."
"But the elevation of them is according to this way: you who raise up the thigh of the sick one, if there are knots on it, and then place him in bath and anoint his thigh with cold water until it reddens and veins become prominent; or have him exercised by strong exercise, if bath is not present, until the member becomes hot."
"And then cut the cord in the right of the vein by section in the long or last of it you should do to the groin, or in the upper part of it you should do to the heel."
"And then tie up the cord with forceps and strip the vein from all sides until it appears to the touch, and it should be the appearance of him who often that vein asks declining towards blackness."
"And then when you evacuate, tie up the cord again with white wax which should be hard."
"And then place below that part until it is elevated and thrown off from the cord, and suspend it with anointed wool or lint."
"And then cut another section close to that section by three fingers, and then strip the cord from the part above the vein until it appears."
"And then elevate that and cut it in last section towards the heel, and then extract that and elevate that until it is taken away by second section, and then extract that from the section which is above it."
"And do thus until you extract that from the section which is above or beyond all sections, until all is taken away; and then cut it."
"And if you do not obey to extract and elevate, then insert a strong double-threaded needle and ligate that and extract it, or insert below the part and turn your hand around until it is thrown out." "And be careful that it is not cut; because if it is broken, it will be difficult for you to elevate much and harm will come upon the sick one by that."
"And when all is completely thrown out, then place on the place of the wound with wool moistened in rose oil and unroasted oil and oil roasted, and cure it until it is healed."
"And if the vein is contracted having no tortuosity at which there may be encirclement to parts, and not being according to rectitude as we have said, then you should cut over that through all part of tortuosity of it and in places of encirclement of it, and then suspend it with forceps until you elevate that completely."
"And be careful to make your section so as not to cut the vein and not to wound that because it will be difficult for you to elevate much; and use your wisdom in this."
**Form of the incident with which vein is cut:**
"It is not sharp like needles and it does not have a pointed tip so that it doesn't harm the vein. It is thick but flexible, because if it were thin it would pierce the vein due to its thinness. As we have said, it has an excess of thickness."
"For removal of varicose veins."
"This vein originates in the legs, both on the land of Arabs and in the lands of India where it is hard and dry with little tenderness, where there is neither grass nor shrubbery."
"And likewise, it also arises from other parts of the body besides the legs."
"And its formation comes from putrefaction which arises from the spine, just as venom inside the body produces snakes, worms, crabs and worms generated between the spine and the flesh."
"And a sign of the onset of this condition is when there occurs inflammation in the leg that becomes swollen and red, from which the vein starts to emerge like a plant root."
"And when it appears at the end of this condition, then you should wrap around that one pound weight of lead which is the weight of two dragons; and tie it there, leaving the lead suspended from the leg."
"And whenever you notice that some part has moved outward due to this condition, then wrap it in lead and tie it there." "If it is prolonged, then you should cut off one part of it and wrap the remaining portion; but do not cut so deeply that it remains inside, for if you do this it will contract and enter into the flesh causing inflammation, putrefaction and a bad ulcer in that spot."
"Therefore it must be treated gradually and extracted little by little until all of it has been removed from the body, so that none of this condition remains inside."
"And there are some men in whom this vein is as long as two hands and ten fingers, and I have heard that one man had it up to twenty hands."
"And if it is cut during the time of its treatment, then insert a probe into the channel and pierce it with a long probe through the body until everything that is in it has been evacuated. Then apply putrefying medicines to this area for several days, and also treat it according to the cure for apostemes."
"And sometimes this vein has many branches, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot itself, and it comes out with many openings, each branch having its own opening."
"And therefore treat it as we have said in the division above, using the methods that have been described previously."
"Regarding cutting for worms generated under the skin, which is called bovine ailment."
"This ailment is called 'malautia bovina' in some lands because it often happens to oxen and it is a worm that is born between the spine and the flesh, it spreads throughout the body going up and down, causing the limbs to become paralyzed one by one until it breaks the spine and comes out."
"And its generation occurs through putrefaction of certain humors, just like what happens with worms, serpents, earthworms and ascarids in the belly."
"And it is feared because of its malice, for when it goes into the body and rises up to the head, reaching the brain, then it violently enters there and destroys it, causing many deaths."
"And therefore when you want to cure it and extract it, first find out its movement and appearance by sensation. Then grasp what is above it and what is below it with bandages and tight ligatures, dry the area above it, and extract it."
"And if it is embedded in the flesh and cannot be grasped, then apply a hot cautery to the area where it dwells until it dies. The main cause that is feared is corruption of the area, as we have said."
"If you want to treat someone who has reached the brain near the head, then grasp above the eyebrow with a tight bandage and dry it off. Then extract it; and the patient must undergo purgation of their body using medicines that evacuate bad humors, and they should avoid foods that cause putrefaction."
"Regarding cutting for the ailment called nafir."
"This ailment is called 'nafir' in our land and it is a pain that appears in some limbs and also changes from limb to limb."
"And you have already seen it described as I will tell you." "I was called to see a woman who was ill in a certain village. When I uncovered her arm, I saw a small inflammation on the vein of the elbow joint. After about an hour, I saw that inflammation move like a worm crawling towards me, but more slowly than it should be, as if it were alive silver flowing from place to place."
"And then the pain moved to that area and fixed itself in the muscle for about an hour."
"And then it ran through the other arm until it reached the other elbow joint."
"And she told me that she felt it moving throughout her body as I saw it. She was amazed by the way it moved and its speed from limb to limb." "And I had already seen something similar in my patients before that time, although I have not seen many cases where the pain moved from limb to limb." "But I did not see it happen like this in other patients as it happened with this woman."
"But I thought that this was because the woman was elderly, with dry skin and visible veins, which is why we could feel that moving wind."
"It is necessary that it does not appear according to this description in those who are delicate and have moist skin with hidden veins."
"And when you want to treat it and the patient feels that pain, if it is not apparent on the skin as we have said, then grasp over that area gently and dry it off until that constrained wind has come out. Then cauterize the area."
"But if you cannot feel it with your hands in that way, then treat it by purging the body and using whatever expels wind. Also use pills made from foul-smelling plants and those containing saffron and similar substances."
"Regarding the extraction of arrows."
"Arrows are diverse according to their species and the parts of the body where they strike. Their diversity is such that some have large points, others small, concave or blunt ones. Some are solid, while others have three edges, tongues, or barbs."
"And the signs of a wound to the brain are when an arrow strikes it and passes through the bone, causing shock, darkness before the eyes, dizziness, redness in the face, inflammation of the tongue, spasms and confusion of the mind, vomiting of bile, difficulty speaking or loss of speech, and there is white fluid resembling dust issuing from the wound, with the surrounding area appearing wet like flesh."
"And therefore if you see these signs, then abstain from treating and extracting the arrow, unless it is superficial."
"The signs of the arrow when it enters the heart are such that it is near the left nipple, and it feels as if something hard has been placed there, not a hollow cause. And strong and sudden movement of the arrow is like the movement of the pulse, and flow of black bloody plasma, and that chill in the extremities, sweat, faintness; thus you would know that death descends suddenly without warning."
"And the signs when the arrow has pierced the lung are: frothy bloody spittle from the mouth, and vessels near the neck become congested, and the color of the invalid is changed, and they expire with a great sigh or gasp for breath."
"And if the arrow pierces the pleura which is in the chest, there will be pain near the little ribs at once, and a great difficulty of breathing with violent pain and sighing, and all the members are paralyzed."
"And if the arrow pierces the stomach, immediately there is a strong flow of undigested food from the mouth."
"And if the arrow pierces the belly and is stuck there, some wound or tear of the flesh or bowel, which has been broken, will occur, and there is little hope for recovery from this, even if the arrow were extracted."
"And if the arrow pierces the bladder, urine flows out immediately, and there follows inflammation of the surrounding parts, and strong pain is felt at once, so that you will know it to be a fatal wound."
"But the other limbs such as the face, neck, throat, shoulders, arms, and ribs, spine, collarbone, and hip bone, and their likeness of members are saved according to the best conditions when the arrow does not strike a vein or artery and is not poisonous."
"And I will tell you what I have seen concerning these arrows, so that you may know how to treat them."
"That is why, in the case of a man who was pierced by an arrow in the lachrymal bone of his eye socket near the root of his nose, I extracted it from the other side leaving behind the gristle of his ear, and he recovered without any injury to his eye."
"And I extracted another arrow from a Jew which had struck him in the gristle of his eyelid, leaving behind the eyelid itself and the arrow was already hidden, and it was not possible to seize hold of it except for a little point by which it adhered to its shaft, and it was one of those sharp arrows of the Turks with a lion's head on which there were no feathers."
"And the Jew recovered, without any harm to his eye."
"And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man which had fallen into his throat; it was an Arabian arrow with feathers on it. And then I made an incision over that between two guides and it was already submerged in the throat. Then I carefully extracted it with forceps and pulled it out, and the Christian recovered."
"And I extracted another arrow from a man who had been pierced in his belly and thought that he would die from it. And after thirty days had passed with no change in his condition due to his natural disposition, I made an incision over the arrow and extracted it, and he recovered without any harm."
"And I saw another man in whom an arrow had struck his back and the wound had healed over it. And after seven years had passed, the arrow emerged at the root of his hip."
"And I saw a woman in whom an arrow had struck her belly and the wound had healed inside her without any change in her condition. And the woman did not suffer any harm in any of her natural functions."
"And I saw another man in whom an arrow had struck his face and the wound had healed over it, and then the arrow broke off without causing much pain, resembling these ones."
"And I extracted the arrow from the face of one of the king's princes which had struck him in the middle of his nose and was already inclined slightly to the right side. The whole arrow was hidden."
"And I was called for his treatment as soon as three days had passed after he was struck by the arrow."
"And then I drew out the arrow very straightly; and then I explored it with a subtle tent, but did not find it; yet he felt a prick coming from behind his right ear, and then hoped that this prick was because of the tip of the arrow."
"I plastered the place with plaster in which the attracting and digestive virtue was found, believing that this place would be suitable for it to appear to me where the arrowhead was, so that it could dry over it."
"And it did not happen that the arrow had reached that spot by chance; and I continued applying the plaster there for many days, but no accident happened; and the wound had healed in the meantime, and the illness from the injury of that place disappeared over the course of many days until one day he felt the arrow inside his nose and recognized it as such."
"And then I applied medicine that was corrosive and sharp to the wound for many days until it opened up, and with a probe I felt around that place, and grasped the tip of the arrow subtly, which adhered to the shaft."
"And thus I continued applying that sharp medicine to the opening of the wound until the tip of the arrow appeared visibly to me, and I spent four months with that for the duration of time."
"And then when the wound had become enlarged, and it was possible for me to insert the forceps into it, I seized that with them, but I could not remove it immediately, so then I did not cease subtly manipulating and inventing ways of doing so until one day I began to do so with a device made by hand, which will be described at the end of this chapter, with which I extracted it; and thus I restored that wound."
"And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored, but I restored it and the wound was consolidated, and the illness was healed entirely, and there remained nothing in it on any account."
"And I recount to you the method of extracting certain arrows because it is appropriate and significant that which I have not mentioned, for the parts of this art and the definitions of that are not understood with narration nor comprehended by this book."
"And the learned artist compares little about much; and what is present with what is absent, and he finds new operation and new instrument in the descent of foreign causes of the art when it happens."
"And therefore I say that arrows are not ejected from the members into which they are inserted, except in two ways: either by attraction of the place where it intersects, or by the contrary part."
"And that which is ejected by the place where it enters, it is an arrow proceeding in a fleshy place and is drawn out."
"And if it does not obey extraction at the moment that you catch it, then you should leave it for a few days until the flesh around it softens and its attraction and exit are alleviated."
"Similarly, if it is inserted in bone and does not obey extraction, then leave it for a few days and repeat that with attraction and motion each day, and it will be ejected."
"And if it does not obey extraction even after a few days, then you should pierce around the arrow in that bone on all sides with a subtle drill until the place is enlarged by the arrow, and thus extract it."
"But if the arrow is deeply hidden in the place of the body and is hidden from sensation, then you should search for it with your finger; and if you feel it, then attract it with some instruments that are convenient for its attraction."
"And if you cannot reach it because of the narrowing of the wound and the length of the penis, and there is neither bone nor nerve nor vein here, then incise on the wound until it is enlarged enough for it to be possible to extract the arrow."
"And if it is held by the ears with which it is gripped, then release the flesh in which it is inserted on all sides with whatever art you can devise; and devise about this: if you cannot succeed through evacuation of the flesh in fracture of the ears or torsion of them until it obeys."
"And when you perform extraction of the arrow in any place where it is, then use torsion of your hand with forceps on all sides until it makes that obey; and be subtle with extreme subtlety so that the arrow is not broken and is made easy for its difficult attraction and extraction."
"And if you cannot succeed with that at your moment, then leave it for a few days until the parts around it have softened, and thus repeat it; for now it will be alleviated." "But if you experience contrary flow of blood, then perform what we have said about cure in its chapter."
"And guard your virtue of incision of vein or nerve or cord, and devise in every possible way for evacuation of the arrow with facility, tranquility, slowness, and steadfastness as I have recommended to you."
"And then cause the arrow to contract in such a way that the illness follows the figure according to which the case of the arrow was made for it; for this is more beneficial." "But if that is not possible for you, then perform what is possible for you according to the figures."
"But the arrows that are ejected by the contrary of another party, or from which some part has already proceeded into its outer parts, or cause swelling in the extremity of the arrow through sensation of the flesh above the wound and thus enlarge it; then cut over it; and let the section be according to the quantity taken by the forceps; and thus extract it, for it is made light for extraction."
"But if it is retained in the bone, then twist your hand in contrary direction until the arrow impresses on the bone, and thus amplify its entrance, and thus extract it."
"And otherwise, leave it for a few days, and thus repeat it until it is extracted."
"And if the shaft of the arrow is in that, then push it out with it."
"But if the shaft is broken and you wish to perform pulsation, then introduce it and that if it is hard; use a concave instrument so that it enters between the concavity of it and the end of the arrow, and thus push it out with it."
"But if the arrow is concave, then push it out with a strong instrument entering into that, for the arrow is alleviated by that."
"And if the arrow is poisoned, then it is necessary that you incise all the flesh around where the wound is, if this is possible for you; and thus cure it with what is appropriate."
"If the arrow strikes the foot, belly, bladder, or side, and is close enough for you to touch it with your hand, and if it's possible for you to cut around it, then do so carefully, avoiding veins or nerves. Extract the arrow, and cover the wound with a poultice if necessary. Care for the patient until they are healed."
"Forceps-shaped instrument used to extract arrows:"
"The ends of these are shaped like bird's beaks, which become serrated when they grip the arrow so that it is not released."
"And among these there are many types: large, small, few, and medium-sized ones, according to the quantity of the arrow's size and its thickness, and the width of the wound and the tightness of the flesh."
"Like this: <diagram> so that it may facilitate the entry of the flesh into the arrow's concave cavity and be pushed in with it."
"Regarding venesection (flebotomia):"
"The veins usually opened during phlebotomy are: sixteen in the head, two pulsating veins near the ears, called temples; two veins apparent on both temples; two veins located at the corner of both eyes, called lacrimal veins; one vein prepared at the middle of the forehead and one at the tip of the nose; two veins at the neck; two veins at the upper lip; two veins at the lower lip; and finally, two veins behind the tongue." "The veins opened during phlebotomy in the arms are five: one is the cephalic vein which runs over the wild side (lateral side); it's called 'the head vein' and it's deaf; it's also a median vein composed of a branch from the basilica and another from the cephalic vein, which people call 'the vein of the whole body'; the basilica is the vein situated on the domestic (medial) side, known as 'cubital' or 'elbow vein' in common language; the funis of the arm runs over the elbow and is where phlebotomy takes place; it appears visibly on the wrist; the salvatella is the vein located between the auricular bone and the little finger's metacarpal, which divides into two branches."
"And in the thigh and leg there are three veins: one of them is located at the curvature of the kneecap on the lateral side (outside); the second is called saphenous, located near the bend of the inner thigh (medial side); and the third is the sciatic vein, located behind the outer thigh (lateral side). In the leg there are other veins similar to those mentioned."
"The benefit of opening veins near the ears is for ancient catarrhs, migraines, headaches and ulcers on old wounds."
"And the procedure for opening those veins is as follows: the patient should be lying down with their head tilted towards the occiput (back of the head) in a comfortable position. Then, wrap a cloth around the patient's head, making sure to cover both veins near the ears and the location between them on the forehead. Tighten the cloth gently but firmly, then feel for the pulse of the veins with your index finger. When you've found it, make the incision."
"Then, take the lancet, which is used for incising. Insert it into the vein in the elbow until blood flows out." "And elevate your hand with the vein and elbow upwards, then make an incision into the vein using an incising cut." "And make the length of the incision equal to two fingers' width or about that amount, then let as much blood flow out as desired."
"And afterwards apply powder and dress the wound until it heals."
"And as mentioned at the beginning of this book, these veins are also opened with cauterization."
"Among the two arterial veins on the temples, the benefit of phlebotomy is for ancient migraines, chronic bad humor, habitual inflammation of the eyes, and acute attacks of superfluous heat in the cheeks."
"And the procedure for phlebotomy of those veins is as follows: Have the patient lean their head forward until both veins appear clearly. Then feel for the pulse of the veins with your index finger, and once you've found it, make the incision."
"And elevate the elbow above the vein with your index finger. Insert the phlebotomy lancet into it, raise the vein up, and make an incision just as you did for the other two veins. Then let blood flow out according to your needs."
"And then untie the bandage from the patient's arm. Place your index finger on the vein for about an hour, then press a cotton cloth and powder onto the wound with strong pressure. Leave it like that until it heals."
"And as previously mentioned at the beginning of this book, these veins have been remembered and their incisions and attractions are described."
"And the benefit of phlebotomy from the frontal vein is similar to that of the cephalic vein for ancient diseases of the face, migraines, nosebleeds, and fetid ulcers."
"And the procedure for phlebotomy of that vein is as follows: Have the patient lean their head forward with a bandage wrapped around it so that the vein appears. Then take the instrument called 'fossor' which has this shape:"
"Place the pointed tip of the 'fossor' onto that vein and strike it with a pen or other tool in this manner, then let blood flow out according to your desired amount. Then unwind the perforation from the patient and apply pressure until it heals."
"Sometimes it is useful to perform phlebotomy laterally. However, the phlebotomy should not have an acute tip like others, but rather a blunt one on one side. Perform the phlebotomy transversely because if it's sharp and fine, it might break the bone in that area during phlebotomy."
"The benefit of the two veins that are on the temples is for the itching of the eyebrows due to redness and heat in the eyes, and for diseases of the face."
"And the procedure for phlebotomy is as follows: Have the patient lean their head forward with a bandage. Then perform phlebotomy on those veins while you are standing above the patient's head."
"And perform the phlebotomy transversely with a blunt lancet that's not too sharp, because there isn't much flesh in that area. If the lancet is too fine and sharp, it might break."
"And then let blood flow out as much as you need. Press cotton onto the wounds and apply pressure overnight. Then untie it in the morning."
"The phlebotomy of the vein in the nose is beneficial for acute fever and violent inflammation, and for diseases of the face, migraines, nosebleeds, especially if they are chronic."
"And the procedure for phlebotomy of that vein is as follows: Have the patient lean their head back and place your left hand on their nose. Then take a sharp lancet and insert it into the middle of the tip of the nose vertically, because the vein does not appear here to the touch, and blood will begin to flow immediately."
"It is important that you gradually withdraw your hand with the lancet and let blood flow out according to your needs. Then leave it for the night because this wound heals easily."
"The benefit of phlebotomy from the two veins at the wrists is for constriction of the uvula, the beginning of leprosy, and many other diseases such as impetigo and destructive corrosive ulcers like herpes zoster."
"And the procedure for phlebotomy of those veins is as follows: Have each patient lean their head forward with their arm outstretched. Then stand above the patient's head and have them sit on a stool."
"And then perform phlebotomy on the vein along the arm with a blunt lancet little by little. Then extract blood according to a moderate quantity or as much as is necessary at that time, and do the same for the other vein."
"And then untie the bandage and compress the two veins with a midrib binder for a while to ensure that the patient is not faint. Then leave it overnight because the wound will be healed by morning."
"For the benefit of bloodletting from the large veins, it relieves small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, corruption of the gums, and bad ulcers and fissures, as well as bad ulcers that are found in the nose and around it."
"And the quality of bloodletting from those veins is that you first hold the patient's head steady with one hand, and then wrap a cloth around their neck to protect it. Then carefully pull back the lips and observe where both veins are located, one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left. The demonstration of each vein is indicated by its darkness compared to the other, and there are more small dark veins in that area. Then cut each one with a single cut."
"But if there is doubt about which vein it is, and you are unsure of its location, then make the incision on the larger one, and follow the course of that vein."
"And imitate the appearance of both veins that are in the lips above."
"But of the two veins that are on the left side of the tongue, it is particularly appropriate for bloodletting from the cephalic vein to precede those found in the cheek, for diseases of the uvula and mouth."
"And the quality of bloodletting from those veins is that you follow the disease along your side and toward the sun, raise the tongue gently, and look for both veins on either side of it. The color of each vein will incline towards darkness."
"And then bloodlet from each one; but be careful not to cut too deep in bloodletting those veins, because arteries are nearby."
"And the veins that are bloodlet in the neck are those which usually run through all people. Bloodletting from them is done in two ways: either with a mirtillat or olive oil lancet for subtler cuts; or with a cutellar lancet and catgut thread, and this is how it is done:"
"Be sure to sharpen the edge of it like this, and use it to open concave veins that appear full and contain dark, turbid blood."
"And this bloodletting is of lesser width and has a more subtle point. It should be used for bloodletting from thin veins containing clear, citrus-colored blood."
"But the main purpose of bloodletting from the basilica vein is that it removes blood from diseases on the left cheek and neck, and also from those that affect the chest and abdomen."
"And the phlebotomist should be careful when bloodletting from that vein and proceed with caution, because there is an artery nearby. If they err in their puncture, they may lacerate the artery and cause excessive bleeding. Therefore, it is not recommended to use a pointed lancet for this procedure, but rather one that is blunter and can be used with catgut thread."
"And if the basilica vein is not apparent by its usual signs, then you should leave it and move to another vein, either searching for one of its branches or bloodletting instead at the end of the arm where it is more visible. In this case, you should use a catgut thread lancet as previously mentioned."
"But if you wish to perform bloodletting from the median vein, then it should be done near the elbow crease of the arm where you can feel the pulse. Hold your arm down with one hand and use a catgut thread lancet to make an incision into the concave vein, as previously mentioned. Be sure not to hit the artery located nearby."
"And when you twist with the thread, if there is swelling where you have placed your finger, then that swelling is an indication of the artery, so avoid that area."
"If blood flows like a fountain during the bloodletting procedure and it is clear red in color, then you know that it is arterial blood. In this case, you should stop twisting your finger over that area for a long time. Then remove your finger, and if the bleeding stops, you should squeeze the arm gently to help close the wound."
"And beware of infection from the wound, and be especially careful not to aggravate it by touching it for a few days until it has healed."
"But if the bleeding does not stop and continues to flow freely, then you have probably severed the artery. If this is the case, do not try to treat it yourself. Instead, use a compress of fistic [fresh figs] to stop the bleeding, and then apply a poultice made from mallow leaves over the area where the vein was cut the next day."
"If the bleeding stops, that is good. But if not, then treat it with the remedy mentioned earlier for stopping bleeding at the site of powders."
"And bloodletting from this area is difficult in many cases due to the small size of the vein and the possibility of damaging the nerves of the arm."
"But bloodletting from the dark vein is beneficial in removing blood from the upper right side of the head and the left side of the body. This is because it is composed of branches from the basilica and cephalic veins, as previously mentioned."
"And the phlebotomist should be cautious when bloodletting from this vein because there is a nerve nearby. If they mistakenly cut it with the lancet, they may cause paralysis, which can be difficult to heal and may never fully recover. This nerve is often palpable but can sometimes be hidden beneath the skin in some people. In such cases where it cannot be felt, one should use a blunt-tipped lancet for bloodletting and avoid damaging the nerve with excessive pressure."
"And if the vein is located between two nerves, then you should cut across its length to avoid damaging either of them."
"The benefit of bloodletting from the cephalic vein is that it draws off blood from the head and helps alleviate headaches."
"In this case specifically, if you wish to bloodlet using an olive-shaped or myrtle-shaped lancet, then do so because these shapes are safest for all veins as there is no artery or nerve nearby."
"But in some cases, an aposteme [hematoma] may occur if one attempts to bloodlet at the first percussion without success. However, they should not try again on that aposteme."
"The first thing you should know about bloodletting is that it should only be performed for the conservation of health and with the expectation of benefit and caution against potential illness. It should be done on one of the three main veins: cephalic, basilic, or median cubital vein. Bloodletting should preferably be done in springtime, after fasting in spring and autumn, and before meals in winter, when signs of plethora appear."
"Perform a bloodletting on the third day after it has been three hours since sunrise."
"And when bloodletting is administered, whether it brings convenience and necessity at that time or another, either by day or night, at any hour."
"And it is not appropriate to perform bloodletting on a child who has not yet reached fourteen years of age, nor should a pregnant woman be bled unless she is in her fourth month, and old people who have surpassed sixty years should not be bled."
"And when someone wishes to be bled for any reason whatsoever, it is necessary to cleanse their bowels beforehand with a lion's claw enema, especially if they have much retained feces, so that the veins do not draw impurities into the bloodletting of the bowels, which are purified, and thus harm the principal members."
"And those suffering from sacred disease and gluttony should not be bled until they have recovered from their illness or drunkenness; nor should those suffering from dropsy be bled. Bloodletting should rather be avoided during colic pain and vomiting, as well as during abdominal inflammation and multiplication of coitus, hard labor, and excessive exercise following long fasts or vigils, or any other cause that dissolves bodily strength or fluids."
"And consider also the refinement of humors before performing bloodletting: if the blood is thick, use foods and drinks to thin it out, and medications if necessary."
"And also perform a bath if nothing prohibits it, or exercise somewhat for the blood to become refined."
"And pause bloodletting on that day at sunset, except during the hour of Terce, as we have said."
"And ensure that the sunset of that day is guarded from all sudden accidents, such as anxiety, anger, fear, and also from all bodily accidents like excessive work, fatigue, coitus, and similar things."
"And at his seat let there be present the causes according to their use, with aromatics and fragrances and balms and similar things, as much as possible."
"And let the bloodletter lie on a couch that is higher than the couch of him who is to be bled."
"And also, before extracting the vein, rub his arm with his hand two or three times; and also, strengthen the limb with a bandage and wrap it twice."
"And let the ligature be moderate, for if it is too tight, it prevents blood flow; or if it is too loose, it causes superfluous bleeding. In either case, it prohibits proper bloodletting. But if it is moderately applied, it allows the blood to flow evenly."
"And also, before applying the ligature, let him who is to be bled rub his hands together for a moment until the veins are inflated and clearly felt."
"And also, let the bloodletter anoint his lancet with a little ancient oil properly; and also, let him place his index finger of his left hand on that vein where he wishes to perform bloodletting, so that the vein may swell slightly and the percussion be seated correctly. For it is said that among the veins there are some that resemble strings or cords, and those that are full of windiness contract under the lancet, causing the bloodletter to slip and lose his grip; and if he does not find the vein at first, then it becomes narrow."
"And therefore, it is necessary that the bloodletter be firm and attentive to all these causes."
"And also, after inserting the lancet, if the vein is not filled at once, it is good; but if not, withdraw it slightly and try again in another place nearby, or else on the surface of the skin if there is no swelling."
"And if the location is inflamed or the illness worsens, then let it rest for a day or two, and do not tighten the bandage too much, lest it draw out an abscess, nor enter into baths."
"And also, repeat the bloodletting if necessary."
"And if the opening is small and blood flows subtly, and you fear that not enough blood will flow out as desired, then insert the lancet again in the same vein according to its rectitude and adjust the opening slightly; but do this with haste before the location becomes inflamed, for many men become inflamed from a small opening."
"But if the location is already inflamed, then do not insert the lancet again there, for it will serve no purpose; instead, apply some olive oil to that part of the skin, for it alleviates blood flow." "And it is better in this location than other oils."
"And similarly, apply olive oil in all bloodlettings where veins are opened with the prohibition of blood flow, and they do this by applying tyriaaca almonds and saggina when pausing from one of those over the location, for blood becomes thinner and is better circulated when it is thick."
"If a large abscess is formed at the location of bloodletting, as often happens, especially if one has not been bled for some time or if the opening of the vein was too small, then let him apply a poultice and place over the location a sponge infused in water and salt, lightly scorched; let this remain for an hour, for it will dissolve."
"And let him do this also at the conclusion of bleeding from that vein with completion of it or of another vein."
"If there remains in the location for some days any blackness or greenness, do not heed this; and if you wish, apply over that location a plaster of aloe and myrrh dissolved, or of mint juice or calendula or the like."
"Many times apostemes and swellings occur due to bloodletting from the basilica (vein)."
"And therefore place your hand over that (vein), and if you feel softness due to your compression over it, then that swelling is bad and harmful; and therefore be sure to apply over it some cause of what we have said, for blood will flow strongly from the artery."
"And make a plaster with that which has astringent properties so that the location may be endured; and also treat it with other appropriate remedies until it is healed."
"And it is necessary to draw blood from each person according to the quantity of his strength and according to the prevailing color over the blood as it appears."
"For if the blood is black, let it flow out until it becomes red; and similarly if it appears thick, let it flow out until it becomes thinned; and likewise if it is bitter, let it flow out until its bitterness is removed."
"And it is necessary for that person who is full and strong and has need of bloodletting in one session to amplify the bloodletting of the vein and make the lancet wide."
"And for that person who is frail, let the opposite be done, and it is necessary to bleed him in many sessions, and let the vein be narrow."
"It is better to perform a transverse section in bloodletting of veins than puncture."
"This manner of bloodletting saves from flow of blood and from incision of nerves; it is more laudable and safer than bloodletting according to width and length."
"And in that person to whom syncope is accustomed to occur during bloodletting, you should care for him before bloodletting with a little powder of millet seeds infused in wormwood wine or simple oil macerated; and draw from him blood in three or four sessions."
If it is a cold complexion, then perform phlebotomy to infuse an eyewash of myrrh or an aromatic eyewash scented with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and the like.
And if syncope occurs after phlebotomy, and it is due to loss of much blood, then one must drink beef water and a subtle fragrant eyewash. Use aromatics with algae and rub them on the patient's body.
And use the other causes mentioned in the division in the chapter on syncope due to evacuation.
And here to raise the arm and dissolve the blood according to what is seen, if phlebotomy has been done for much evacuation, and its virtue is cold, which evacuates the blood little by little, then it is according to the quantity of the virtue on consecutive days.
But if one wants to raise the arm again and evacuate the blood once more, and his body is robust, then do it appropriately 7 or 9 hours after the first phlebotomy.
But if one wants to draw blood from his body contrary to the direction it inclines towards, then do it on the second or third day.
But in the body where much blood has already been drawn and it is hot and causes fever to occur, then draw out some blood once more and draw off a large quantity of it, amplifying the aperture so that syncope occurs. For you have conserved all the conditions of phlebotomy; and place your hand over the pulse of the body to prevent death from occurring instead of syncope, because many times this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
And do not when you want to release the arm and evacuate the blood again, after the opening of the vein has already been closed and it is difficult to draw out the blood, press beneath it violently and curved, for that is very wrong.
Leave it until it is phlebotomized again; or remove that with the heat of the phlebotomy which has coagulated the blood in the opening of the vein; or place upon it some triaca ointment, or sage, and compress it with light compression until the blood is completely evacuated.
And if the vein is inflamed, then leave that one alone and do not touch it until the inflammation has subsided.
And if you are provoked to evacuate blood again and there is no excuse, then do it on that same spot or on the other arm in another vein.
And the vein called "the rope of the arm" is phlebotomized in place of the furca or basilica, when they are not visible or hidden, for it is composed of those.
And the quality of phlebotomy of that one is that the patient immerses his hand in cold water until the flesh reddens and the vein appears manifestly.
And make sure to tie it tightly with a ligature made of twisted thread with moderate tension; and phlebotomize according to the transverse direction, not latitudinally nor according to length.
And let the aperture be wide and your phlebotomy be such that you phlebotomize that one at the junction of the hand a little bit.
And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then immerse your hand in cold water again and let the blood run into the water until your need is satisfied.
But if you are in the days of summer, then you are excused from the immersion of your hand in cold water; and in autumn the course of blood is stopped by immersing it in cold water at that time.
And phlebotomy from this vein is safer than from all other veins because it does not have a pulsating vein nor nerves.
And phlebotomy of the little finger of the right hand corresponds to diseases of the liver.
And the quality of phlebotomy from that one is this: you tighten the hand with a ligature or your hand, because you have placed it in cold water until the vein becomes inflamed and well demonstrated at sight; and make sure to phlebotomize it transversely; and if you miss it entirely, do not worry about it.
And be careful not to end the phlebotomy on your hand, because those ones have nerves denuded of flesh.
And make sure to immerse the hand in cold water again and let the blood run into that one because if you do not immerse it again in cold water, the blood will coagulate in the opening of the vein, and its flow is prohibited.
And when the blood has been extracted according to the amount needed, then place oil and salt on the vein so that it does not close suddenly; and do likewise in all strict vein.
But be aware that phlebotomy of the little finger of the left hand corresponds to diseases of the spleen.
And do likewise in the phlebotomy of that one as you have done with the other.
And the advantage of phlebotomy from that vein is for diseases that are in the parts of the body, such as diseases of the mother, and retention of menstruation, etc. and also for ulcers of skin and old wounds, and their similar diseases.
And the quality of phlebotomy from that one is this: the patient immerses his foot in cold water and makes friction until the veins appear well; and he places it on the junction of the foot with a belt; and the place of the vein appears clearly below the said foot, and from there are many branches distributed on the face of the foot.
And then phlebotomize the largest branch or the one that is below the heel on the side of the aggregation of it because it is better and safer.
And if you phlebotomize that one on the face of the foot, then be careful of the nerves that are below that one on the face of the foot, and pause your phlebotomy with which you phlebotomize transversely, as if you wanted to miss it.
And make sure that the phlebotomy is sufficient
But if the emission of blood is prohibited, then immerse the foot again in cold water and let the blood run into that one until it is evacuated.
And if the phlebotomist errs in the first attempt, then repeat with the phlebotomy somewhat higher up because the place is safe; and do not fear its malignancy, but rather be careful of the nerves as we have said.
And do likewise with the saphenous vein of the other foot
And concerning the sciatic vein, its place is thus: below the heel on the side of the ankle of the left leg
And the advantage of phlebotomy from that one is for pain in the hip when it is due to hot blood.
And the quality of phlebotomy from that one is this: the patient enters into a bath and makes haste and tightens the skin of that one on the side of the hip above the heel above four fingers with a long thin bandage because it does not appear except by that.
And then when it appears, then phlebotomize that one according to each vein that is within your ability and according to the transverse, and it is better; or miss that one by incision or cut that one by section because its place is safe.
And it is found more in men than women. And if you find that one, and it does not appear to the touch, then phlebotomize some branch of it, and that is the one that appears on the back of the foot near the said ear and little finger bones.
Guard yourself against the nerves, and make the blood flow as much as you wish.
Then carefully untie the ligation and place your hand over the site of the phlebotomy wound, pressing gently to stop the bleeding. It heals easily this way.
Of ventilation and the quality of using those.
Ventilation is done with horns, or earms (earmuffs), or wicks
Ventilation is done in two ways: one with scarification and bloodletting, the other without scarification.
And this ventilation that is done without scarification is performed in two ways: either with fire or without fire
And the twelve locations of the body where ventilation is administered with scarification and bloodletting are: behind the ears; at the crown of the head; in the middle of both halves of the neck; below the jawbone on either side of the mouth; on the two shoulder blades; over the buttocks; on the inner thighs, each about a hand's breadth above the knee.
Ventilation does not draw blood from veins but from the small capillaries scattered throughout the flesh, and therefore does not drain the virtue through them, just as blood is drawn by phlebotomy. Neither does it matter whether ventilation is done with fire or without fire in any illness caused by excess within that needs to be evacuated completely from the body
But if there is a need for ventilation due to illness or continence, administer it every hour at the beginning and end of the month, and in the middle of it as well, whenever necessary.
Therefore, whenever any of those causes occur, and especially if it is in the third or middle of the month, we command that ventilation be performed after two or three hours have passed since daybreak.
It is helpful to ventilate the nape of the neck when there is heaviness in the head and sinking at the temples, but it is important that this be done as part of a general evacuation of the entire body.
This ventilation is performed on the same spot where phlebotomy is done on the cephalic vein.
It is not permitted to perform this procedure on anyone who is of robust constitution or has a cold, as it can cause great harm.
Therefore, this technique should not be used on the elderly or those with hot-headed illnesses.
But if one continues to perform this technique repeatedly on the same person, it can lead to forgetfulness. Therefore, you should command the operator performing ventilation to pause slightly with his hand and the cup at each of the intervals mentioned earlier, in order to prevent the generation of forgetfulness.
Ventilation of the armpit is done on the spot where phlebotomy is performed on the dark vein and the basilica vein: for this reason it relieves asthma, tightness in the chest, and splitting pain in the lungs, as well as coughing and congestion.
It is important that armpit ventilation be done with care, because if it is done too vigorously it can cause weakness in the body and stomach.
Ventilation of the forehead relieves accidental headaches and inflammation of the eyes, migraines, and congestion, as well as pain in the roots of the teeth. It is performed on the spot where phlebotomy is done on the basilica vein.
You should command the operator performing ventilation not to press his hand at the site of incision, lest he injure the artery and cause bleeding.
Ventilation of the chin relieves halitosis in the mouth, gingivitis, and symptoms of oral diseases. It is performed on the spot where phlebotomy is done on the veins found on both lips.
However, ventilation performed on the two spatulas (the sides of the neck) causes headache, which is caused by congestion of heat.
Ventilation of the two divisions at the corners of the eyes relieves symptoms associated with phlebotomy of three veins: the basilica, dark, and cephalic veins. This is because it attracts blood from all the smaller veins in the flesh, as well as the smaller branches of the other larger veins that lead to those three veins.
Command the operator not to proceed with scarification at this location, as it is lacking in flesh and has nerves and arteries close beneath the surface.
This ventilation technique involves applying the cup over the buttocks and relieves hemorrhoids of the anus, as well as ulcers in that area.
You should command the operator to perform strong, broad ventilation at this location using a brass cup, as the area requires a strong section. Weak or subtle traction vents may not be sufficient and scarification may be necessary.
However, ventilation of the calves reduces pain manifestly by degrees, as it attracts blood from the entire body and relieves chronic pain in the loins and back, as well as the bladder. It also stimulates menstruation and relieves dropsy and edema. It is performed on the spot where phlebotomy is done on two saphenous veins, the external saphenous vein, and two cavel veins.
However, they greatly weaken the body and can cause fainting in many people.
The benefit of ventilation on the external saphenous vein is similar to that of ventilation on both calves.
The quality of the position for performing vents is to place the cup at the beginning and follow with moderate suction, not prolonging the position but pausing it lightly and removing it gently, allowing the humors to come to the location by equal attraction. Do not cease repeating this until you see the location become reddened and swollen, and you can perceive the color of the blood appearing within the cup.
Then scarify and repeat suction little by little, carefully considering the condition of the patient's body.
For a person with delicate skin and few pores, you should scarify once only and not more, so that the location is not ulcerated.
Command the operator to widen the scarification and probe slightly, and apply suction gently with ease.
If the blood is thick, you should then scarify twice, because in the first instance the pathway for suction of the blood and its humidity is opened. But in the second instance, the extraction of thick blood becomes more visible during examination.
If the blood is very fetid, then perform a third scarification to ensure its complete removal.
Finally, when you wish to remove blood little by little or just a small amount, one scarification is sufficient.
If you wish to remove a large amount of blood, perform many scarifications. If you know that the blood is thick, then you should scarify with a deep cut.
The term "scarification" refers solely to the depth of the incision made by a lancet.
"For one whose chain is thick, hard, dark, and its pores are narrow, it's necessary that the places for cups be anointed with lenitive, aperient, resolvent oils. If it's summertime, use oil of aloes or violet oil, or bitter almond oil, or oil from cooked hemp; but if it's wintertime, then use poppy oil, lilac oil, chamomile oil, or blood."
"If there is abundant sweat that's thick and frothy, then use oil of amaranth, balsam oil, aloe oil, or aneth oil."
"But if the bleeder has large pores with tender skin, then it is forbidden to use oil. Instead, wash the places for cupping near the area being treated with warm or hot water mixed with salt, hemp, or borax, and similar substances."
"And for one whose blood is very moist, wash his cupping places with sour wine or water from myrtle and sumac."
"And for one whose sweat is thick, wash his cupping places with old wine or water from hyssop (majoram), or decoction of aneth or chamomile."
"And it is necessary that cupping be performed before bathing. It should be administered near the bath for an hour or two hours, and one should sleep near where the cupping is taking place."
"It is necessary to regulate the air before performing cupping on a person who has undergone bloodletting."
"At the beginning, if the one performing cupping or phlebotomy is choleric with sharp and inflammatory blood, then it is necessary to use cooling causes, such as sour apples, endive cooked in sour wine and lettuce, and secanabin, julep, and similar substances."
"And pause from foods such as polecat meat, cooked birds' flesh, and foods seasoned with sour flavors."
"And for one whose complexion is cold, it is necessary that he drink barley syrup or alkanet syrup with seeds, sumac, and wine with a moderate odor between old and new. And it should be recommended to him that he use moderation in drinking and eating, and avoid foods such as polecat meat, cannabis, fish, small birds, and pigeons."
"And on the day of cupping and bloodletting, it is necessary that drinking be greater than eating."
"And it is necessary to give some people, especially those who are weak, triaca alhacen or muscat oil, or musk powder, or aloes denbent cupping or phlebotomy, so that the main members may be comforted and the blood subtilized; and these things should not be taken by those with a scaly condition."
"Ventoses that are without scarification are cupping vessels paused on the liver, spleen, and gouty parts, and on the navel, in the locations of the joints, and on the armpits of the ankles, because these members do not suffer scarification upon them."
"And it is not desired for these except the attraction of blood from a member, such as pausing a cupping vessel on the breast in a condition of blood flux from the nose. It is used to dissolve cold and viscous cupping vessels from the member, such as pausing on the belly and navel, because it rarifies the member, clears it, and relieves pain by resolving cupping vessels."
"And it is paused on the ears when there occurs an obstruction or deafness in them, because by virtue of strong attraction it draws out obstruction and removes deafness from its place."
"And similarly it does when paused on the liver and spleen to draw out coldness enclosed within them."
"These cupping vessels are administered wet with suction alone, but sometimes they are administered with fire."
"And sometimes they are administered full of warm water for illnesses of the spleen."
"This is because when the cupping vessel is filled and becomes larger, it can be done with cold water alone or with water in which herbs are boiled according to what is appropriate."
"Form of cupping vessel administered with fire: let the opening of the mouth be two fingers wide; let the amount of pitch be as much as half a palm; and place it on the side where it is in the circuit, as much as possible; let the attraction be small according to the amount that enters into it through one needle."
"Let it be made of copper or bronze, with thick edges, lion-shaped, egg-shaped, and flat-bottomed, so that the member is not harmed by its position on it."
"And let there be in the middle of it a transverse groove of copper or iron where the candle with fire is paused."
"And this cupping vessel should be much larger than that which we have recommended, and smaller according to the illness and condition of the person who uses it."
"The cupping vessels for infants and weak individuals are different from those for young people and those with strong constitutions."
"The quality of pausing this cupping vessel with fire on the member is that one should extend the wick with fire from dry wood decently before a small candle of wax, and pause it on the middle of the transverse groove in the middle of the cupping vessel, so that the fire is kindled around the opening so that the body of the sick person is not burned."
"And immediately after it is paused on the member of the sick person, let him be on the attraction that we have said, until when we have the cupping vessels and do not want to draw out the wick so that vapor does not rise upon that attraction, at that time the cupping vessel will be dissolved quickly."
"And immediately extinguish the wick according to its manner, and repeat this if necessary."
"But in a cupping vessel that is administered in the illness of pleurisy with water, in which there is no transverse groove nor attraction, and it is not administered except that it is filled with water, and it is paused on the member alone."
"And this is its form: And this cupping vessel, the larger it is, the better, because it can receive a large quantity of water."
"Chapter XCVI."
"Bloodletting is not administered on most members except on those in which the position of cupping vessels is not possible because of their smallness, such as the hand and gingiva and similar ones; or on a member denuded of flesh, such as the finger and nose and their similars."
"And the quality of using those bloodletting vessels that are found is if there are bloodsuckers in the stagnant waters of muddy pools."
"And immediately they are placed during the day and night in stagnant water until they become hungry, and there remains no cause in the belly of those; and immediately let the body be evacuated at the beginning with phlebotomy and cupping vessels; and immediately rub the member of the sick person until it becomes reddened; and immediately pause them on it."
"And when they are full, throw them away."
"If suction from the place with a cupping vessel is possible, it is better in judgment."
"But if not, then wash the place with sour wine and immediately with much water; and let it be rubbed and pressed."
"And if the body of blood is prolonged through the skin of the bloodsuckers, and this is sufficient, then you take a cloth dipped in hot water and pause it on it until the oozing stops."
If blood has multiplied, then sprinkle powdered vitriol or gallstones and similar substances with styptic properties onto the wound until the bleeding stops; or place handfuls of cooked fava beans on the area, allowing them to adhere before the bleeding ceases.
And if necessary, apply leeches for bloodletting, but only when it is possible to remove them later.
If it is not possible to remove the leeches by suspension, then rub the area with fresh blood or insert a needle into the flesh until some blood flows out. Afterwards, apply pressure to stop any further bleeding immediately.
When you want them to detach, sprinkle a little powdered garlic or salt or ashes on them and they will fall off immediately.
Thus begins the prologue of the third part: On restoration This chapter is very often necessary in the art of medicine, as it concerns the restoration of fractures and dislocations that occur in bones.
Oh, son, know that those who boast about this chapter are foolish doctors and laymen who at no time have regarded the books of the Ancients nor read even one letter of them.
And for this reason, the science of this manner in our land is rare. And I have not forgotten it at any time. And I do not propose what follows except due to the length of reading the books of the Ancients and studying their understanding, in order to extract the science from them.
And therefore I direct you to experiment and study throughout the duration of my life.
And I have already described in this chapter all that my science contains and about which my experiment has passed. For here I have summarized it for you other wise men and delivered it from the occupation of lengthening; and I have abbreviated it in abbreviation; and I have shown it in declaration; and I have formed many forms of the instruments that are administered therein, as is done by addition of declaration, as I have done in two preceding chapters.
Chapter one
Summary and collections of the causes of bone fractures, from which it is necessary to make a premise before we begin remembering the members that have been broken and diverse. I therefore wish to declare in the prologue of this chapter the summaries of my speech, and the chapters for understanding which at the beginning it is necessary for craftsmen to stand still and reflect on their truth. So you are and those who are prompt to know or learn this noble art besides you.
And therefore I say that when some fracture or dislocation or torsion or collapse occurs, at the beginning it is necessary for you to prepare with a phlebotomy or bleed that one, or several together, if no prohibition exists due to debility of virtue or because he was an infant, or elderly in decrepitude, or during intense heat or cold.
And therefore you should be content with your diet of fresh herbs and meats of birds and crabs. And prohibit thick meats and foods that fill the veins with blood, lest you are secure about an abscess forming and fear effusion of matter in the member.
And at this point return the sick to his first regimen with which he is accustomed to live.
And therefore when the broken bone begins to be restored, at this point the sick should be nourished with foods rich in nutrients that are thick and heavy, containing viscosity, such as foods made from wheat cooked with water, rice, chickpeas, eggs, beef, cheese, fresh fish, thick wine, and similar things. And with this regimen coagulation of the fracture is done more easily and quickly.
And know that when bones are broken in men who are in the first flourishing of life or are elderly, it is not possible for them to be joined together and consolidated according to their nature due to the drying out of the members.
But nevertheless nature adjusts and binds the broken bone together with glue-like substance that adheres to it, so that they are joined together at the same time. And it brings about the end of firmness and strength, just as fire does at its beginning. As long as no cause prohibits this from occurring in its workings.
And for this reason it is necessary to pause the feeding of the sick with foods that are heavy, viscous, and thick, as we have said.
And know that the types of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of the members. For a fracture of the bone of the leg is different from a fracture of the bone of the head; and a fracture of the bone of the foot is different from a fracture of the bone of the arm, and similarly all other members have different fractures among themselves.
And I come with a reminder of every type of fracture, explained in its own chapter distinguished from the others.
Many varieties of fracture even within itself. And the types of bone fractures are diversified within themselves; for there is an arch-like fracture that occurs sometimes in stars. And some fractures occur according to the length of the bone: such as those of the satire and astragalus bones which are additional or not, just like when a pen is prepared to write. And there is also a fracture with splintering and disruption at the head, and a fracture with a small fissure.
And for each type there is a specific pain or torment in its restoration, which will be remembered later on distinguished by their locations.
Many signs of bone fracture And a fracture of the bone is known by its crookedness, and by the prominence and depression that can be felt on it, and also when you squeeze it with your hand.
And therefore when there is no apparent crookedness in the place nor any deformity felt when touched with agitation and the sick person does not experience great pain, then there is no fracture here.
It may happen that there is slight crookedness or fissure present, so you should not squeeze it with your hand or compress it too much. Rather pause at this point and use the medicines of which a reminder will be given at this moment suitable for the location; and also apply a bandage to provide subtle support.
And know that when the location is arched and not split into two or otherwise injured in its satire, if all separation from its companion is removed, then you should begin at this point to correct it, provided that an abscess does not occur there.
And if an abscess occurs there, then leave it alone for several days until the abscess stops. And then treat it according to each manner that you know of lifting and binding.
And know that restoration and healing of this is easier than for the bone in which satire occurs.
And then strengthen it as will be remembered later on.
But if there are satiruses in the bone, then it is necessary to extend this broken member from two parts if it is the hand or foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two strings or one string and your hand.
And let your position be such that you place the affected member in its natural figure while the parted parts of the broken member are extended; then you should proceed to return those additions with binding and according to each manner that you can apply them in their locations.
"Guard thou thyself, according to thy strength, that thou fall not upon the patient through thine own carelessness or injury. And proceed thou with all thy might, applying one bone with another their companionship in their best forms."
"And it is necessary that thou dost touch him at that opportune moment with thy hand, and if sometimes some different cause occurs, correct and equalize it according to the quantity of thy virtue."
"And excessive extension and compression are avoided, as many foolish doctors do who often cause an abscess to be cut by their operation, or cause contraction in the limb, as we have seen happen from their operations."
"And this is the quality of bandaging that I recommend for tranquil limbs, because you should know that broken limbs are diverse in their smallness and greatness and form."
"And for those that are small, such as the arm, hand, and foot, and similar to them, then the wrapping should be of very fine linen."
"But for those that are large, such as the thigh or calf, then in these there should be wrapping of thick and strong linen, because the tight binding connects the limb and strengthens it on all sides with equal bandaging, so that nothing enters between them."
"And when you begin, first direct your evacuation of air, then bind it conveniently with three or four wrappings according to the size of that limb, and tighten thy hand with the linen."
"And then take him to the highest part of that limb from the location of the fracture, and tighten more so that thy bandage is not too loose at the place of the fracture." "And then extend yourself with wrapping from the location of the fracture a little bit, and gradually loosen the bandage, until you take up a large part of it."
"And then take another bandage and wrap it again over the location of the broken limb with wrapping, and then go with those wrappings to the highest part of that limb away from the fracture; and let your operation be in the tightening of the wrapping and loosening of that according to what we have said about the first wrapping above."
"And then insert between the wrappings of linen or cloth with which you should equalize any curvature of the fracture, if there is curvature in it; and if not, do not pause therein for any cause."
"And then place another bandage over it, and then equalize upon those wrappings with well-arranged stitches immediately, if there is no inflammation or abscess in that location, and then place over that which sits on the abscess and covers the inflammation; and leave that for a few days; and then tighten over it the stitches."
"And let the stitches be of strong linen thread, well-formed; or of juniper wood; or of date palm branches; and let the width of each stitch be according to this shape and figure:"
"But the stitch that is placed upon that fracture should be thicker and stronger than the other stitches, and the length of the stitch according to what is measured on the limb in size and smallness; and then tighten over the stitches with another bandage according to thy first tightening; and then tie it above with thread neatly according to what we have said about tightening, and let thy tightening be according to the location of the fracture more, and as it is further away from the fracture, so less should be the tightening."
"And let the threads be soft in thickness and fineness, and of wool; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen some fools doing who place their threads of twisted cords, it is a great error, for they will not have an even tightening."
"And very fine threads are not convenient, for with them you will not be able to tighten as much as you want, and it is necessary that there should be less than one digit between stitch and stitch."
"And if the pain is felt at the ends of the stitches near the tightening in those locations, then place them aside with linen or wool pads until that does not cause harm."
"Sometimes fracture is with splinters, and there occurs displacement in the bone, and I have spoken about that previously in this chapter concerning singularities."
"And know that not every broken limb should be stitched with stitches on the first day; which is because when a limb is large, it is necessary to wait upon it with stitches for about five or seven or more days, according to your security concerning the advent of an abscess."
"And this is the manner of splints with which the Ancients used to restore fractures, displacements, and luxations."
"Mode of splinting commonly used for the restoration of fracture, convenient for many complexities and especially for women and children, because it does not admit heat nor friction: And let there be taken powdered gypsum, which is the marrow of flour that you must remove from the movement of the millstone in the walls of the mill."
"And grind it thus as it is, except that you sieve it with white of egg, and make the mixture neither too thick nor too thin, and then use it."
"Another manner of splinting for restoring fracture and dislocation and luxation: Take of asafetida one drachm, laudanum two drachms, acacia three drachms, enula four drachms, and migrace five drachms, which is root of wild radish; myrrh and aloe two drachms each; all of them are ground and sieved and mixed with aloes water or with white of egg if the condition of the illness is scaled. And then use this splint, for it is of good composition and restores lightly broken bones, conferring benefit to many men."
"Another manner of splinting which benefits fracture and luxation: Take of migrace five drachms, white lead two drachms; myrrh and aloe one drachm each; acacia six drachms; pitch twenty-four drachms."
"All are ground in a mortar with much crushing, and sieved, and mixed with water or white of egg, and it is administered."
"Mode of splinting for joints and bones separated from their locations, and causes pain in those places and for fissures and fractures: Take clean wool and immerse it in sour wine and boiling oil, and place it on the location."
"But this plaster has no virtue of restoration, nor does it cause abscesses or expel pains properly."
"Another manner of plaster that restores broken bone: Take leaves of wild fig and leaves of opium poppy, count them all together and make plaster of them."
"A brief manner of plaster administered for the restoration of fracture of bone and when you wish solution of the remnant of abscess: Take roots of althea, camomile flowers, violet flowers, barley flour, all in equal parts; all are ground and mixed with wine if the member is not scaled."
If it is scraped, then comfort it with water containing humid coriander or simply with water.
Another method for a plaster that is more powerful in resolution than the first one, when an apostema occurs during the restoration of a limb: take some roots of althea and its seeds, and of balm, melilot, marjoram, violet flowers, chamomile, and all this finely chopped and sifted; then grind them together with water from sauces or sweet water or wine, all according to the quality of the limb and the pause of its color.
However, Hippocrates does not specify in his book that it should be paused on the limb for forty days during its restoration, but rather recommends making a cerote of wax and oil, and nothing else; he also advises that it should be ground between coarseness and subtlety.
But it is seen that in Galen's view, they should be paused on the broken limb during its restoration and the causes for which there is drying with little heat are such as myrrh, resins, and similar ones of those causes that we have recommended.
A way to make a plaster that relieves injury and pain: take some myrrh, saffron, human hair cuttings or chicken feathers, althea, and salt, all finely chopped; grind them together until they form a plaster.
However, the amount to be left in place according to how tightly it should remain and when it is appropriate to remove it depends on whether there is no pain or swelling nor any bone fracture, in which case you can leave it for several days. And if there is severe pain or swelling or inflammation in the place where it has been applied, then you should immediately remove it and replace the plaster.
Then take some lint and marine sponge moistened with hot water, and submerge it in warm water; use this to wash the affected area until the swelling subsides and the pain is relieved. Then allow the limb to rest for an hour. After that, place lanolin soaked in vinegar and oil or rose oil on the limb and leave it overnight, ensuring that there is no signs of cauterization, and that the swelling and pain have been removed from the limb.
And then apply that subtle strapping and small plaster again, not too tightly as in your first application, until it is healed.
And if sometimes the abscess and redness and pain and inflammation and all accidents are completely removed, and you need a plaster and strapping, then repeat that which you have done at the beginning of treatment.
And if no cause of those mentioned occurs in the limb, then you should not remove it but leave it on for three or four or five or seven days. And sometimes all this is left until twenty days according to what appears to you when removing the plaster, as we have said, until the fracture adheres and approaches the coagulation of the flesh upon it.
And then tighten the strapping more than your first strapping all around, and adjust it according to the thickness of the limb of the sick person, according to how much it has healed.
But if the place of the fracture becomes dry and emaciated more than it should, then you should know that nourishment is prohibited from reaching that place. Therefore, moisten it with warm water every time you remove the plaster; do this for all three days. And loosen the strapping a little, and through this operation, bring nourishment to the limb, and it will be healed easily.
But what foolish bone-setters do when a fracture of the limb is not restored at the beginning, as it should be, and is restored crookedly, that is an error according to their operation. And there is great fear, and if it were correctly done, the Ancients increased in their books and writings with this practice.
"I have never seen them do this, so it seems more reasonable that they should not."
"Chapter Two: On fracture when it occurs in the head."
Broken bones are many, and their shapes are diverse, and the causes are distinct, for some fractures are caused by impact of force which crushes all of the bone within its cavity, leaving the bone like that seen in a tree trunk, and hence this type is called "axial"; or the force cuts into some part of the bone, cutting through the flesh but not penetrating to the marrow; and this kind of fracture is called "closed".
The disease of these two fractures is great or small, and it varies from fracture to fracture. The cause of this is impact with force or pressure on bone, accompanied by swelling or bruising.
This fracture is penetrating and approaches the perimysium which covers the bone, or it occurs on the surface of the bone. The severity of these two fractures varies greatly.
And there is fracture which is concentrated within the bone itself, in the finest detail of hair's breadth, and hence this type of fracture is called "capillary".
And there is fracture which occurs by pressure or impact of bone, with similar symptoms, causing some laminae of the bone to enter into its cavities, and this happens especially in concave areas, as seen in the heads of hammers when they suffer impact and their entrance is fractured.
This phenomenon occurs most often in the bodies of moist bones, such as the heads of nails.
And so for all these types of fractures, they appear like stars separated from one another. "I will bring all of this back to its proper place."
"I know all these types of fracture by detection on those and by inquiry of their marrow and examination of putrid flesh that is upon them."
"A capillary fracture is recognized by the fact that it is visible on the bone and is cleaned and lined with tincture of iodine because the fracture appears black."
"However, in the treatment of fractures, one must first consider any accidents of the illness, and then whether the accidents are significant by manifest sign, such as vomiting from cholera or extension and loss of consciousness, fainting spells, acute fever, dilation of pupils and redness of eyes, and similar occurrences in major conditions; it is not healed if not treated."
"And if there are no current accidents you wait for health, then you begin the treatment of it."
"The reason for this is that if it happens to you at the beginning as it was happening and especially in the days of winter, then it is necessary for you to observe the marrow of the bone before the fourteenth day according to all conditions."
"And if it is in the days of summer, then you must expose the bone before the seventh day, having ensured that what remains of the bone has become corrupted by the soft tissue, and that the accidents which we have mentioned have occurred."
"And if the fracture has already reached the soft tissue covering the brain and is accompanied by small pieces and attrition, then you must insert the comminuted and attrition fragments, according to what I will recommend to you."
"And having shaved the head of the patient, you must uncover the bone according to your custom and manner as much as possible following the figure of the fracture, ensuring that it is light on the patient."
"And if it happens to you that you must make the detection of the bone, fluxes of blood or hard abscess, then you should pause for it with what is necessary, and this is that you apply compresses of cloth infused in wine and rose oil to the place, and let the fracture rest until the abscess is sedated, and ensure there are no fluxes of blood; and then begin the circumcision of the bone and its ablation."
"And this is according to one or two methods of operation."
"And one method is that you insert the bone with a narrow incision, and this is its shape: And then administer another incision tool a little wider than the first one; this is its shape:"
"And then apply an even wider incision tool."
"And you should have a variety of different incision tools, some of which are wider than others; some shorter than others and sharp at their tips, made of iron or steel."
"And use them with ease in percussion on the incision tool so that you do not strike the head and harm it."
"And if the bone is strong and hard, then you must perforate around it before you administer the incision tools with their handles, which are called non-penetrating awls."
"And they are not called thus but rather those which do not reach the end of the bone at that point where it is approaching it, so that the awl has a round tip or edge on that side which is left of its sharp tip similar to an edge or small circle, which prohibits being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone."
"And it is convenient that you take many of these awls, each suitable for the thickness of each bone, so that you have present in all tests of the brain the tip of which is sharp, and its quantity in length and width according to the quantity of thickness of this test."
"And this is the shape of three types of awls: The quality of perforating around the broken bone is that you place the awl on the bone and twist it with your fingers until you know that the bone has already been penetrated; and then move the awl to another location, and pause where it is between all threads equal to the thickness of the ray or approximately."
"And then incise with incision tools between each thread of the bone and make it as subtle as possible in the end of levitation, as we have said, until you remove the bone, or with your hand, or with some other cause by some instruments which will be prepared for that, such as tweezers and subtle forceps."
"And it is necessary that you guard with all caution that the incision tool does not touch any part of the cerebrum."
"And then when you have completely perforated the bone and separated it from the cerebrum if it is continuous with it, you will extract it, and rasp and smooth it on its roughness where it is on the bone with another tool similar to an incision tool but which must be more thin and subtle than the others."
"And if some fragments of the small bones remain scattered and scattered, then you should take them with ease with what is necessary among the tools; and then cure the wound with stitches and bandages which we have mentioned."
"And the other method of operation is light and distant from fear, which Gaulish and Greek praise greatly; this is its speech: It is necessary for you at the beginning to begin discovering the fracture of the bone in that place where it is most violent and evident, until when you have discovered that fracture and placed on one side of it the tip of this long and gentle incision tool whose shape is as follows:"
"And it is that the lenticular fracture is lion-shaped and does not incise any part, and the acute fracture is of it on both sides in length, as often happens; so that the lenticular fracture fits well with the cerebrum with its face facing the sharp edge of the bone."
"And then strike the incision tool of one fracture with a small hammer until you incise all the bone easily as it revolves and you are sure that the panic does not happen in any manner whatsoever, even if the patient were the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he were asleep."
"Then if some part of the paniculus attached to the bone in certain places of bone breaks off, incise it with the tip of this lenticular incision tool and detach it easily because it is detached from it without harm or fear."
"And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the paniculus and that which is cut off or detached from the bone is its face, and remains rough and scattered with subtle fragments then it is necessary to rasp this roughness and remove these fragments with subtle razors which you have prepared in different quantities so that you can administer them in all places as conveniently and correctly as possible according to how you proceed in your operation of that broken bone and the shape of it."
"And it is necessary that you use in your operation with which you rasp the bone at the beginning the widest of those razors and then use progressively the most subtle ones, and do not cease doing so continuously until you arrive at administering the thinnest and most subtle of all."
"But in each of the other small capillary fractures and subtle fractures, administer cure according to what you have found for their correction."
"And it is a cause that it is not mentioned among all those who have studied in this art." "And what we have written about this applies especially to large fractures."
"And if the paniculus is torn when you remove the bone, then it is necessary to take a piece of cloth according to the quantity of the wound and immerse it in rose oil and place it on the wound; and also take another doubled or tripled cloth and immerse it in wine and rose oil and place it on the first cloth gently so that you do not press too hard, and then apply this bandage and do not stretch it except according to the quantity that the wound has alone."
"Let that one remain under this care for one or two days until you are sure of the formation of pus; then remove it and administer medicines with which superfluous dryness is removed, such as linseed oil and barley flour, powder of incense and aloes, and similar things."
"Also make powders from these medicines which are finely powdered on the wound, like they are dry; generally, administer to him all medicine of a property that cleanses and does not bite."
"And guard yourself, according to your skill, that the wound in your treatment is clean and not sullied by dirt or other things; do not allow it to become inflamed, because when it adheres to the panniculus of the brain it corrupts it and causes severe illness."
"When it occurs in the head, if the bone is exposed and especially if the treatment of it is neglected, then blackness appears on its surface; therefore consider the hours so that you know if it happens to the patient those accidents which we have said are fatal without any remedy."
"But if blackness does not appear except from the medicine applied to it and that blackness is due to the power of that medicine, then take some honey and three parts rose oil, mix them with a cloth, and apply it directly on the wound; also treat it with the appropriate remedies until it is healed."
"Chapter III."
"On the restoration of the nose when it is cut."
"You should know that the nose is not broken except into two parts at once raised up, or one of those sometimes seen, because there are two bones in it, and the cartilage part is not broken but only roughened and twisted."
"But if one of the two parts of it is broken, then you should introduce the little finger into its place and push that fracture inward with your thumb and index finger from outside until the nose returns to its natural shape." "And let this be done by you easily, and guard yourself so that you do not cause pain to the patient during your operation."
If the fracture is at the top of the nose where it meets the forehead, and the patient cannot reach that area, then a splint should be applied with its end placed on the bone in which some thickness has been carved.
If the fracture is in two parts, then make it appear as if it were one piece.
And try to begin the restoration of it on the first day after the fracture if possible; otherwise, around the seventh or tenth day you should repeat the wound cleansing process.
And if the fracture is in one piece, insert a cloth wick into the end of the nose, or use two cotton pads if it's in two pieces, ensuring that the padding is thick enough to fill the gap in the nose.
Some ancient restorers say that the cotton pads should be edged with border and changed every day, but this is not seen by me. It is necessary that the wick be wrapped in albumen of egg yolk mixed with powdered mastic; and also let the pad remain inside until the bone has been set and the cartilage strengthened.
Sometimes, instead of cotton pads, pieces of linen wool can be inserted into the nose, provided that there is not much pus present and that the patient's breathing is not impeded.
And this method is not necessary for you to use; if you wish, do as I have said, or if you prefer, use cotton pads.
And if another wound cleansing process is needed in the future, plaster the nose with cerote or cotton soaked in vinegar and rose oil, or with diachylon.
But if there is no wound cleansing process needed, then you should plaster the outside of the nose with sesame flour and powdered mastic mixed with egg white. And also cover it with linen wool, and do not touch the nose for any reason.
But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or slightly comminuted, then you should bind them up and extract those fragments using appropriate instruments. Then close the wound with stitches and treat it with something that heals and consolidates the bone, along with suitable plasters.
If plague occurs within the nostrils, then it is necessary to cure them with hot compresses and administer lead cannulae until completely healed.
Captulo IV
De la restauracin de la mandbula cuando est trabada
When the jawbone is broken and the fracture is not infected, look to see if it is fractured only on one side, and not in two pieces. If it is curved inward at the ends, its treatment will be easier
Therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, insert your left index finger into the patient's mouth and similarly if the fracture is on the left jawbone, insert the said index finger of the right hand. Then gently push the swelling of the fracture inward with that finger while supporting the outside of the bone with your other hand until it becomes even.
And if the jawbone fracture is already separated into two pieces, then you must apply traction to both parts according to their straightness until it is possible for them to be brought together.
And if there is commotion of teeth with disruption, then strengthen those which you expect to break with gold or silver wire or thread. Then place cotton on the broken jawbone and apply gauze over it, and place a large sterile cloth folded lengthwise on top of everything. Then bind it all together according to how you are accustomed to do so and according to what is convenient for its application, until it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to rest quietly, and have them avoid eating dry foods that are difficult to swallow.
And if you estimate that the figure has already been altered in some way, then on the third day remove the splint and realign it. Then refine what needs to be refined on the splint and apply plaster with powdered chalk or egg albumin or wheat flour, after first removing the cotton from the patient's mouth. Then place a linen cloth over the plaster.
And then, when the splint is attached and well-adjusted on the patient, and the position of the bone has not been altered, leave it in place until the fracture has healed and become strong. For many times this fracture heals in three weeks.
And if an abscess forms later on, then apply what we have said many times for its treatment until it heals and the abscess is removed.
And if the fracture is accompanied by pus, then consider whether it is a piece of bone that has separated or an abscess. If it is an abscess, then be careful to remove those abscesses using whatever is convenient for removing them with your instruments.
"If the orifice of the wound is narrow, then you should widen it using a dilator according to your need."
"And when you have finished those procedures and nothing remains, then if the wound's orifice is wide; otherwise, apply one of the dressings that are convenient for this purpose and pack it until it heals."
"Chapter Five."
"On the restoration of the collarbone when broken."
"Frequently, the collarbone is broken at its midpoint near the muscle, and this fracture occurs in one of three ways."
"It is broken, separated, or separated into two pieces without any displacement; this is easy to restore; or it occurs with displacements, which makes restoration difficult; or it is accompanied by a wound."
"And the operation in this case, when there is no wound, is that you have two assistants present: one to hold the forceps and follow the broken collarbone, and the other to extend the neck at its midpoint."
"And once you have grasped the fracture with your hands as described earlier, make sure it has the appropriate shape according to what is needed, and that there is neither prominence nor concavity at its apex."
"And if you need more extension, then place a folded cloth or wool pad behind the sick person's shoulder according to how much is necessary for your needs. Then extend and elevate the collarbone and compress the pad with your hand while grasping the fracture as needed."
"And if you cannot reduce the end of the collarbone to its normal position from outside, then have the patient sit up on their neck and place a large cushion or bolster under their shoulder on that side."
"And the assistant presses down on the muscle at the fracture site while you elevate the collarbone until it is reduced to its normal position. Then you can correct the fracture and grasp it with your hands as described earlier."
"But if there are displacements of the collarbone that cause pain and discomfort, then you should press down on them and remove those displacements with ease."
"And if it is retained within the bone, then you should make an incision through it using one of the incissors that you have prepared for this purpose. You had previously placed the collarbone under the instrument called a 'cyphac,' which can be made of wood or iron and has this shape:"
"And it resembles a spoon with a concave surface, whose width should be according to your needs based on the size of the bone or the depth of the incision."
"But its length should be according to what is feasible for the operation: it should have two ends like this, one wide and the other narrow."
"And if the disruption of the skin that you incised when removing the bone displacement is wide and you are certain there will be an abscess, then you should approximate the two edges of the wound with sutures."
"And if the disruption is small or you fear an abscess, then fill the wound with dressings and powders according to the size of the skin incision."
"If an abscess forms, then soak a cloth in sour wine and rose oil mixed with wine, and place it on that area."
"And all this should be done without causing pain to the patient over the fractured bone. And you should check on the patient every day to see if the bandage becomes loose or slips out of place; if so, then correct it and tighten the ligature."
"And also place the patient on their back and elevate their head with pillows, placing one pillow on either side of them at night. This way, the assistant's arm is elevated from that side and consequently the fractured collarbone is elevated due to the elevation of the muscle; or else the patient's arm is tied around their neck."
"And do not remove the bandage until the twelfth day unless there is proper healing or an abscess occurs."
"And also renew the poultice if you see it become dry at any time, adjusting it to fit the reduction and replacing it until the fracture is completely restored and consolidated."
"And it is strengthened and comfortable after one month and twenty-eight days. Sometimes in some men it happens more quickly than this."
"Chapter VI."
"On the restoration of fractures of the shoulder."
"The blade of the scapula is broken at its lateral edge and not the whole bone, but only its margins."
"And therefore when the fracture is at its lateral edge and not known except by touch, then prepare it according to its shape and reduce it according to its natural figure in every way that you are able."
"And also apply a poultice of fine powdered millstone with egg albumen and a lion's tooth compress. Then place a folded cloth bandage over it; then apply a thin wooden splint according to the size of the entire blade or slightly larger."
"But if there is a concavity on one side of the blade where the splint lies, then fill in that concavity with a lion's tooth compress and place the splint evenly."
"And also secure it above with a long twisted bandage with sufficient tension and firmness of the splint so that it does not slip out of its place."
"And check the bandage every day. And whenever it becomes loose, replace it and tighten it again, adjusting the splint if it has slipped out of its place."
"And make the patient lie on their side."
"The blade is restored in twenty days or in twenty-five days."
"And therefore when this number is complete, then dissolve the bandage, ensuring that you know that it is among those bones where healing has begun and its removal will not cause harm."
"And if you proceed with the operation at the location of the shoulder blade and put the arm in place, then cut it open there, drain it, and follow what we have said concerning the treatment of an abscess if one occurs here."
"Chapter VII."
"On the restoration of fractures of the thighbone."
"The thighbone sometimes breaks in its middle but most often it is broken at both ends and becomes shortened and comminuted."
"And when the middle of it is broken, its accidents are that it declines towards the thighs and occurs with great pain, difficulty in walking, coughing, shortness of breath, and vomiting blood. It is evident in the cavity of the broken bone and not hidden to sensation."
"And the restoration of him is that the patient should be propped up on their back, and a cushion placed between their shoulders; then press upon their muscles, adjust their ribs with both hands, and proceed gently in the operation and equitation according to whatever manner is possible for this purpose."
"And then place the plaster and cotton wool on top of a subtle table made of wood or marble, and its semblance in levitation, since you wrap it in cloth. And be careful to apply that gently onto the broken bone without hurting him; and bind around the back several times according to the roundness of the spine, tightening it appropriately. Observe the binding at all times, and when softened, tighten it again."
"And if it is necessary to provoke the removal of that binding due to infection or pain, or an aposteme occurring in that location, then you gently remove and untie that binding, eradicate the plaster, and rectify whatever has happened there through appropriate care. And then reduce the plaster, sometimes applying it to the face; and adjust the tightness until it is healed."
"Chapter VIII."
"On the restoration of crushed ribs."
"You should know that rib fractures only occur in large, thick bones of the back; and at their extremities near the junction, such damage does not happen except due to a fall." "And its diagnosis is not hidden from sensation during the examination of it with these tools."
"And the restoration should be done as follows: align the fracture with these tools according to the most possible manner, until it is completely aligned according to need, and then apply plaster and strengthen the broken bone with steel if necessary."
"And if the rib fracture is displaced towards its ends inward, then it occurs with sudden pain and stabbing, like that which occurs in someone who has coughed up blood, because the bone pierces the pleura; and difficulty breathing, coughing, and vomiting of much blood occur, and this is difficult to treat."
"And even the Ancients knew about this with many words."
"And they said this: that one should pause feeding the patient who generates inflation and flatulence, so that the abdomen may become inflated and extended, and thus the fracture may be pushed back towards its ends outward."
"But we would avoid this because it might cause a boil to form easily if it does not happen, and if it has happened, then it will already help with that."
"And some of them said that wind should be paused and sucked out with force; this is similar reasoning, but nevertheless it is feared that the wind might draw the superfuities to the location due to weakness."
"And some of them said: that the location should be covered with wool which has already been immersed in hot oil, and powdered resin should be paused between the ribs until it is full, so that the wrapping may fit well according to its roundness; and then the patient should be treated with food and medicine for pleurisy."
"And if the patient is experiencing strong pain which they cannot bear, and the bone pierces the pleura with sharp puncture, then we fear for the patient, so it is necessary to perform a operation on that location, uncovering the broken rib, and then place upon it the instrument that preserves the cicatrix, of which the memory has been preceded, and gently insert the bone and remove it."
"And then we should join together the edges of the wound, if it is large, with suturing, and treat it with plasters until it has healed."
"And if an abscess forms inside it, then take and grind up frankincense in rose oil and pause it upon the location, and treat the patient with what is necessary for that internal abscess."
"And let him be propped up on pillows on the side on which he lies, until he has healed."
Chapter IX
On the restoration of fractures of the spine of the back and neck.
Sometimes fracture occurs in the bones of the neck, and it tends to adhere to them, and similarly for the spines of the back. "And when this happens to someone and you want to know whether it will heal or not, then consider: if the muscles around it are already softened, stunned, dead, and cannot move them nor extend nor strengthen them, and when you press on them with your fingers or prick them with a needle and they do not feel pain in that location, then you will know that it has not healed, and such cases are mortal."
"But if they can move them and feel pressure with the fingers or pricking, then you will know that the neck of the bone is saved, and the patient will recover with treatment."
"But if it appears like this on the spines of the neck, then consider its weight to know whether it will heal or not."
"Then if you find that the muscles around it are already softened, as happened with the others mentioned earlier, and furthermore when he lies on his back, there is windiness and emptying without his will, and sometimes he is propped up on his back and wants to urinate but cannot, then you will know that it is mortal, and therefore do not bother with treating him."
"But if none of these causes occur, then the case is better and easier."
"And the treatment for it is that you should pierce and evacuate the abscess which has formed on the broken spine with hot rose oil or with hot wax, pausing upon it a few times each day until the hard abscess has been softened."
"And then pause one of the comforting and exciting plasters on it, and strengthen it with bandages; and command the patient to use rest and tranquility, and not to lie down on the part where they feel pain until they have healed."
"And if it happens that the bone is sticking out or some cause has already separated from it, then it is necessary to secure a splint on the neck and fix that bone in place; and also join together the edges of the wound with suturing if it is large; and also treat it with some encrusting of the ointments until it has healed."
"But if the end of the bone has broken off, and it is the end of the spine, then you must insert your left-hand thumb into the anus, and grasp the broken bone with your other hand as much as possible by equilateral pulling; and also pause upon it plaster and bandage, if necessary for those, and also strengthen it."
"And if you feel broken bone fragments in it, then remove those and fix that bone in place, treating the wound with the treatment that has been described until it has healed."
Chapter X.
"On restoring health."
"The bones of the thighs are broken here, and if they break, the fracture is merely union at the ends of those bones which are inserted in length and incline toward the inside; and it happens that the patient suffers pain in this place and puncture, and the limb becomes paralyzed when there is a fracture."
"And the restoration of him consists in your extending your hand over that part which is above the fracture as figured."
"And if the fracture is only in the extremity of it then you shall reduce that according to what appears equal to you by proportion; and engage that part which is joined together with its natural figure."
"But if the fracture is in the long bone or already inclines toward the inside of the leg then let the patient lie on his back with that limb prepared for you to restore that fracture." "And then when you have reduced it, apply plaster, and also apply a splint of wood or stick, and bind it firmly with bandages so that there is no fear of puncture or displacement of the bone."
"And then fill in the concavity with something that will occupy that space which has been filled by the bandages according to equality, and command the patient to sleep on his back or on his side."
"But if an aposteme occurs, cease from the extension and restoration of it until the aposteme is sedated, and apply what sedates that according to what has been said before; and then return to the restoration of it, and bind it as usual."
"And if any splinters or small fragments occur in the bone, then remove them."
Chapter XI
Of the restoration of the fracture of the jawbone.
The jawbone is that which is between the cheek and the head of the shoulder.
"If it is broken, then its restoration is by one of two methods, the first being that you should take a splint of moderate thickness in this manner:"
"And if there are two extremities to it, two bands should be suspended from an elevated place nearby."
"Then have the patient sit on a chair, and carefully place their broken arm on the splint so that it reaches the elbow joint at the midpoint where the curvature of the splint is attached."
"Then suspend some heavy weight from that (the splint), or have the servant extend it towards the left side; and then the physician should gently pull the broken ends together with his hands, ensuring that the fracture is realigned properly."
"The other method is for the patient to be propped up on their chest, with their arm suspended by a sling from the neck. Then command two ministers: one should hold what is above the fracture with both hands, and the other should hold what is below it. And each of them should extend towards his side."
"And if you wish for greater extension, then place one strap above the fracture and another below it, and each of the two ministers should pull towards their respective sides."
"And if the fracture is close to the extremity of the muscle, then you should place half of the strap on the elbow joint and the other half below the fracture at the bone."
"And likewise, if the fracture is close to the elbow, then you should place the strap on that location and also over the elbow."
"Then apply it with ease and without difficulty, and as soon as it is applied correctly and according to what is necessary, then tie it firmly so that it does not happen that a blister forms."
"But if a blister forms, then loosen the bandage for 7 days, and apply over it a poultice made of linseed and oil, until the blister disappears. Then tie on again."
"And the method of tying that is: apply a plaster over the fracture, then wrap it with a layer of clean cloth over the plaster. Then adjust the arm over that support and place the hand covered in a sling on top of its muscle."
"And wrap and tie the cloth over the support for the arm so that the arm remains in place if there is no prohibition due to any cause of the broken bone."
"And then apply splints."
"And it is necessary to place over the fracture that splint which is wider and stronger than the others. And place the width of a finger between each splint, and let the length of the splints be according to the fracture with an addition of three fingers on either side."
"And then tie over the splints with the bandage which was mentioned at the beginning of this chapter."
"And it is necessary that your bandage over the fracture site be as tight as possible." "And when the fracture is extended, the bandage should be looser."
"And therefore, if you adjust the splints and bandage as we have said in the time when you restore the member to its proper position, then do it."
"And if you fear blistering, then loosen the bandage and splints for 7 days as we have said."
"And then consider the bandage in all cases for 3 days so that no bruising or inflammation occurs at the location due to excess tightness. Or if the member is prohibited from being nourished due to excess tightness, then correct everything as we have said."
"But if you are doubtful about this and fear that nothing might happen due to it, then do not loosen the bandage, but rather wait for 3 days or more."
"And let his sleeping place be elevated on two pillows, and let his hands be on his stomach."
"And place over the elbow joint a full cushion of wool padding, and watch at all times of the night or day that the figure of the broken member is not dislocated nor dissolved, or if the bandage becomes softened, then correct everything with your skill."
"And feed the patient according to the order which we have mentioned earlier, so that in the beginning the food is soft until he begins to heal. And then it becomes necessary to increase his food."
"Regarding the custom of the splint and the sling, they should remain tied for 40 days. And then it becomes necessary to loosen them and give a bath and apply ointments that correct them."
"And if the fracture is completely consolidated, then you do not loosen the bandage and splints for 1 day or up to two months."
"Chapter XII."
"Of the restoration of fractures of the arm."
"The arm is composed of two bones which are called the two elbow bones. Of these, one is small and it secures the thumb; and the other is large and it is placed beside the little finger from its outer side."
"And sometimes only the larger elbow bone is fractured, or sometimes both are broken together."
"When the little elbow bone above is fractured, then its restoration will be easier and healing will also be quicker."
"But when it is fractured below, its fracture is bad and healing is difficult."
"And the worst of all is when both bones are broken together."
"Therefore, if the bone that is fractured is the little elbow bone above, then it is convenient for the physician to do its restoration by applying a small extension with ease until it becomes well aligned."
"But if the large elbow bone is broken, then it is necessary to apply stronger traction."
"And if both bones are fractured together, then you must apply traction very strongly."
"And it is necessary that you place the figure of the hand in its restoration and traction extended on a pillow. And let the wrist be placed above all the fingers, with the thumb higher than all the other fingers, and let the patient lie on a cushioned bed."
"And place a pillow before him at his height or behind him, so that the patient does not move."
"And then let one assistant extend the arm from its outer side with his hand or bandage, and another assistant extend it similarly above."
"Then the physician aligns the bone until he reduces it to its best figure possible."
"And if in the fracture of the bone you are unsuccessful, then proceed to reduce all pressure into its proper place with your skill."
"And if it appears that the elbow is dislocated and does not return to its proper place during restoration, then do as we have said above."
"But if the fracture is accompanied by contusion, which has already been discussed in Chapter X, and therefore take care of it accordingly."
"And if blistering appears at the beginning of your restoration, then take a cloth with cerate made from rose oil and white wax, and let it be moderate between thickness and thinness. Then apply the cloth over it with gentle pressure until the blister is absorbed. Then remove the cerate and apply an emplaster prepared from powder of barilla with clay of eggs. And then apply bandages; and let the bandage which is applied over that fracture be wide and strong."
"And know that in the case of fractures of the arm, the number of bandages used is usually greater than those used for other parts of the body, whether it be a fracture of one bone or both bones together."
"And then apply your bandage over the location of the fracture with great force and vehemence. And if the traction pulls too much on the parts above or below the fracture, then apply the bandage more gently according to what is remembered from the beginning of this chapter."
"Wet bandages should be wrapped around the fracture, not hard or rough ones. The thread with which it is sewn should be neither too thin nor too thick."
"The limb and its ligaments should be considered several days later." "And if some cause occurs that necessitates correction, such as swelling of the limb, then you should immerse the limb in cold water until the swelling subsides."
"Allow the limb to rest without constraint and then gradually return it to its original position."
"And if the dislocation has already been softened and the bone has returned to its usual appearance, then correct everything with your own strength."
"Also consider whether the supply of nutrients to the limb is being restricted by excessive tightness. If so, you should loosen it slightly and allow it to rest for a few days until blood flow improves, and then bind it again."
"But if the injury does not involve any of the causes mentioned above, then it should not be unbound for at least 20 days or thereabouts."
"And then have the injured person use their own strength to move their arm actively, and make them sleep on their back."
"And know that this fracture takes about 30 to 32 days to heal, or sometimes even fewer, such as 28 days, depending on the disposition of the complexion and the strength of the person."
"Chapter 13"
"On the restoration of fractures of the hand and fingers."
Know that at the tip of the hand and the knuckles of those fingers fracture occurs frequently, yet it rarely happens without first experiencing many dislocations.
And when the hand suffers fracture or dislocation, it is necessary that the patient lie on their back with the injured arm extended out in front of them and supported by a pillow.
And then the minister should extend the broken bones and the physician should bind them together with good alignment.
And then it is necessary to apply a plaster and bandage, unless there is a risk of pus formation. Then apply a splint according to the severity of the injury, which you should already have wrapped in cloth.
But if the fracture is in the middle of the palm, then fashion a splint like a hand towel and instruct the patient to grasp it with their injured hand. Then bind it with a long strip of cloth.
And the splint should be made of leather covered in cloth that is folded over itself to provide padding, so that the splint can be applied directly to the palm. Then bind it according to what is necessary.
But if the fracture is on the outside of the hand, then you should apply splints both above and below the injury on the palm side of the hand, so that the hand is in a position of flexion. Then bind it as follows:
And if there is a fracture of one of the bones in the fingers, then if it is the thumb, splint it as necessary and bind it to the palm. Additionally, you may apply a small splint on the outside of the finger to elevate the fracture and prevent displacement.
But if the fracture is in one of the other fingers, such as the middle finger, index finger, ring finger, or little finger, then splint it by extending and binding it with the finger next to it that is not injured. Alternatively, you may bind them all together in continuity, which is preferable. Or apply a small splint on top of the injured finger, as previously described for the thumb.
And note that in your treatment and splinting, you should consider the position of any blisters or wounds formed during the procedure, as well as what is necessary when such causes arise according to what is described in this book.
Captulo XIV
Chapter XIV
"The bone of the hip joint is often broken, and this is felt according to its transformation into the anterior part and upper part."
"And its restoration is done in such a way that the ligament is tightened over the fracture and another ligament on the other side of the fracture, and the patient should lie prone on their stomach."
"And therefore the minister should extend all the ligaments to their respective parts according to quality, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone."
"But if it is displaced towards the hip joint, then the ligament attached to the bone should be stretched at the point of the penitent, so that the extension takes place there, and the other ligament on the other side of the fracture."
"And similarly if the fracture is displaced towards the bone end, then it should be done by stretching the ligament attached to the bone end, and the extension should take place on the other side of the parts."
"And therefore the doctor should press both sides of the bone inward so that it reduces according to its natural shape and the bone is joined together by good union. Then plaster and splinting should be applied if no inflammation occurs in the limb." "But if inflammation occurs, then allow that to rest for a few days until the inflammatory swelling subsides, and then return to your treatment."
"The splinting should be done as follows: wrap a hard bandage over the fracture and fold it two or three times, removing the excess; then wrap the limb so that it reaches to the heel and hip joint."
"And insert a long splint between the hip and the limb near its lower end; bring both ends of the splint above the upper part of the two parts, then wrap it around the limb and hip, removing any excess bandage."
"And then place a splint over the hip in the location of that fracture, and place another splint on the limb bone."
"And then fill the spaces between the limb and hip with soft cloths, so that the union is consolidated."
"And then begin with a strong splint on the middle of the limb over the location of the fracture with three or four layers. And as you go along with the ligament at the site of the fracture, make your splinting lighter and more flexible."
"And extend both ends of the splint to both sides of the fracture until it reaches the ankle bone, and strengthen both ends of the other splints on either side for fear that the ligament is dislodged from its place."
"And then leave the splint on for about three weeks until no inflammation occurs nor any heat or swelling appears. And if any cause of those occurs, then take care to remove it immediately and correct whatever has happened according to what we have said many times."
"But if the bone is broken at its tip, then you should reset it according to what is possible for you. And if not, then wait until it heals and then remove it, treating with whatever precedes the memory of it until it is healed."
"And sometimes this fracture of the hip joint is strengthened with those splints which are adjusted to it, as we have said in the assistant and in the arm."
"But however in the restoration of it in this manner it does not happen that the patient becomes lame. And if it is restored alone, without applying the other limb, then it is necessary that he limp on it at all times."
"And know that the hip joint is strengthened in forty days or a little more or less, and all this depends on the diversity of complexions and other dispositions."
"Chapter 15."
"On the restoration of fractures of the patella."
"Know that a fracture of the patella is rare, but it often happens with a blow or fall."
"But if a fracture occurs to it, then it is only a crack or break in its parts, and this is with much pain or little pain. And over all this the diagnosis is made by sensation."
"And its restoration should be done by resetting whatever is broken in its parts with the said splints until it is united and joined according to what is possible for equitation, ease of construction."
"And then apply an emplaster and place a round splint if needed. And strengthen it above with a splint that is appropriate."
"And also consider all the dispositions which we have recommended in other fractures, such as inflammation and swelling, so that it opposes all accidents with whatever is appropriate for it until it is healed."
"Chapter 16."
"Of the restoration of a broken leg."
"Do you know that in the leg there are two bones of which one is thick and is called the shinbone; and the other is slender and is called the fibula?"
"And what happens to each of the types of fracture that happens to both bones of the arm also happens to it [the leg], and thus its restoration is like the restoration of the arm, and the operation for it is one."
"And if two bones are broken at once, the leg becomes completely useless."
"And if only the thinner bone is broken, the leg is paralyzed in front."
"And if only the thicker bone is broken, afterwards that one remains, and it is of those causes which are not lame."
"Therefore, extension, traction, and fixation of the splints should be applied according to that same manner."
"But nevertheless, if the fracture of the leg is such that it has many attempts, then extension should be less and lighter, and eased with your virtue."
"And in the leg there is some cause of operation on the arm, and this is when you align the splints and complete all your operation; then you will take pieces of wood from pine which is placed behind the causes which are placed below, and they should be made equally of branches of palm; lighten those which have less thickness, and do not use large ones, and let their length be according to the length of the leg, and from the knee up to the thigh."
"And therefore wrap each splint with two wrappings according to its length, and place one on the fracture of the leg from one side and the other from the other side, and they should be from the knee up to the ankle."
"And therefore fasten the two splints in three places of both extremities and in the middle place, because with this traction the leg is prohibited from bending at the right or left joint, and it remains in good position."
"And then apply a splint of wood according to the length of the leg; and let the leg be placed upon it so that it retains its movement."
"And especially when you do this in a fracture, and particularly when with that there is swelling properly."
"And therefore consider the leg each day and study it with that for final study, and keep it from suppuration and inflammation or other similar causes. And when any of those causes occurs, then pause there with what is necessary until it is healed."
Chapter xvii
Of the fracture of the ankle bone and the bones of the foot.
The ankle bone does not usually break completely, but the bones of the foot do sometimes fracture occasionally. And those of the foot rarely break, and they are only sprained in cases of disposition.
"And if any of the bones of the foot becomes fractured and those bones sometimes rise above each other, then the sick person places his foot on the ground prepared thus as when walking."
"And therefore pause the other foot upon what is raised from those bones, and press them down, squeeze them together, and keep them in their places until they return."
"And therefore apply a plaster and bandage over it, and place a small board at the bottom of the foot with two projecting heads."
"And therefore strengthen that with the leg by traction downwards since you have wrapped it with bandages and other means which are necessary."
"And when three or four days have passed, then undo the bandages, for you will find that the bones are united, either by being fixed together or reduced. And the operation on them is like those previously known."
"But if some of these are not fixed, then reduce them and fix them thus as you have seen in the reduction of the bones of the hand." "And therefore place a splint on the fractured finger according to its length, and let it be placed a little to the side of it. And then place that board which has been recommended under the foot, and strengthen it with traction downwards."
"But if two or three or more of the bones are broken, then place on each finger a splint according to its length wrapped in lion's skin cloth, and strengthen the board at the bottom of the foot, and let it stand upon one of the heads of the board with the sole of the foot for better retention."
"And it is necessary for you to remember that you do not neglect all the causes which have been mentioned to you concerning the other fractures which we have spoken of, and be prepared for every accident with what is necessary."
De la fractura del colze e dels osses de la man.
"Regarding fracture of the bone of the woman's pelvis, the bone of the penis, and the rod of man."
"When the bone of the woman is broken, then immediately cease that pressure in that area, and gently incline her to the side of the hip, keeping it held behind."
"And moreover the midwife will press the bone from outside, and it should be placed in the bone as if it were hoped; and moreover the woman should be moved gently, lifting her hips little by little, because all this is forgotten until it is before the opening of the bone as desired, and the broken bone returns."
"And moreover, powder should be placed on the hips, and when she wants to urinate, gently move the hip away with ease, and then she can urinate, and reduce it again according to how it was positioned at first, and then return to her initial powder."
"And do this for seven days or thereabouts, because that is when it will be restored."
"And if you wish, take an ovine bladder and stretch it over the bone of the hip using a reed cannula; then insert the entire bladder into the bone of the hip, and blow into the cannula with force until the bladder is inflated within the bone, because this will cause the fracture to return."
"And then fill it again with cotton and keep it there for some days as we have recommended, until it is healed."
"And when the bone of the penis in a man or woman is broken, then you should apply the same treatment and stitching as we have recommended for the hipbone."
"And that which is right is not concealed in these fractures, nor is it difficult to find, especially for those who study and use this my book; because this fracture indicates to you the major dispositions of a straight line in restoring and repairing it, and therefore understand well."
"But in the case of a broken penis in a man, take a gourd of cucumber and place the penis inside it; then apply a bandage made of cloth over it and wrap it up, and leave it for three days or thereabouts, until it is healed."
"Chapter XIX."
"Of the restoration of fractures of the bones when they are with plague."
It is appropriate for one who has experienced a fracture with contusion, especially if the bone is large like that of the thigh or arm, or similar, you should perform bloodletting immediately if conditions for phlebotomy are favorable as mentioned above.
And if the contusion flows with blood, it is necessary that you cauterize the wound immediately, powdering it with the above-mentioned mixture, unless there is another cause present.
And therefore begin restoring the fracture on that same day, and do not delay this process if there are no signs of gangrene.
But if gangrene is present, delay restoring the fracture for up to nine days until the gangrene has subsided. Do not approach it on the third and fourth day altogether, for you will cause further harm.
But if the broken bone is prominent above the skin, it is necessary that you perform reduction and alignment of it with your hands with ease and minimal extension.
But if extension is not prepared and the bone cannot be aligned with your hands alone, then use this tool: it is made of iron, seven or eight fingers long, and its width varies depending on the size of the wound. Therefore, it is necessary for the physician to have three or four of these tools ready, according to what is needed in the treatment of all kinds of fractures.
And once it is reduced, apply slight pressure to prevent it from being displaced during the operation.
And if there is an acute angle at its ends, cut it with the scissors near its extremities; and make sure that the upper part of the bone is thicker and the inner part is wider.
And this is how it looks:
And in Greek, it is called "labre volentz atelarem," which means "slight spatula."
So that the acute end may be elevated above the prominence of the bone.
And press it into place within a splint until the bone returns to its alignment with some reduction.
Then strive to align the ends of the fracture with one another. If the end of the broken bone is thin and does not fit well with the tool, then insert the tool between them so that it can have some leverage.
But if you cannot reduce the bone with all that has been recommended, then cut it with scissors in the manner that is described above. Or saw it with one of the saws, whichever way is easiest for you.
And remove any sharp edges or small rough spots from the remaining bone.
And when the bone has been reduced and the patient feels intense pain upon movement, you should know that the bone has not returned to its proper place. Therefore, be careful so that you do not cause further harm to the patient.
When you have completed the reduction of the bone, then cover it with a bandage soaked in black stiptic wine. And especially if it is summer, do not apply any ointment containing oil or other grease, so that it does not cause inflammation and corruption afterwards.
And apply bandages in the final stages of the reduction of the bone. Leave the dressing uncovered so that you can insert splints and use wrapping according to the size of the wound.
And be very careful not to strain the dressing at the fracture site, as many foolish doctors have done this and caused harm to their patients, resulting in death or gangrene. And if your patient's fracture is light, soft, different from other fractures.
And if the wound is large or infected and you fear that one of the bad accidents mentioned earlier may occur, causing pain in the area, then do not apply bandages. Instead, use a dressing made of thick cloth and tie it on firmly to keep the wound clean.
And after one or two days have passed since the wound began to suppurate, then remove the bandage that you had placed over it with wine. And apply poultices, as is customary in our practice for treating wounds, such as teriapharmacon and similar remedies.
And it is your duty to remove the splints and examine the wound every morning and evening until it has healed and is firm. And the limb should be positioned in such a way that pus can flow easily from it towards its lower parts.
If many days have passed and the wound is not consolidated nor has it begun to heal, then you should know that here are signs of pus formation. Therefore, explore the wound with a probe. And of those signs that are separated and removed or drawn out, if they are not separated from one another and put the limb in danger and cause pain, then persevere in incising them according to what you find possible.
And if pus or gangrene occurs in the wound, which is called stomatitis, or another kind of corruption and putrefaction, then it is necessary that you treat it with one of those remedies that are described in their chapter under the heading of treatment.
And regarding that in which my speech should be brief and you perform your task: when the thick bone is crushed, do not attempt traction or extraction of it, as many times this has caused death. Leave it there until it grows together, for it will usually unite by itself in about 20 to 30 days. And then treat the wound if you see fit, or leave it alone.
Chapter XX.
Of the treatment of union that occurs in the place of some fracture.
Many times this condition occurs during the healing process of a fracture, especially near joints, and it is characterized by a deformity of the limb. It is strictly forbidden to move the limb from its natural position.
Then consider if the deformity is recent and administer those medicines that have astringent properties such as alum, resins, and myrrh. Take some of them and mix with stiptic wine, albumen of egg white, or vinegar, then apply it on the deformity wrapped in linen cloth and secure it with good compression.
And let the bandage remain undisturbed for several days until the swelling subsides. Then remove it and repeat the application until the deformity is removed; or place over that a lead plate descended from above, as lead has the property of reducing any swelling in the limbs.
If the deformity has already hardened and tightened, it may be necessary to remove it carefully. To do this, first make an incision along the superior edge of the limb and then incise the superfluous skin and fat until the hardened tissue is exposed. Then carefully remove that tissue using some probes or hooks until it is completely removed; afterwards, dress the wound until it heals.
"The chapter twenty-one."
"When a fracture has healed, but the limb remains thin and does not follow its natural course."
"When a bone fracture has healed, but the limb remains thin and does not follow its natural course, this happens for several reasons: one of which is the abundance of solution in the ligaments and bonds, not according to what is appropriate; or due to excess tightening of the ligaments preventing nutrients from reaching the limb; or due to excessive use of ointments; or due to unnecessary movement; or due to lack of blood in the patient's body and weakness."
"And its treatment is to feed the patient and make their heart strong so that blood may be increased in them; and administer baths; and apply warmth, joy, and comfort upon them."
"And also to apply plaster around the limb, so that the plaster draws nutrient to it, or continuous application of hot water, so that the nutrient flows and returns to its natural form."
"Chapter XXII."
"On the treatment of broken bones that have healed crookedly and why surgery is not appropriate in this case."
"When it happens that a limb which has already healed becomes crooked and prominent at the site of the break, and this causes the limb to appear misshapen, although the limb is not prohibited from its natural operation, you should not listen to those who claim that the limb has been recently broken."
"But many foolish doctors and bone-setters have done this in our land, and this operation is most reprehensible and brings great fear upon those who bear its mark, which is death."
"But if the limpness and nodosity are recent, then they should be treated with hot water containing herbs that soften them, such as marshmallow and rosewater, and mallow, and similar ones; and a plaster made from white lead should be applied with a moistening plaster like litharge well-made; or gum tragacanth of rosewater mixed with wool grease or camphor oil, and this should be plastered upon it; or ripe figs crushed with dove's feathers, and similar to those medicines called softeners."
"And sometimes it is dissolved by frequent gentle friction with the most humid ones, and the member should be moved in all parts at all hours."
"But if the crookedness has already become hard and converted into bone and surgery is necessary, then it is appropriate to cut away what is superfluous from the prominence of that bone with subtle chisels, and to administer ease in that place with care and diligence."
"Chapter XXIII."
"On discourse concerning dislocation."
"Dislocation is the displacement of some of the joints from their place so that they are hindered in movement and cause deformity of the limb and bring about great pain and harm."
"Therefore when it happens that there is dislocation somewhere, then it should be promptly reduced and not delayed in reducing, because if it is delayed the joint becomes inflamed and firm, making reduction of dislocation difficult."
"And therefore one should not be moved or stretched at the time of inflammation, because many times it brings about spasm and severe pain."
"But when it happens, then you should apply the cautery to the affected part and let it rest until the inflammation subsides; and then embrocate the limb with hot water and oil, and reduce it gently."
"And every limb should be treated with that remedy which brings back the memory of its place."
"I have already set the bones of dislocation according to what is known about fractures; I placed the upper part of the body into the lower part."
"Chapter Twenty-four."
Of dislocation treatment of the jaw on the left side
If both mandibles are dislocated but do not reduce on their own, there are two methods to treat the dislocation of both jaws:
"However, if the dislocation of the limb is minor, it often returns to its proper position on its own accord."
"If the dislocation is entire and complete, then it must be reduced gently, without delay."
"And the assistant should hold the patient's head, while the doctor inserts one finger of his right hand into the dislocation of the jaw within the patient's mouth if it is on one side; or inserts both fingers together if the dislocation is on two sides. The others present should hold the rest of the body firmly in place and command the patient to keep their jaws still and relax those muscles that cause each part to move separately. Then the doctor gently moves the jaw back into its proper position."
"And if the reduction of the dislocation is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated together, then steam should be administered with hot water and oil to facilitate gentle and easy reduction without delay."
"After the dislocation has been reduced and the jaws are in place, the patient's mouth should be closed gently and not forced open. Then powdered cloth with cerate should be applied to facilitate easier reduction, using melted wax and rose oil."
"And the patient should sleep on their back with their head supported between two pillows to prevent turning it to either side. They should not be forced to chew anything, but have liquid food until the pain has subsided and the jaws are healed, after which they may eat what they wish."
"And this should be administered with care to avoid any strain on the opening of the mouth during eating and drinking until the jaw is healed."
"And if the reduction of both jaws is difficult when they are dislocated and cannot be returned to their proper places, then frequent vomiting, fever, and constant thirst often occur, with severe abdominal pain and sometimes bloody diarrhea."
"And when this happens, you should know that it is a serious condition; many times the patient dies within ten days."
Captulo XXV
**Of the reduction of dislocation of the clavicle and the extreme end of the muscle.**
The shoulder blade is not displaced from its position due to its connection with the chest; sometimes it can be displaced outward, and this is apparent by touch.
To restore it, the patient should lie on their back and extend their arms. Then press tightly with your palm for a moment, as it will return to its place.
Then apply plaster and powder there and bind it firmly.
However, if the extremity that is attached to it is not displaced on any day, then it should be reduced and bandaged according to what has been said and according to your judgement.
Then apply plaster, powder, and dressing there, and instruct the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until healed.
With this same treatment, the detached end of the muscle is also reduced.
Chapter XXVI
Of the reduction of dislocation of the muscle
You should know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways: one is that it is dislocated at the attachment of the tendon to the upper arm bone, another is at the attachment of the tendon to the elbow.
And the second way is that it is dislocated at the attachment above the muscle, and this is rare; and it is not dislocated at the attachments behind by the shoulder blade or in front by the nerves.
And mostly it is dislocated and exits at the attachments below the elbow near the tendon of the biceps, especially in those individuals whose flesh is thin, it is easily dislocated; but in those with much flesh, it exits out with difficulty.
And sometimes it happens to some men that through a blow or fall the muscle becomes swollen with blood and clotted, and is then dislocated by that swelling.
Therefore you should remove this [swelling] before it becomes completely hardened, and then proceed with its treatment.
And the dislocation of it is recognized when it occurs at the attachments below the elbow near the tendon of the biceps; so that you may distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the normal one, since there is a manifest difference between them. And you find on the head of the muscle a concavity towards the elbow and the tendon of the biceps feels like an egg, and the patient cannot bring his hand to his ear nor move it in any way.
If it is dislocated at the lower end or above, then you can immediately find a palpable swelling which is not hidden.
And this dislocation undergoes easy reduction when it is fresh and the patient is a child.
And the reduction of it is that the practitioner elevates the patient's hand towards above; and approaching from behind he places his thumbs below the tendon of the biceps of that arm, and elevates the joint with force up to its place, and then the practitioner raises the patient's hand, extends it upwards; and while doing so he should pause it below when it returns easily.
But if it does not return by what has been said, and especially at the beginning when the dislocation occurred many days ago, then the patient should be immersed in hot water and given a poultice that softens and lubricates like a common liniment made from althea root, fenugreek, and marshmallow leaves in water.
And then the patient should be propped up on his back and placed below the elbow with his arm suspended between elevation and tension, and the physician places his heel upon the sphere [of the joint], elevates the head of the muscle with force, and pulls the patient's hand so that it is not hidden at its lower attachments; and another practitioner should hold the patient's head so that it is not moved from its place, for then it quickly returns to its proper position.
And if you wish, you can also reduce it in this way: have present someone who is taller than the patient and stands on that side; let him insert his muscle behind the tendon of the dislocated arm and elevate the tendon upwards while the patient is suspended in the air; then another practitioner pulls the patient's hand from its lower attachments towards his belly. But if the patient is light in weight, then it is necessary that some other cause be suspended from him in order to weigh him down, for the dislocation returns quickly.
And it is also reduced in another way: this is by placing on the ground a long stake whose head is round like that of a mortar pestle, neither too thick nor too thin. Then place the patient on top of the head of the stake with cloths beneath him; then let the patient stand along the length of the stake and extend his arm at its lower attachments towards the other side, while extending his body on the other side with force so that the joint quickly returns to its proper position.
"If reduction proves difficult for all the reasons mentioned, then use this treatment: Take a stick whose length is that of two arms, and whose width is four fingers, and its thickness should be eased in the middle according to this form:"
"And similarly, a lion's skin should be laid over the patient's head so that the stick does not slip."
"And then the stick should be placed on top of the patient's titillic, and their hand or arm should be extended over the stick to either side, and the stick should be bound over the assistant's hands and the arm and the tip of the hand."
"And then place your arm on a ladder rung according to its width, and extend your hand to either side, and the other end should be suspended from the other side, for the joint will be ready soon."
"And when the treatment is completed according to each possible manner, then you should place a compress made of wool of equal quantity on top of the titillic; and then apply an emplaster prepared from powder of ground almonds and egg whites over the entire muscle, just as it is rolled up, and then tighten beneath the titillic with moderate tension; and the bandage should be wrapped around the emplaster, and his hand should be attached to his collar, and he should rest it for seven days without moving his hand."
"And the patient's food should be limited during this time while the member is recovering, for it is easier for healing to occur."
"And then food should be gradually increased after seven or eight days and some movement exercised; and thus if it is firm and not softened, then it is healed."
"But if the joint is often dislocated due to humidity that occurs there or for some other cause, then cautery should be administered in that place with three burns, as is mentioned earlier in the chapter on cautery."
"And even if all of this is done and after seven days the bandage is removed but the joint remains loose, and the emplaster and tension are applied to it several times without effect, and he cannot raise that arm above his head, then know that the nerves of that muscle, which are at its head, have been injured or stretched or softened, and know that the joint will never be put back in its proper place."
"For the dislocation of that which has occurred, you should press the patella and the kneecap or the parts behind, and the reduction is made with pressure and extension using both hands until it returns."
"And then apply the other bandage to that place and cure it until it is healed."
"And if there is heaviness in the member that occurs during healing and slowness of its movement, then the patient should use hot baths several times until that heaviness is relieved and it returns to its original nature."
"Chapter XXVII."
"On the treatment of dislocation of the coccyx."
"You should know that the joint of the coccyx is dislocated with difficulty and returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated in all directions, but more so towards the front than the back. The dislocation of it is not hidden from you for you can see it clearly by looking or touching according to whatever figure it has been dislocated, and when you reduce the displaced coccyx with your hand, that is made clear to you, for the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm nor touch its own muscle."
"And you should know that it is necessary to reduce the dislocation immediately before an abscess appears, for if an abscess appears, reducing it is difficult and the healing will not be complete; and especially when it is in the back parts, for there is no worse species of dislocation nor greater pain, and several times death results from it."
"And the reduction of it, when that which is possible to reduce occurs, is that his hand should be extended with two hands and his arm spread out, and the physician's hands should be placed on the coccyx from below, and he pushes the joint back with the force of both hands together or with the heel of his palm until it returns to its place."
"But if the dislocation is in the front parts, then it returns thus by bending his hand with his own hand until he strikes the coccyx with the heel of his palm."
"And if the dislocation does not obey reduction, then apply powerful extension and great force."
"And let two assistants extend the arm and hold it firmly with both hands so that it is not moved during the extension."
"And then turn the arm in every direction, because it is wrapped up with a doubled cloth or bandage around his hand."
"And when the physician touches the joint with his hand, anoint it with some oil for this purpose that this may be one of those causes which help in lubricity of the joint with facility. And then push the joint back with powerful pressure until it returns."
"And then the reduction of it should be supported with that plaster in which there is astringency and suction with white of egg, and it should be extended with descending bandage, and his arm should be suspended from his neck, and he should rest for some days."
"And then let it be untied. And if the joint is formed in its proper place, then you should untie the bandage from it and leave it alone."
"But if you see that the joint is not strong, then repeat the plaster and bandage, and leave it for some days until it is extended. And then untie it."
"But if heaviness occurs during the reduction of the joint and its position is in movement, then apply moistening in baths and gentle friction and compression until it is relieved. Or let him rest upon the joint elevated, for this is a matter of fatty motion. And then let him be bound, and leave it on overnight." "And then remove that and put him in a bath. And when he rises, then friction the joint with gentle friction. And then repeat over it elevated, for this is routine of fatty motion, once, twice, three times." "Within the bath until it is softened."
"And if you wish, apply over it the hollow of a moist cow's horn scarified on its edges and press upon that. Do this several times for it is moist and reduces to its position."
"Chapter XXVIII."
"On the treatment of dislocation of maltreatment, that is of the joint which is between the arm and the hand."
"Dislocation of the hand sometimes occurs and its reduction is easy, unlike other joints. But nevertheless it is necessary that there should be swiftness in the reduction of it at the time when it is dislocated before a tumor appears or something happens with an abscess."
"And the reduction of the dislocation of it is that you place the joint of the hand of the patient on a table and an assistant extends his hand. And the physician places his hand or palm over the prominence of the joint, and pushes it until it returns to its proper place."
"But nevertheless it is necessary to consider if the palm has already been removed from the surface of the hand. Then the patient places the back of his hand on a table for extension and reduction. And if the dislocation is anterior, then the position of the patient's hand should be internally rotated upon the table so that the hand of the physician may lie over that prominence."
If it does not return quickly, then press it with an embrocation that draws out the abscess and leave it. And do not repeat this unless necessary, for otherwise it will suffer and you cannot reduce the inflammation that passes through the days.
But first soften the joint according to its tortuosity; and do not notify the patient of any cause, but say that your hand is softened and cannot press any cause. Then you will know that the nerves are crushed or cut, and therefore it is necessary to cauterize them near their outlet, and afterwards tell him some cause.
Then when it is returned badly, then pause on the embrocation which we have recommended, and let it be laid and pressed for 5 days. And near about it should be untied and left alone, and the hand of the patient should be exercised.
But if the movement of the hand is difficult and it occurs to him some heaviness, then you should apply that with cold water and friction several times, until it is alleviated.
Chapter XXIX
Of the treatment of dislocation of the said (joints).
Sometimes these are dislocated entirely out of their place.
And when some finger is dislocated from those on the side of the palm or on the back of the hand, then stretch the finger and push back the dislocation with your thumbs until it returns.
And then support the tip of the finger, and suspend that above the part where it is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
And then suspend it and extend it until it can be covered with its bandage on that same day.
"And when it is night, lie down according to that narration, and do not cease loosening him during the day and exercising with movement, and lie down with him at night. And do this for several days until it becomes tight."
"And do likewise if it is dislocated in the stomach or hand. Lie down according to that partition and perform your first operation until it is healed."
"And similarly do this when it is dislocated at other joints."
"Chapter XXX."
"Of the treatment of dislocation of the vertebrae of the spine."
"When complete dislocation occurs in any of the vertebrae of the spine or neck, removing the displaced vertebra from its place is not a cure, for death overtakes the sick person."
"And this is indicated by the fact that the evacuation of the sick person's excrement is without control and he cannot retain it. Many times some members become relaxed on one side or both sides, or both arms, or one of them; or one vertebra is removed from its place, for many times removal occurs and many times the displacement to all four parts is made."
"Therefore that which has already been removed to the posterior parts is called sciatica (gelbozitat)."
"But the treatment of it is this: first consider whether sciatica occurs in childhood, for if it does, there is no cure nor healing for that."
"But those that occur from falling or striking or similarly to these have already been discussed by the Ancients with lengthy words, of which the majority returns with profit; but this is now abbreviated because it is too long for me and excuses itself from it due to my proximity to the intention of my exposition, with which I have explained and formed diverse instruments with which I will show this and explain that."
"And of these only those that occur properly in the back can be cured by what I will recount."
"And it is that the sick person should be laid on his back with his head close to a wall, and extended outwards from him by means of soft padding so that the foot of him does not get hurt."
"And properly a straight stick should be placed and set on the ground at the end of the foot around his head, and another stick on the other side of his feet at the other end of the foot."
"And the minister should hold the stick, and not be fixed in a hole; and another minister should hold the other according to that form."
"And properly he should cover the head of the sick person and tie him there tightly with linen bandages and fasten them; and extend the end of the bandage to the stick that is above his head, and tie it there; and properly stretch another bandage over his hips on both sides of him, and above his knees; and properly adjust all the bandages and tie them to the other stick that is above his feet."
"And properly each minister should extend the bandage at the beginning of the stick and not remove the two sticks and the bandages from their places where they are set, but nevertheless not fixed as we have said."
"And the doctor should place his palms on the sick person's back with force so that he returns, or rather if he places one table on it and properly adjusts his feet on the table so that he returns."
"But if he does not return by this method, then take a table whose width or length is around three braccia and hollow out in the wall that we have said is near the sick person a place in which to fit the end of the table." "And properly place the middle of the table on his back and the doctor places his feet on the other end and strongly presses so that the back is shortened and returns to its proper place."
"And if you wish, open it with a turn made by hand. And it is that you place yourself on the ground near the head of the sick person at the end of his foot between two sticks whose length is one braccio and at the end of his head similarly two sticks; and let the distance between each stick be one palm and already made in each stick a hole through which it turns, and let each one be firmly fixed on the ground so that they are not moved."
"And let there also be placed a round stick on which is the hole and it should be turned in the two holes of the two sticks."
"And at its end there should be a hole through which the stick is passed whose length is one palm with that which turns. And in the other two sticks there should be similar ones."
"And properly tighten the bandages that you have tightened on his foot at the hole that is above his head and the bandages that you have tightened on his thighs at the hole that is below his feet."
"And properly above each hole there should be a minister who turns the hole with his hand and the doctor presses on the back as we have said."
"And properly when the back has returned and the place is pressed, then it is necessary to place an absorbent plaster with alum of hawk and properly cotton; and properly place on the plaster a table whose width is around three digits or about that, and its length should be equal to the extent of the swelling, and on the beginning of the back."
"And properly tie it with the bandage we mentioned and feed the sick person a subtle diet until he is healed."
"And if there remains some inflammation in the place at the end of healing, then it is necessary to administer medicines that soften and cleanse with administration by table for a long time which we have recommended. And already administered in that place lead plate."
"And sometimes inflammation occurs at the end of the two spine bones and it is squeezed by that dislocation. And that bone already threatens such that it should not be operated on with this medicine, for strong rubbing will cause you to die."
"Chapter LXXXI"
"On the treatment of a dislocated hip."
"You should know that the dislocation of the hip and the dislocation of the muscle is not only a displacement, but also an injury which does not occur in other joints with small movement and concavity."
"The hip joint can be dislocated in four ways: it can be dislocated inward or outward, forward or backward."
"Most commonly, the hip joint is dislocated inwardly, and less commonly forward or backward."
"The sign of hip dislocation inward is that when you press the healthy thigh against the affected one, it feels longer and the kneecap seems more prominent than on the healthy side. The patient cannot bend their leg backwards and must have an incision to drain the hematoma."
"The sign of hip dislocation outward is that the injuries occurring in it are opposite to this one."
"The sign of anterior hip dislocation is that the thigh expands according to its nature but does not bend due to pain in the knee area. If forced to do so, it cannot extend forward. The urine is retained and there is a hematoma in the groin area. Treatment should be directed towards the heel."
"The sign of posterior hip dislocation is that the knee does not expand and cannot be bent forward. The thigh appears shorter than the other one, the groin area is softened, and treatment should be directed towards that area."
"However, reduction of these types of hip dislocations should be considered with caution if the dislocation is old and chronic. In such cases, one should administer traction according to the patient's condition, but this is not the only treatment option. In these cases, there is no need for forced manipulation."
"However, in cases of recent dislocation that fall into one of the four types, it is necessary to reduce the joint and extend the leg inward and outward. Then move the leg to the right and left until it returns to its normal position, as this alone will suffice."
"But if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare a strong rope and extend the thigh as far back as possible. Alternatively, you can attach ropes to the upper part of the leg or use a sling placed over the thigh above the knee. Another assistant should extend their hand above the patient's foot so that their fingers point towards the toes. Then, grasp one end of the rope tightly with your left hand while another assistant holds the other end."
"And extend it either from the inside to the angle of the pubis or from behind to the buttock area."
"And let all of this happen in one glance, while the patient is lifted up on their own body from the earth and remains hanging."
"This type of extension is common to all four (limbs)."
"And therefore if the dislocation returns as we have said, it will be good; but otherwise, now it is necessary to speak of its proper cure."
"In the reduction of its own (joint), when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is inwards at the hip joint, it is necessary for the patient to lie on their side with the affected leg; and then pause the limbs above the root of the thigh at that point where the head of the thigh bone enters the socket; and then extend the limb upwards from the angle of the socket to the furthest possible part of the clavicle."
"And then another person should take hold of the limb firmly and press the thick part of the dislocated joint and extend it forcefully outward, because that will return it to its proper place."
"And this type is of easier reduction with which this limb is reduced than the other types."
"But if it is excused on you and does not obey the entrance with this type of reduction, then both feet of the patient should be lifted together with firm, light pressure, on both heels and both toes."
"And let the length of each (foot) be by the amount of four digits, and let the affected limb be extended more than the other by the amount of two fingers."
"And then the patient should be suspended over the head of the bed, with their back up, and let the length from the ground be by the amount of two cubits."
"And then command a strong youth to pull down the head of the joint, and let another youth suspend it, and the other youth pull down the joint with forceful impetus, because the articulation returns to its proper place with speed."
"But in the proper reduction, when there is dislocation outward at the joint, it is necessary for the patient to lie on their back according to what we have recommended in the event of stiffness; and let the limb be straightened over the affected joint properly and over its foot."
"And then two sticks should be placed, one at the foot of it, and the other at its head; and let two sticks be placed that are adjusted in the middle of the elbow, over which damp cloths are wrapped, so that the patient is not injured because the stick is between their joints, for the extension to the joints should not be forced."
"And then each assistant should extend on his own side, and the physician with his hand guide the reduction according to the art."
"When dislocation is at the front parts, then it is necessary that the bed be extended lightly, and this is according to this method; and the doctor places the palm of their right hand on the sick person's flank, and then grips that with the other hand, and with that grip extends the legs away from the leg of the pain."
"If the dislocation is at the back parts, then it is not necessary that the sick person be extended with the legs away from them, and they are raised off the ground; it is necessary that they be placed on a hard surface, like this: if the hip joint is dislocated externally, according to what we have said about placing it on two widths; and they lie on their face and the limbs are extended, as we have said."
"It is necessary that compression be administered with a board over the location where the joint is dislocated."
"So when the reduction is completed as it should be - and the sign of the reduction of the hip is not hidden from you, which is that you extend the sick person's two thighs, and when you feel those joints and the sick person extends their thigh and expands that without excuse, then you know that the member has been returned to its proper place; then you apply two splints and bind it tightly with a bandage so that the joint is not moved in any of the parts; and let the sick person rest for three days or four."
"And after removing the ligature and splint, compare one thigh with the other."
"Then if you feel those joints firmly, then you know that the dislocation is already healed, and therefore let the sick person go."
"And if you see any sign of weakness, then return and splint that again, and extend it according to your first method, and let it rest for three days."
"And after removing the splint, let them walk with support on crutches for a few days until they are strengthened."
"Chapter XXXII."
"On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder blade."
"The shoulder blade is dislocated in three ways: for it is dislocated at the outer parts, and at the inner parts, and more often at the upper and rear parts; but it is not dislocated at the front."
"And the sign of dislocation of the shoulder blade is that when you tell the sick person to apply their thigh to the hip, they are unable to do so."
"And the reduction of all kinds of dislocation is as follows: make the sick person lie on their right side, so that they can extend their thigh if possible; press their knee against the outer face of the shoulder blade, and place their foot between your feet; then apply both palms to the shoulder blade of the sick person, and press firmly with your elbows over the shoulder blade of the sick person while another assistant extends their foot until the shoulder blade returns to its proper place."
"And the sign of reduction is that the thigh adheres to the hip with ease and effortlessly."
"And then splint it and make the thigh adhere to the hip, then bind them together with a bandage for three days or four, then remove the splints."
"Then let the sick person not walk until they are healed and strengthened."
"But if you cannot reduce it, then apply strong traction with ligatures as described in the treatment of hip dislocation."
"Chapter XXXIII."
"Treatment of an ankle dislocation."
"The talus bone may sometimes be displaced by minor trauma, and sometimes it becomes completely dislocated, with dislocation occurring either internally or externally."
"And the sign of talus bone dislocation is that sometimes the talus becomes swollen at the joint where it has dislocated."
"The treatment for removing it is easy reduction; it should be extended gently with hands and gradually returned."
"Furthermore, in the treatment of it when it is displaced according to completion, you should make the patient lie on their right side, and have a strong and able servant hold them firmly by the hips from behind."
"And appropriately, place your right hand on the upper part of their thigh and your left hand lower down towards their knee."
"And properly pull the leg towards you with your right hand, and appropriately grasp it twice with your left hand, and then extend it with your left hand; and press firmly on the joint of the leg with your right hand without force."
"And perform this procedure twice as we have discussed."
"And then press firmly on the joint of the leg with your hand for the third time; you are now at the knee."
"So if it returns in one or two attempts with this method, and the leg feels right again, that is good. But if not, then repeat the procedure until it returns."
"But if you are prohibited from performing the reduction with this method that we have recommended, then have the patient lie on their back on the ground, and place a sturdy stick firmly on the ground at the foot of their bed. Cover them with a blanket so that they do not move."
"And then the minister of the church should hold their things, and another minister should extend the leg with both hands or with some cloth placed on the sole of the foot; and each minister should extend themselves against extension of the hip, so that the stick is extended between the patient's thighs retaining them, so that the body of the patient is not pulled towards the sides during extension."
"And then the doctor should reduce the dislocation with their hands, and another minister should hold the healthy joint on both sides, for the dislocation returns easily."
"And then once the dislocation has returned and you have declared that the reduction is successful, then apply plaster and bind it firmly with cloth, and tie the leg with cloth at the joint."
"And be careful or guard yourself from the nerves which are behind on the heel, so that the cloth does not press too tightly and hurt them."
"And then leave him for two days or three; and if the cloth becomes moistened, replace it."
"Then on the third or fourth day, untie it and forbid the patient from vomiting for 40 days." "If it is necessary to go ahead with this space, it's not certain that the dislocation isn't already dissolved and corrupted, precisely because of this."
"If an abscess forms after cautery, you must administer to it what was mentioned earlier in this story regarding cure and embrocation, until it is removed."
"Chapter XXXIV."
"On the treatment of dislocation of the said hips."
"It is necessary that he who has been dislocated be stretched out with slight extension without moving him; and if it is difficult, let him be lifted up easily."
"But if the dislocation is in some of the bones of the foot of the leg, then place the patient's leg over a low stool or table, and let him be standing thus as if walking."
"And then stand on the foot and pause his leg over what you have prepared from the joints, and then press that with your foot with force until it returns, and see if it is now aligned and does not appear in the prominence of the joint."
"And then place the lower leg of the thigh on a table that takes in all the leg, with two heads, and then stretch it with appropriate and firm traction for three days; and then untie him and have him rest from walking for more days until he is strengthened and recovery is assured."
"Chapter XXXV."
"On the types of dislocation that are made with pain or fracture or with each one separately."
When some cause occurs from that, and you strive in its cure and restoration, many times death succeeds.
However, it is not necessary to presume over its cure, but rather that one who is knowledgeable in the art, experienced, merciful and compassionate, cautious, not hasty or presumptuous; and who uses medications at the beginning that only cause apostemas cauterizations, leaving the patient's fate to divine judgment, unless there is hope for salvation from destruction, relief from illness, and some sign of improvement appears. Then make haste to reduce it at the beginning of the cause, before it becomes an apostema caut.
And then if the limb returns as desired, afterwards administer regimen which causes cauterization of apostema and heals the plague with what is convenient for it of the remedies for drying humidity.
And if dislocation with fracture occurs in the limbs and bones separated, then you perform the reduction of them, and do in this what we have said in the simple maladies of that which is preceded in the places of those.
And guard and avoid according to your ability that which enters through the paths of fear according to what is preceded by my instruction; for this is better for you to owe to your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and more healthful to your true body in your time. Thus ends the words of Al-Bukaysis perfectly, of which God be blessed. Amen.
