O children, since I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine, it seems to me that by its completion and explanation, I fulfill my promise to you with this treatise on surgery.
Because the practice of surgery is almost unknown in our region and time, it is feared that this science will be lost, its traces will disappear, and only a few small descriptions will remain in the books of the Ancients. But these are obscure and their meaning is difficult to understand.
And it seems to me that I should revive this with a treatise arranged in such a way as to explain, clarify and abbreviate; and also include illustrations of the forms of cautery tools and other instruments used in the operation, both for addition to the explanation and preparation of the subject matter.
But the reason why skilled surgeons are not found in our time is that the art of medicine is lengthy and requires its practitioner to be well versed in the science of anatomy before attempting surgery. One must know the arrangement of the limbs, the forms of their joints and separations; the number and function of bones, nerves, and ligaments; and the location of arterial and venous pulsation points.
"Thus says Hippocrates that in name it is small, but in work it is great, especially in the art of the hand."
"But we have already spoken of this at the beginning of this book; for whoever does not know what we have said about anatomy will not avoid falling into error which often causes the death of men, as I have seen too many times, since some are formed in this science but lack knowledge and experience."
"I saw a foolish and inexperienced physician who incised an aphemphous abscess on the neck of a woman, cutting some arteries in the process, causing so much blood to flow that the woman suddenly died between her sheets."
"And I saw another physician who, shortly after removing a stone from a man in his urinary state, and the stone was large, he tore part of the bladder with it, causing that man to die on the third day."
"And I had already warned him not to do so, and I saw that because of the size of the stone and the state of the illness, I knew right away that he would die."
"And I saw another physician who received payment of one ducat from our land for surgery, and he came to treat a black man who had a broken thighbone. And through his ignorance, the physician put splints on it with bandages and braces too tightly, not allowing space for respiration."
"And he released him according to his desires, and then left him, leaving him like that for some days and ordering that the bandages not be removed. And thus it was until the thighbone and flesh became putrid, resulting in harm."
"And I was called to him, and I prepared to remove the bandages, and thus tranquility returned and he recovered from his pain."
"But however, corruption had already become established in the member, so that I could not prevent it, and corruption did not cease to wander through the member until the patient died."
"And I saw another physician who punctured a cancerous boil, and it became ulcerated some days later, during which time the evil of it increased with the patient."
"The reason is that black bile is pure of humor, so it should not be cauterized with fire at all, but rather it should be treated with members which suffer from heat."
"And for that reason, my children, it is necessary that the operation be divided into two parts: one is the operation which is associated with health, and one is the work in which there is danger in the greatest dispositions."
"And I have already spoken about this in all parts of this book where operation is mentioned which contains error and fear. Therefore, it is necessary for you to observe this and leave that, so that the foolish may not find an opportunity to speak and dishonor you."
"And therefore take your weapons with solicitude and protection from God, and your illnesses with patience and firmness."
"And use the best way through the grace of God to achieve salvation and blessed success, and leave behind terrible illnesses of difficult healing, and bear your weapons against that which causes you fear, so that you may not waver in your faith and in your name: for more remains to your glory, both here and hereafter, and your sanctity."
"Because it has already been said in some of my books:" "'Do not treat an illness that you do not know, lest you be called a bad physician.'"
"And I have already divided this book according to three chapters."
"Begin the division of the book, and first of the first part." "The first chapter deals with the head in its forms of instruments and cautery irons, and what is necessary for the operation."
"The division of the second part." "The second chapter, on stitching and puncturing, leeching, cupping, extracting arrows and similar things, all organized according to the forms of instruments."
"The third chapter, on reduction and dislocation, and the cure of torsion and similar things; this chapter deals with the head in its weights and forms of instruments."
"It is necessary for me to say what are the virtues of that cautery and its harms, and in which complexion cautery is prohibited."
"Therefore I say that the discourse on the virtue of cautery and its harm is long and prolix, subtle in science, and secretly hidden; many wise men have already spoken about it, and they disagree among themselves, and it suffices me to mention a little of their discourses for fear of lengthiness."
"And therefore I say that cautery confers benefit to all complexions universally, whether they have matter or not, except for two complexions which are without matter."
"In the complexion that is cold and dry with matter there will be disagreement; for some say that cautery is beneficial to it, and others say the contrary, that cautery is not suitable for an illness that is caused by quality and dryness, because nature of fire is heat and dryness, and it is not fitting that an illness that is cold and dry with matter should be healed with something hot and dry."
"And he who says the contrary of this, that cautery brings benefit to all cold and dry illnesses that occur in men's bodies, for when you compare the body of man and its humidity with the complexion of fire, you find the body of man inferior."
"And I say according to what he says, that experience has already proven this to me on several occasions."
"But nevertheless it is not necessary to elaborate on this subject that has already been discussed and exercised in the chapter on cautery at length, and after having studied the diversity of complexion in men and the disposition of illnesses in their members, their causes, accidents, and the space of time for each."
"But in other complexions there is no cause for fear, especially in hot and humid illnesses, because all physicians agree on these and are not in disagreement about the benefit of cautery in them."
"And know, my son, that the secret of curing by fire cautery and its goodness consists in cautery with combustible medicine, because fire is simple and its action only reaches to the member being cauterized, and does not reach another member nearby except with slight harm."
"But the action of combustible medicine reaches to that which it touches, and strong heat can bring about an illness in a nearby member that is difficult to heal, and strong heat also exits."
"But fire, because of its sublimity and goodness of substance, does not do anything except superfluously. And this is already known to us through experience and long study of the art with regard to the truth of causes; and for this reason I am excused from lengthening the discussion. And if it were not that my book has not yet been read in this place, you would find hidden here a secret about fire and the quality of its operation in bodies and its expulsion by which illnesses are expelled, demonstrated with philosophical speech, which would sharpen your understanding."
"And know, my son, that they disagree about the time when it is appropriate to perform cautery and they place the best time in spring."
"I say that cautery is convenient at all times, because the harm caused by accidental time is submerged in the judgment of that which is drawn with the cautery, and even more if the cautery is for pains or necessary pains, strong and fixed, which do not tolerate delay because it is feared from those that come malice, which is greater than small entering harm."
"And do not count on yourselves, O children, for that is not esteemed by the common people and foolish doctors, since it is believed that any illness that is healed by cautery is a lasting remedy, and they pause at that consequence."
"And the cause is not as they believe because cautery is only a substitute for medicine which alters the complexion and dries out the humors, which are the cause of pains."
"But however, cautery is superfluous over medicine because of the will of its virtue and operation and the greatness of its Lord."
"And it is possible that his illness will return at some time in the future, depending on the complexion of the sick person and the location of their illness, and its virtue and what is prepared in their body from the accumulation of superfluities therein, and what they have acquired through food and similar causes; but if an illness for which cautery has been administered is a subtle one in a member with few superfluities and humors, like cautery of teeth for pain or similar things, it is possible that this pain will not return, but it is done little."
"And more commonly it is said that cautery is the last resort of medicine, and this saying is true, for they believe that there is no cure that profits either with medicine or with any other cause besides cautery."
"And the reason is contrary to that; and the intention that cautery is the last resort of medicine is only when other remedies have been tried in certain illnesses, and those medicines do not help, and therefore cautery is administered at the end, and it profits for that." "And here it is said that cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention understood by the common people and many foolish doctors."
"And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the sublimity of its substance."
"And they said that the place of cautery does not make a scar, which is not absolutely true, for I have seen and proven that this is only so in certain bodies without others, and cautery with gold is good and better than with iron as they said; but nevertheless when you heat cautery with fire with gold it is not declared to you, because it ignites according to the quantity you want due to the roughness of gold, and prepares to receive a burn; and if you adjust the ignition it melts the gold by the fire, and some sheets fall into the fire so that the artist catches them in his occupation."
"And for this reason cautery with iron is done more lightly and more gently with regard to the correctness of the operation."
"And I have already ordered this chapter on cautery according to chapters, and those of the head within the weights, so that later when asking for something from it you may easily find what you want."
The first chapter
This cautery confers upon the skin humidity and coldness; its accidental cause is due to two things: namely, heat and excessive flow of phlegm, called catarrh, which flows from the head down to the eyes and ears, causing excessive sleepiness, toothache and throat pain, and generally speaking, all diseases that arise from coldness, such as paralysis, apoplexy, etc., and similar ones.
Firstly, you should command the patient to purge with a laxative medicine for three or four nights, depending on what you judge appropriate according to the severity of their illness and their age and constitution.
And then command him to shave his head with a razor, and have him sit on a large bench covered with a sheet, with his face turned upwards.
Then place the cautery of your palm just above the tip of their nose between their eyebrows. But first, when you have arrived at that point with your finger, mark it with a pen and then light the olive-oil cautery which is in this shape:
Then place it on the marked spot so that it descends gently, pressing down little by little until you feel the heat. Then twist it slowly back and forth.
Then lift your hand gently and observe the spot; if you see that some of the bone is already exposed, like a grain of barley, then lift your hand. If not, return your hand with the iron, using another one if it has cooled down, until you see what I have told you to look for.
Then take a little salt and dissolve it on the spot, leaving it there for three days.
Then place around the edges of the wound and leave it on until the burn scar has healed completely. "And then treat the spot with a fourfold remedy so that it may be healed."
"And they said that whenever the plague breaks out, it is better to tie one's arms tightly, for it brings greater relief and healing."
"And some of them said that the spine should be cauterized within the bone, and that the cautery should be held there until some part of the spinal marrow is adhered."
"Then scrape off what has adhered to the bone, and then treat it."
"And others said that when the cautery reaches the end, it should press strongly onto the bone until the bone cracks, and this is the form of a small alfecati." "And they believe that from that spot the vapors of the head expire."
"And let the plague remain untreated for a long time, and then treat it so that it may be consolidated."
"But I have not seen these two kinds of cauteries performed entirely, but only in some men due to fear; and that one, it seems to me, is better with health when present, for the head is dilated by solution of continuity from this same cause as we have testified regarding other members, and even more so when the head of the sick person is of a hot nature."
"And the first kind of cautery is safer and better, in my opinion; and with that instrument and that procedure one has health."
"Chapter Two."
"On cauterizing the head."
"When there is chronic and long-lasting pain in the whole head and this persists for a prolonged period of illness, and various remedies are used such as bandages, poultices, compresses, plaster casts, ointments, decoctions, poultices made from plants or animal parts, and similar things, especially if it has already been cauterized with a cautery that does not help much due to those causes, then consider whether the head of the sick person is of strong constitution in its nature; and if it is not hotter than usual, then cauterize it with another cautery at another place near that one." "And similarly cauterize it on the horn of his head with a cautery until the bone is broken." "Cut the bone and expose it to the quantity we have mentioned, and cauterize there with a cautery at the last part of the head where it is called 'vagus', which is the place where cupping is performed." "And be gentle in this matter and do not expose the bone, for the illness suffers great pain from this different from the pain of all other cauteries on the head."
"And I say this cautery in its place, for it is necessary to cauterize with the cautery that one uses to cauterize the horns of the head and the occiput, which is a more subtle cautery than that used to cauterize the middle part of the head; and this is its form."
"Chapter Three."
"On cauterizing chronic migraine."
"When there is sudden pain in the part of the head or a stabbing pain within it, evacuate with medications that cleanse the head and administer the other treatment which I have mentioned in the remedies for illnesses; and if nothing helps, then cauterize in two ways: either with a caustic medication that burns, or with iron."
"The better cautery with burning medication is this: take some aloe and scrape it and cut off both its heads." "And then incise the location of the pain in the temple with a sharp lancet until you reach the bone beneath it."
"And then press it with a tight bandage for several hours, and leave it alone for three hours; then remove the bandage and remove the aloe, leaving the wound open for two or three days; then bathe the surrounding area with warm water until the location becomes moist."
"And then treat it with ointment until it is healed."
"If you wish, do this with some caustic medications which I have written about in the second book of caustic medicines."
"The better cautery with iron is done in this way: heat the cautery which has this shape:"
"and it is called 'closed nails', for its head is like the shape of a nail with some curvature, and in the middle of it there is a small prominence."
"And then place it on the location of the pain, and hold your hand steady so that the heat does not adhere to the cautery which is underneath; and slowly rotate the hot iron with speed."
"And if the quantity of it that adheres to the bone is thus much, lift your hand up so that the artery below does not adhere, lest blood flow."
"And then immerse the area in salt water and place it there, leaving it alone for three days; then bathe the area with warm water, and treat it with ointment until it is healed."
"And if you wish, cauterize with the point of a knife according to cautery, and beware of incising an artery in this chronic migraine properly."
"Chapter Four."
"On cauterizing acute migraine."
"When you treat migraine with what we have said about the previous treatment and what we have mentioned in the divisions of illnesses, and if the treatment does not help, and the illness is such that it does not reach what we have said about the first cautery with medication or with fire, then heat the knife cautery until it is red hot, and place your hand on the location of the pain with a line of its length, and press it there until you incise the artery and enter to the bone."
"However, it is necessary for you to beware of the continuation of the mandible, which is moved by chewing, and that the muscle is not adhered to and the nerves that move it, and that spasms do not occur."
"And if it is about the caution and care of blood flow from the artery that is opened, for there is fear in its opening, especially for him who does not know what he is doing and is not studious and experienced; leave the operation at the beginning."
"And I will bring to mind the regimen of accidental bleeding from an artery according to its manner, in its place in this book."
"And if you see that this illness does not benefit from this cautery and that the patient can tolerate it, cauterize him in the middle of his head as we have told, and treat the wound until it is healed."
"And if you wish, administer the cautery which we have mentioned in the chapter on tying an artery with cautery having two points, for this is better cautery and more effective."
"Chapter Five."
"On cauterizing earaches."
"When there is pain in the ear due to friction and it is treated with laxative causes and other treatments that have been mentioned in the division, but the pain is not removed, then heat the cautery, which is called 'punctum' and has this shape:"
"And then prick it at the ignition point and lead it around the entire ear like a wheel is turned, or around each prominence if the pain is in each one." "Be careful with the cautery of the ear's opening little by little because you have felt the location with its tip."
"And if you make ten points in all the ear and quit it, then treat those locations until they are healed."
"Chapter Six."
"On cauterizing tortures."
"The torture that is treated with cautery is only of those species that come from phlegm, according to what we have said in the divisions of diseases."
"Evade cauterization of the species that occurs through dryness or spasm of the nerve."
"When you treat that species of tortura with herbs and capipurgi and gargarisms, and yet you cannot confirm your treatment, then you should cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, the second a little behind the cheekbone, and the third at the junction of two lips."
"And place your cautery on the opposite side from where the ailment began, for softening is seen only in the part that seems healed."
"And the manner of cauterization is that you should cauterize it with the cautery on the right side of the extreme tip of the ear, a little above the horn of the head, and another on the cheekbone, its length being equal to the length of the thumb, and then place your hand with the cautery until most of the surface area of the wound is burned."
"And this is the shape of the cautery, and it is a specialty of the barber-surgeon, the shape of which is shown on this table." "Although perhaps it may seem too subtle to you, yet in place of unnecessary roughness it is better to cut a little."
"And then cure the wound with what is denoted as processed before until it is healed."
"Chapter VII."
"On the cautery of ancient apoplexy."
"When apoplexy is ancient and you cure it with what we have said and your medication does not work and the ailment has no fever, then cauterize those places with four cauteries: on all the horns of its head; and a cautery in the middle of the head, as we have said; and a cautery behind the ear." "And the manner of the cautery is made according to what has been said above."
"After it has been cauterized over the mouth of the stomach, and if it is worse, then it should be cured with what you process."
"Chapter VIII."
Burns caused by forgetfulness are treated with flame cautery.
"Great quantities of pills are given to the patient at the beginning, serving to cleanse."
"And then immediately cover the entire head of the patient and place on it the plaster described in the treatise on plasters."
"And apply this several times, for this is a manner of cautery." "And do this according to that method already mentioned."
"If this does not heal well, then make three cauteries in the last section of their head, which should be descending from the most elevated part of the head towards the lowest part of the neck." "And place between each cautery the thickness of a finger, and immediately cover the cautery with that which has been produced."
"But if the patient can tolerate it, then make a cautery in the middle; and if they want more, then cauterize those over both ears."
"Then cover that which has been healed; and let the cauteries be oval according to the form given above."
Chapter IX
Of cauterization of paralysis and softening of the whole body.
"First, you shall proceed with the preparation of the head using herbs and the things we have mentioned. Then shave the head of the patient, and cauterize him in the middle of the head with a cautery. Also cauterize all around the horns of his head, and cauterize at the last part of it. And apply three cauteries on the spinal bones of the neck."
"If the illness of softening of the body is great and the patient cannot tolerate it, then cauterize him with four cauteries on the spinal bones of the back, and afterward cauterize within the hollow of his throat, and lift up his hands." "And also cure that which is healed, and this shall be cauterized with an olive-oil cautery."
"Chapter X."
"On the cautery treatment of epilepsy."
It is not cauterized in the epileptic unless that epilepsy is caused by phlegm.
Therefore, it is necessary to cleanse the brain at the beginning of the disease and also in the other cure which we have spoken about in the division when the patient has a great deal of phlegm and is tolerant of medicine.
And if it is a child who does not tolerate medicines, then administer gargarisms and masticatories to cleanse the throat, previously for several days, with good nutrition.
And afterwards shave the head of the patient, and also cauterize him with one cautery in the middle of the head according to the previous manner, and with another cautery in the nape of his neck, and on each horn of the head cauterize also. And if the patient is strong and can tolerate it, then cauterize him with cauteries as mentioned before, having paralysis and relaxation of the body over the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
And use an olive-shaped cautery according to what has been described previously.
But if the patient is a child, then pause cauterizing him with subtle cauteries in this manner.
Chapter XI
Of cautery for melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humidity and thick phlegm, then cauterize the patient with the cauteries that we have mentioned before, having paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is superfluous matter declining towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then let him drink water that cleanses the brain according to what has been mentioned before in the division.
And also shave the head of the patient, and also make a suitable pigeon's egg of it on the circumference, and also leave that in the middle of the head.
And let the patient lie down on his back, and let him be held from all parts.
And then apply a liniment; and afterwards it is worthy of anointing with wool grease. And heat this over the fire for moderate warming by measure, which the patient can suffer when it is applied to him. And then put this in the middle of the head of the patient within the circle, and let it remain until it becomes cool.
And do this with the patient once each week until it is healed; or if you wish, cauterize him with small punctures according to what suits him best, without having your hand close to a cautery arranged in this way: this is a type of cautery that moistens the brain evenly.
And then apply that ointment smeared on wool or on grease of lard.
Chapter XII
"For cauterization of descending water in the heel."
"When you notice the start of water descent in the heel through the signs that I mentioned earlier in this section, then begin and give the patient something to drink which cleanses the head, and protect them from all humidity."
"And do that treatment in a bath for several days."
"And also order him to shave his head, and cauterize it with a cautery in the middle of the head; and also cauterize it with two cauteries over both temples if there is the beginning of descent of water in both heels, or on one side if it begins on one heel."
"Incise with a cautery all the veins and arteries which are below the elbow, and let the cauteries be placed at that distance level with the temples."
"And take care not to have flows of blood when cauterizing. And if you see any flow of blood from it, stop it with some medication, which is within your ability."
"And you should come with skill in extracting arteries and in excising them, and caution against flows of blood."
"Sometimes it is cauterized in the neck below two bones with two cauteries placed perpendicularly."
Chapter XIII.
Of cautery for dried tears.
"When tears from the eyes are abundant and flow through veins and arteries in the visible area of the head, it is verified that this is excess fluid from bloody humors. Therefore, cauterize around the beginning of water entering the eyes with the cautery mentioned at the start of this chapter, and cauterize the middle of the head, two points on either side of the temples, and two points on either side of the jawbones." "If additional cautery is needed, then cauterize the entire length of the eyebrow ridge above the eye with a small cautery."
"Chapter XIV."
"Of cautery for foul odor from the nose."
"When you treat someone with the method described earlier and it does not improve, then prepare and give them to drink the decoction for three nights. After that, shave their head and cauterize the crown of the head with a mixture of cautery iron and olive oil." "And also cauterize the middle of the forehead with clove cautery and two cauteries on either side of the eyebrows where the hair begins, each one a little smaller."
"And be careful not to burn the face with the cautery."
"Here is how to make clove cautery:"
Capital Fifteen
About eyelid cauterization in cases of inflammation.
"When the eyelid is inflamed due to illness or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a lunar cautery."
"And if you, cauterize the two eyebrows each with two cauteries in total, and elongated from the temples." "And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the eyebrow."
"And do not press too hard on the cautery with your hand, but according to how much the third part of the eyelid is adhered."
Capítulo XVI
"Regarding cauterizing the eyelid when the hairs turn inward and pierce it."
"When the hairs of the eye turn inward so as to pierce it, there are two ways to cauterize them: either with fire or with a burning medicine."
"If you cauterize with fire, first tell the patient to pluck out his hairs as they are plucked for shaving, until they are lengthened and thickened; and if one of them touches their opening, then immediately close the eyes with a bandage so that it is not harmed until the hairs have grown."
"Then, when they have grown long and thickened, then pause the head of the patient on your thigh, and carefully place the cautery on the eyelid of the eye with the tip, shaped like a grass blade, at the beginning where the hairs are."
"And then place hot wax or dough made from ground barley or pitch on the eye."
"And then light the cautery of which this is the shape:"
"And then cauterize along the shape that you have drawn, little by little, in several views, until the surface of the line that is like a myrtle leaf is completely burned."
"The sign of the completion of this procedure is that you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted and its hairs raised away from the puncture of the eye."
"And then raise your hand and leave it for three days, and then place cotton with a border over it until the scar has healed." "And then dress it with ointment until it is healed."
"If some cause returns through the skin near their birthmark and the eyelid is swollen, then apply the cautery again in that same spot just as you did initially."
"If the hairs on the eyelid are growing outwards, then cauterize that area which is elevated to its natural place and sealed so that the hairs cannot stick out."
"If the cautery with medicine burns you, then order the patient to apply the hairs which are lengthened and sealed, and nearby make a bandage of cloth in the shape of a miter leaf."
"And take some known soap and live coal together with a needle, and immediately mix those coals well, and do this with haste so that it does not cool down; then spread that onto the cloth which is made in the shape of a miter leaf, and place it over one eye or both; and place a cloth dipped in egg white over the other eye, keeping the head of the patient upright."
"And place your finger over the medicine and press it gently without moving until the patient feels the bite of the medicine, for that bite is like fire."
"And when you perceive that the bite has ceased, then remove the medicine with your finger; and when the bite stops, then rinse the eye with water. Then observe if the eyelid is lifted up as it should be after being washed away by the contraction with fire or incision, for then it will be good. And if not, then place the medicine again on the location where it did not stick previously until it becomes sealed and your operation is completed."
"And then place over that with a border until the chain of adhesion has been eradicated; and then heal it with a poultice or another remedy until it is healed."
"And it is necessary that you, after your operation, carefully guard that nothing falls into the eye from the medicine. And if the eyelid becomes inflamed after several days and some cause of hairs punches into the eye, then repeat your medicine over that location where the eyelid is inflamed; and particularly do this as you did at the beginning until it is healed."
"And this is the shape of a miter leaf."
"And know that the eyes of men are differentiated according to their size and smallness, and therefore your contraction is made accordingly."
"And do not reveal the way of rectitude to one who studies this art."
Chapter XVII.
Of the cauterization of a fistula that is in the lachrymal duct of the eye.
"When you treat fistula as we've said in the divisions of illnesses and your treatment does not conform, then you must cauterize it in this manner: Command the patient to place their head on their knees, and have a servant hold their head between their thighs so that it is not moved nor agitated with their head."
"And then apply heat in the form of hot water or poultice of bird droppings onto the wound."
"Now take the cautery of which this is the shape:"
"That is heated, like the shape of a reed or an eagle's feather, at one end with which you make the cautery."
"And if you wish, it should penetrate somewhat into the other extremity." "And if you want, it should be sharp like a needle."
"But however that which is heated is better for your task."
"And then press the fistula with it if it is open, and draw out from it the sanies (pus) and dry it up." "If it is not open, then apply that cautery there to make it so, and extract the pus from it."
"And then apply the cautery which has been well heated onto it, and with that hand hold it against the wound near the opening of the nostril to prevent your hand or the patient from being burned, and then apply the cautery onto the surface of the wound and destroy it."
"And then if at the beginning of your cautery it enters into the bone, that is good. Otherwise, apply the cautery again once or twice as necessary, and leave it there for three days, and then apply a bandage around it with a drying ointment until it is healed."
"But if after twelve days it has not healed, then apply a caustic medicine to it until the bone is exposed and scrape it according to what you will find in its chapter."
"And another manner of cauterizing a fistula that some first said: Enter into the location of the fistula and make it hot, and then apply there gently with this form: Take as much melted lead as the length of your little finger. And with your hand hold it with good retention so that the molten lead does not fall onto the wound; and cover the wound of the patient with a cloth dipped in album of eggs or water, for the lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it by marvelous healing."
"And if the fistula has been healed by that which we have said about cauterization and cure, then that is good. Otherwise, it will be necessary to administer a probe through the nostril and reduce the fistula into the nasal cavity according to what will come in its proper place."
Chapter XVIII
On cauterizing the split in the buttocks.
"Fissures occur frequently in the lips, especially in those of infants."
"So when you treat these fissures with what we have said in the divisions and it does not help, then immediately use a small cauterizing scalpel according to this form that is indicated:"
"And let its concavity be like the thinness of a knife blade."
"Approach carefully and place that cautery in those fissures until it reaches the bottom of them."
"And then cure it with wax until it is healed."
Chapter XIX.
Of the cautery of a fistula in the mouth
When in the root of the uvula or on the palate or on the roots of the teeth an aposteme appears and it grows, and then bursts, and becomes ancient, and blood flows and a fistula is formed, and you treat that and it does not benefit from treatment, then it is necessary for you to heat cautery according to the amount received in the fistula, and put that heated one into the passage of the fistula, and keep your hand there until the hot iron reaches the bottom of it, and at the end of it do this once or twice; and then treat it with what we have said about treatment until it is healed.
And if the bone is separated and it heals, good; but if not, then it is necessary to uncover that place and remove the decayed bone according to what will come in its chapter.
Chapter XX
Of the cautery of teeth and softening of the gums
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth are painful, and you treat them with medicines but they do not improve, then place the head of the sick one on the chair, and heat the cautery in this form which will come later, so that you put the pincers over the tooth and quickly insert the heated cautery into it, keeping your hand there a little while until the sick one feels the heat of the fire reaching the root of the tooth.
And then remove your hand and repeat the cautery several times according to what you want.
And then the sick one should rinse his mouth with salt water and hold it there for an hour, and afterwards spit that out, because the painful tooth is made firm and the softened gum is strengthened and the corrupt moisture is dried.
De fistulis que son en las dentz e de curacio d'ells.
"For cauterization of tooth pain."
"When tooth pain is caused by coldness, or it's broken or worm-eaten, and medical treatment does not relieve the condition, then cauterization is applied in two ways: either with a hot iron brand from cattle, or by applying fire."
"Cauterization with a hot iron brand is done by taking the branding iron of cattle and heating it on coals, then quickly taking it out and wrapping it in cotton. Then you apply that heated brand to the painful tooth area without delay until it becomes numb."
"And repeat this several times until the heat reaches the root of the teeth."
"And if you wish, dip wool or cotton in the above-mentioned branding iron and place it on the painful tooth. Then place the heated iron on top of that until the iron reaches the entrance to the cavity of the tooth."
"But remember that cauterization with fire is dangerous and should be done with caution, ensuring the heat of the iron or coal does not reach the mouth of the patient."
"And then heat the cauterizing tool according to its shape, and place it on the tooth without touching your hand until it becomes numb. Do this several times a day until the pain is completely gone or has significantly decreased either that same day or the next."
"And it is necessary that after using this cauterization, the patient holds their mouth open with a good grip and keeps it like that for one hour, then spits. This is the form of cauterization."
"And cauterize whichever extremity you wish according to your ability."
"And this is the shape of the cannula:"
"Chapter XXII."
"Of cautery for external prolapse."
"When prolapse is caused by mucus and humors that are refractory to digestion despite medications, then you may attempt digestion of those substances lightly; however, if necessary, cauterize the prolapse using a cautery instrument shaped as follows: having two extremities bored through which smoke can exit during cauterization, pause the ignited end over the prolapse once or twice until it reaches its center."
"And if the prolapse is small, then pause the cautery according to its size, and leave it for three days, applying heat on its edges until what was burned by fire has healed."
"Then apply that ointment and bandages so that it may heal."
"Chapter XXIII."
"On cauterization of the uvula and on the stricture of the anus."
When excessive humidity comes upon the surface of the lung, especially if it's accompanied by coldness in the chest, then the patient should initially be treated with laxative medications and cautery applied on that part pressed by the collarbone.
And make sure to apply the cautery carefully so as not to burn the collarbone itself or its nerves.
And cauterize another spot with another cautery at the junction of the collarbone and the last cervical vertebra. And the cautery on it should be applied in the same manner as before.
And then treat that with what has been prescribed until it is healed.
Chapter XXIV
Regarding the cautery treatment of lung disease and coughing.
When all coughs and illness of the lung are from moist humors, and the patient has no fever nor phlegm, and it is an ancient illness, then cauterize them with two cauteries on the collarbone in the places depressed by lions and buoys; and with another cautery in the middle place of the chest between two nipples; and let the cauteries be shaped according to the preceding form.
And if you wish, the cautery for puncturing should be done with the cautery called "puncta", the form of which is shown in the puncturing of earache.
And if there are points within them, apply to those; and especially cure that with water, as it is said before, so that it may be healed.
And if the cauteries are to have three branches, for cautery there are three cauteries which you can make according to this form:
"Chapter 25."
"The cautery of hemorrhoids that are at the end of the anus."
"When the head of the hemorrhoid is displaced due to slippery moistness and is not held in place during its return, you must reduce this displacement before it returns to its usual position, using a slight movement. This should be done so that it enters properly, as we have testified. At first, you should reduce the displacement while the patient is lying on their back or side. Then elevate the anal canal, which is inside the anus, with your left hand."
"And thus there are two heads to the cautery; this is its form:"
"And thus cauterize the anal canal so that it enters one inside the other. And now comes the figure of cauterization with four heads."
"And sometimes it is adjusted according to this count, and therefore there are eight heads."
"And then pause on the cautery for five days with salt water, and then make sure that the patient rests quietly, and the member is not moved for any time until it is comforted."
"And if the displacement is towards the upper parts and it is done thus, then cauterize on the muscle with a clawed cautery or pointed cauteries, for the junction is strengthened and the moisture is removed and the ailment is healed."
"Chapter XXVI."
"On cauterization of the stomach."
"When there comes into the stomach much moisture and heat which causes it to become swollen and multiplicative in its nature, and if you continue with the usual methods of treatment and do not relieve it, then it is necessary for the ailment to be on its two sides, and extend its hands and feet, and then cauterize it with three cauteries: one on the left side near the pit of the stomach with a clawed cautery about the size of a finger, and two on either side of the ribs of the chest, so that the figure of the cautery is triangular; and extend those that are not suitable in order to avoid injury."
"And if the depth of the cautery is equal to the thickness of two thirds of the canal."
"And let the figure of the cautery be according to this form without addition. And if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and this is one cautery according to the form of a circle thus:"
"And the stomach should be punctured according to that which is feared from this cautery: and thus you will feel on the stomach puncturing with a tentacle as much as you wish, and then cauterize it in those points with a cautery; and then treat it with the treatment that is previously mentioned until it is healed."
"Chapter XXVII."
"On cauterization of the fatty liver."
"When there is pain in the liver due to coldness or moisture or excess windiness so that its normal condition is departed from by superfluous exit, and if the ailment is cured with what we have said and yet does not improve, then it is necessary for the ailment to be raised up on its back, and feel with a tentacle three cauteries according to this form and quantity measure over the liver on the left side of the hypochondrium where the decubitus of man lies."
"And let the space that is between each cautery be according to the thickness of a finger, and let the cauteries be according to the length of the right arm."
"And do not compress your hand with the cautery too much."
"And if the quantity of what is cauterized is equal to the thickness of the middle finger, and it should not be pressed too much; and if the ailment stands on its feet, and if it does not stand up, then let it be made to lie down, which has already extended its feet, and raise its arms."
"And it may be possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a knife-cautery if you have subtlety and prudence in the art."
"And be careful that you do not proceed too much in the cauterization, and let the middle finger be cauterized entirely so that all the body may be cauterized and enter into the veins, because here the middle finger is subtle. Know this."
"Chapter XXVIII."
"On perforation of an abscess of the liver with a cautery."
"When there is an eruption or abscess in the liver and you wish to know whether that abscess is in the flesh of the liver or in its tunic, then if it is in the flesh of the liver, the ailment will be grave and painful without sharpness."
"And if it is in the tunic of the liver, then the pain will be sharp and great, and often the physicians are weary of treating it."
"Therefore let the ailment be turned towards its back, and then feel with a tentacle the location of the abscess; and then kindle the cautery which is similar to a rake, the form of which has been described on another page." "And cauterize with that cautery until all the flesh is burned away, until it reaches the diaphragm, until in ashes it heals."
"And then treat it with the treatment of other abscesses until it is healed."
"But this form of cautery should not be used except by one whose studies in the art of medicine have been prolonged, and who has experienced many ailments; but even that one, sometimes, may be burned with this operation. But leave it to those who are better than us, for it is better."
"Chapter XXIX."
"On cauterizing pleasure."
"The ancients cauterized pleasure in this manner: first take from the vessels of the seminal ducts a dry vessel with a long opening that is found there, and its thickness should be like that of a finger."
"And then submerge this in oil and place it in the fire, and cauterize with a cautery at the location that is between the continuation of the collarbone and the neck; and with two small cauteries leave them guided thus, one slightly inclining towards the side that is below the beard, and with two cauteries on what declines between the fifth rib and the armpit, declining slightly towards the back sides; and with another cautery in the middle of the chest; and with another on the stomach, and with three cauteries on the back parts; and with one cautery at that location which is between the two shoulder blades, and with two cauteries on both sides of the chest."
"And you do not need to buy a cautery, but it should be in your chain in deeds."
"And those ancient people said that among men were some who used cauteries of iron similar to a ray and fiery like this one, and they placed it at that location between the ribs, until they reached that boil with it and it was opened cleanly, as we have said about the boil on the liver."
"But in this perforation with cautery there is no fear, for many die instantly if it happens in the location of the fistula which does not heal."
"Chapter XXX."
"Of the cauterization of the spleen."
"When you treat the illness of the spleen with what we have said about the cure in the division and do not agree with your treatment, then cauterize it in three ways, all of which are correct. One way is to make three or four cauteries along the length of the spleen according to its figure, similar to those of the liver whose figure has preceded."
"And between each cautery let it be the thickness of a finger or a little more, and the manner of the cautery should be as we have said in the cautery of the liver equally."
"And do not buy your own cautery, and let the disease be even on its two sides."
"And another manner of cauterizing is this: ignite the cautery having two vents, whose cause we have mentioned in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and lift up the chain which is towards the spleen where the seat of the disease lies."
"And let your lifting be such that you lift up the chain along the length of the body so that cauteries are made according to its width."
"And then introduce the two vents, kindle it immediately, into that place where with those you penetrate the chain from the other side."
"And then extract the cautery; and thus four cauteries are made."
"And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three vents."
"And then cure the cautery, since it has left to give birth after too many days, for it is more beneficial than the other causes mentioned in the cure."
"Chapter XXXI."
"On cauterizing a dropsical patient."
"No cautery should be applied to dropsical patients except in certain cases."
"When you treat the dropsical patient according to the methods of treatment mentioned in this section and yet your treatment does not succeed, it is then necessary to cauterize him with four cauteries around the navel, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the spleen, two between the vertebrae of the back, one on the right side of the foot, and another on the stomach." "And the quantity of the depth of the cautery should be proportional to the thickness of the skin."
"And remove the cautery promptly so that it does not burn for too long."
"Don't evacuate the disease by cautery alone, but use whatever else is appropriate to add to it, and hasten recovery with helpful remedies."
"The form of the cautery with which the abdomen is cauterized should be like a sword according to its previous shape. And that with which the back is cauterized should be olive-shaped, as it is previously described in its form."
Chapter 32
Of cauterization of feet and legs.
When the feet are swollen in dropsy and filled with yellowish water, it is necessary to cauterize them on the instep of the foot between the little toe and the ring toe, raising your hand with the cautery and not twisting it; and then raise your hand and do not return that completely, for the yellow water will subside.
The cautery is made in this way: First place two cauteries on the two thighs and make a cautery on each thigh with the point of the cautery spoon. The cautery should be made along the length of the thigh, one below the kneecap and the other below the middle of the thigh. Two cauteries on each thigh are to be applied.
Leave the wound uncovered after its cure for a long time, so that no water may accumulate there.
And then treat those causes which we have mentioned.
Chapter 33
On cauterizing the body of the abdomen.
"When the body becomes cold and moist internally, causing weakness in the organs, this is the digestive and retentive virtue residing in the stomach and intestines. This is cured by medical practices without cauterization unless the patient exhibits extreme symptoms, in which case a large cautery should be applied to their stomach as previously mentioned."
"If there are excessive humidities and the patient tolerates it, then cauterize above the penis and intestines. Also apply two cauteries firmly to the stomach near the groin as this is a perfect cure for the ailment, in which you should not err."
"Chapter XXXIV"
Burning of old hemorrhoids.
When there are recent hemorrhoids or one of the thick humors that rubs or corrupt humidities is present, and they do not heal with what was said in the division nor follow their usual treatment, then cauterize them with three cauteries on both sides of the anus near the bottom of the two small triangular folds, and with a cautery above the navel towards the two sides.
And if you find that the stomach is cold and the food is not digested, and the face often appears pale, then cauterize it on the stomach with a large cautery as described above; and with one cautery on the liver, and another cautery on the spleen with a pointed cautery, leaving the cautery in place for some time until the wound heals internally.
Chapter XXXV
Regarding cauterization after the excision of hemorrhoids.
When you sever a vein, then ignite the cautery that resembles an arrow. Apply the heated cautery between the severed vein and seal its opening until blood flow stops.
And do this once or twice, because if there are too many veins, then cauterize each one separately according to what has been reported, and afterwards dress the wounds until they heal.
But be careful not to burn too much skin with a large cautery, as it will cause greater harm than good.
Chapter XXXVI
Regarding the cauterization of fistulas naturally occurring in the skin.
If nature does not follow the treatment recommended here and the patient becomes frightened as a result, then apply a cautery to heal it.
Therefore, when there is some fistula appearing naturally on the skin that has become old and corrupted by dryness and moisture, then it is more appropriate to probe it with a thin, subtle thread and thus determine its depth using the aforementioned thread.
Then heat the cautery which resembles a ray. Then insert that heated cautery into this fistula, following the depth indicated by the thread.
And continue applying the cautery until those corrupt tissues are completely burned away in one or two or three applications, depending on the severity of the condition.
But be careful not to burn any nerves or veins. And if the fistula goes into the bladder or the intestines, then be very careful in those areas. Do not do this unless the fistula is in fatty tissue and you believe it is not penetrating deeply.
Then dress the wound until it heals.
And if the opening becomes sealed and the infected material is removed from it, and it remains like this for a long time, then you will know that it has healed completely.
And if the infected material is not coming out of it, then you should know that it is penetrating or that there is some underlying bone corruption. This may be due to one of those causes which will be remembered later in this chapter.
Chapter XXXVII
Of the cauterization of warts.
"When pain is caused by rubbing or thick windiness in the lungs, and the patient's heart is thereby weakened, it is necessary to cauterize that area over the ribs with a pointed cautery on each rib."
"And then cauterize again, leaving a little space between them so that three cauteries can fit lined up, and finally place two more diagonally for reinforcement."
"Chapter XXXVI."
Burning of the bladder
When there is debilitation and softening in the bladder due to friction and humidity, such that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize it at the opening of the urethra, where the hairs of the pubic region begin. Cauterize with a hot iron on the right side and another on the left side.
And let the length of each cautery be according to the amount of hair at the opening of the vulva. And cauterize there with a hot iron on the lower part of the vulva or with two cauteries if necessary.
And use a cautery that is pointed, depending on what is being treated
Chapter XXIX
Of cauterizing the uvula
When the uvula becomes dry and humid, and because of this conception is prohibited, and her menstruation is corrupted, and their onset is delayed, and there is pain during their emission, then that place should be cauterized with three cauteries in the region of the navel, as we have said for the cautery of the bladder; and with a cautery on the lower part of the vulva or with two cauteries, using a pointed cautery.
Chapter XL
"Regarding cauterization of dislocation of the ankle."
"When moist mucous exudes at the site of the ankle, and there are several causes of the swelling of its cavity, a sign of this is that one thing is prolonged over the other when they are compared between them." "And the site of dislocation is found in the lower abdomen."
"Then you should cauterize the injury around the ankle with a circular cautery similar to this, for you will have marked around the circumference of the site as it is revolved, and thus the site will fall in the middle of the circle."
"And let the cautery be of such form as is used in the cauterization of the stomach."
"But if this cautery is not at hand, then cauterize with three cauteries having an olive-shaped point."
"And let the cautery be according to the amount of thickness of the whole cord; and afterwards care for it until it is healed."
"Chapter XL1."
"Of Cauterization of the Sciatic Vein."
"When pain occurs in the site of the ankle due to friction and humidity, the injury is cured with that which we have said and not otherwise. But if it is ancient, then you should open the injury to remove thick humors with fetid pills or artificial pills or similar ones; and afterwards cauterize it."
"And the manner of cautery in that is according to two methods: either cautery with burning medicines, or cautery with fire."
"Knowing two methods, of which one is that you cauterize around the site of the ankle with three triangular cauteries according to this shape; and make them with good depth." "And let the space between each cautery be equal to the thickness of the finger, and if the cauteries are olive-shaped or large."
"But sometimes it may be that the cauteries are placed over the middle of the top of the ankle, for there are four cauteries."
"And if you wish, cauterize with the circle which is prescribed in the form of cautery for dislocation of the ankle, so that it may be a continuous circle and burn through the thickness of the whole cord."
"And this is the manner of cautery in sciatica when pain is adhered to the ankle and not extended within the thigh."
"But if it is extended within the thigh, then cauterize there with two cauteries over the thigh at the location where you feel the pain that is the cause of it; and with one cautery over the shinbone about four fingers' breadth below the right side."
"And if the cautery is cuticular, let the depth of the cautery be according to the thickness of the cord."
"And if you find that the pain extends within the location near those said buttocks, then cauterize there where you feel it with cauteries of three points or four or more if necessary."
"And if you find that the pain is near the place where the thigh meets the buttock, then cauterize there with one cuticular cautery."
"And beware in all cautery that you do not finish the cautery to such an extent that you burn nerves or large arteries; and that because of this you do more harm than good or cause contraction."
"And I have seen some of those who cauterized over the shinbone and finished the cautery there, causing the leg to swell within so that the swelling reached the foot, and it was pierced and corrupted all the flesh." "And moreover, accidental purging of the bowels often occurs, and because of this death."
"If pain is in two locations at once, then cauterize each according to this manner."
"And some wise men have said that in cautery of the ankle, this is the manner: make it similar to a circle of iron whose circumference is about a span; and let its depth be according to the thickness of a date bone or less than that."
"And within that circle let there be another third one; and let the space between them be equal to the width of a nut from the palm; and let those circles be open on two sides; and let their length be one or two nuts, and make their edge of iron neatly rounded in the circles; this is the form:
Approach fire to heat it until it reddens and sparks fly off, then place it on the part of the ankle, with the patient lying on their left side. And therefore cauterize that leg three times in one session.
Then leave it to rest for three days; plaster that wound with the edge and let the bandage remain on too long; and cure that wound until it is healed.
Oh, son, this kind of cauterization we have rarely used due to the fear of the wound's appearance, and because few patients we have found who tolerate it.
But among those who endured them, some had that mark on their leg.
But cauterization with medicated irons is done by making two circles, one inside the other pierced with holes in which the hot iron door handle is placed; let the thickness of their walls be equal to the size of two nuts or those of similar size.
And if the space between them is equal to the quantity of the thickness of the finger, and they are opened below and above, and their length is such that they can contain themselves according to this shape:
Then pause on the edge of the ulcer and place your hand over its opening; then take boiled water and pour it between the two circles, ensuring that the water has been heated gently over the fire for about an hour. Let the patient endure the burning sensation and discomfort until the burning stops.
Then raise your hand with the instrument and rinse off the boiled water from all around the ulcer with fresh water.
Then leave it for three days and pause over it until the blackness of the burned area has disappeared. Then leave it for a few more days, and finally apply honey to promote healing. This is the last step in treatment.
Then dress the wound with bandages until it is healed.
And if the pain has spread to the foot or leg, do as follows: place a vessel containing water at the height of the ulcer, as was done with the water equalization.
And this is the method for boiled water, which I have already written about in my treatise on the correction of medical terms. Take equal parts of soda and unslaked lime, grind them together finely, and place in a new earthenware pot with a small hole pierced at the bottom, according to the size that fits inside the ulcer.
Then place another earthenware pot upside down on top of it, and pour boiled water over the soda and unslaked lime mixture until it reaches about one finger's breadth. Then press it gently with your hand for good compression, and allow the boiled water to drain from the pierced hole into the inverted pot underneath.
"Then carefully adjust all that water, and throw it onto another living creature or other renewed alkali, because at that moment it will be very caustic, which is administered in many medical operations and in cauterization of other members."
"And thus with some medicines with which wide areas are cauterized, such as tees (iron), melagrace and cause mixed with soap in this way that they are blended."
"And Gaul recounts an operation and cure with which sciatic vein pain is cured, and greatly praises it, saying that no other treatment is needed, because it is healed by one application as he recounts, for indeed the ointment in bath and plaster already knows about that."
"And it is that if possible take fresh centaury, and if not found, fig leaves may be taken; and much should be chopped with a little garlic and placed on the water where there is pain, or on the thing, or on the bed, and wrapped around."
"And it should be left for about three hours or until the patient feels relief from the adhesion."
"And then put him in a bath and when his body is warm, rub that plaster on it, because the pain stops and he is healed."
"And know that it is not necessary to use cautery with these medicines but only the evacuation of the body."
"As Hippocrates says, when the vein is narrowed by a goat's split, cauterize it and profit will come to its owner. The cautery should be prepared in this manner: wool should be taken and dipped in old oil, then placed between the toes of the foot and between the bones."
"And next, take a dry goat's hair and inflame it with fire until it becomes carbonized. Then place it on the wool and leave it there until it cools down." "And continue to do this, not ceasing until the sensation of pain reaches the ankle and then rest the limb."
"And this method of cautery is called the 'cautery of vultures'."
"Chapter XLII."
"Of cauterization for pain in two places."
"Sometimes pain occurs in the back due to various causes, such as by contusion or blow or excessive evacuation, and for causes similar to these, by infusion of hot and humid matter."
"And cautery is not used except in this single case which occurs due to the effusion of hot matter."
"Therefore, first perform evacuation of the disease with pills made from drugs similar to those used for cautery, and place them on the back where the pain is located. The distance between each pill should be three lines according to its latitude, and for every ten pills or more, cauterize one line according to the amount of endurance of the disease and its strength."
"And perform cautery with cauteries having a pointed tip."
"And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cauteries using the middle cautery of the keyhole shape:"
"Chapter XLIII."
"Of cautery for the beginning of trembling (convulsions)."
"Very often this disease occurs in young children; the sign of its onset in children is that accidents occur on their spine with elevation and movement."
"And you will find inflammation in the last thoracic vertebra of the back and of the nerves that are already beginning to rise above the others."
"Therefore, when you see this and wish to prohibit it (i.e., prevent convulsions), immediately cauterize that area with a cautery that is circular in shape:" "which should cover the entire width of the vertebra."
"And if you wish, cauterize around the vertebra with a pointed cautery two or three lines away." "And let the points be close together between them."
"Then treat the wound that is healed with what we have said (i.e., dress it appropriately)."
"But be careful not to administer cautery in trembling caused by spasm of nerves."
"Chapter XLIV."
"Of cautery for gout and pain in the joints."
"When pain in the joints is caused by hot humors which are congealed in each member of the body, then when pains occur in the feet, it is customary for physicians to call this gout properly."
"And therefore, when gout caused by heat has been cured with treatment and the pains are not removed, then cauterize them."
"And if you cauterize that area for evacuation purposes, do so around the joint of the foot with many cauteries."
"And let the cautery be olive-shaped, of which this is the shape:"
"If it is necessary that points should be made on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery." "And if the pains penetrate into the joints or other joints and this happens very often, then cauterize that area over each painful spot with three or four cauteries of the olive-shaped cautery throughout its entire width."
"And if many cauteries are necessary for you, then cauterize and do not press the cautery too hard beforehand, but only around the circumference of the joint."
"And if the pains penetrate into the joint and the bone, then administer the cautery that we have mentioned in its chapter."
"And if the pains are only in the muscles and it is called sciatica, then make punctures around the buttocks thus, making them two lines apart."
"And if the pains remain in these areas, then make punctures around the buttocks over each nerve and over the palm of the hand."
"And if the pains approach the hips to the loins or muscles, then cauterize each one throughout its entire length."
"And do not evacuate the illness through proper diet and receiving of medications, because if there is good regulation and inflammation is evacuated with this cautery without being healed, God help us."
"Chapter XLV."
"Of cautery for fractures."
"When a fracture occurs in the bones of the thigh or shinbone before reaching the knee, and this is how it begins, then you should order the patient to leave off eating on that day and to use gentle ointments so that the wound may heal from his belly."
"And then keep the patient between your hands over his bone, and command him to hold his breath so that his belly may be full or appear the knee or shinbone."
"And then return that area with your hands and press it with tentatively the fracture over the bone of the thigh with the signal of the extremity which is similar to the half of a circle in its upper parts of the body."
"And then ignite the cautery, of which this is the shape:"
"until it becomes very hot and emits sparks." "And then reduce the shinbone or knee into its concavity, and then place your hand over that area so that the bone does not move."
"And you have now inserted between the patient's legs and left one of your hands resting on his leg, with another assistant serving under his buttocks, another under his thigh, which should hold his thighs."
"And then place the cautery on that signal with your hand and apply it correctly, and maintain it until you achieve contact with the bone of the thigh in the middle of the joint; and repeat this again if you have not achieved it on the first attempt."
"And carefully observe the sensation of the bone during your cautery so that you do not burn the bone and cause great harm to the patient."
"And know that if with the cautery you do not touch the bone, your operation is of no use."
"And the cautery for children should be subtle according to their size and measure."
"And then treat that area with bandages for three days until the burn scar is healed."
"And then treat it with other remedies until it is healed."
"And the patient should lie on his back for forty days until the area and wound are completely healed."
"And it is necessary that you regulate the patient's diet according to the length of time for his cure which will empty his belly, and that the bone does not come out due to the effort of healing."
"And when he wants to get up after forty days, then administer a suitable plaster and keep him for another forty days."
"And let him be spared from work and from eating and drinking in abundance and from violent coughing, because when he uses this complete regimen of healing he will not be healed."
"And I will tell you the treatment for ruptures in other parts of the belly, and if they are large at the beginning, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its quantity, as much as it is protruded from the anus like the third section of it; and then treat it with what has been said, and nothing else."
"And some earlier authors have said that rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery like this figure:"
"And the line is placed that they pass through the width in the side up from under the rupture, and another line above; then place your hand with a pointed cautery, but the first cautery should be lighter and better."
"The forty-sixth chapter"
"Of cauterization of the groin."
"When pain occurs in the upper limbs due to chafing or percussion and persists for a long time without improving with treatment using medications, it is then necessary to cauterize with a pointed cautery."
"And the cautery should be of such size according to the magnitude and smallness of the member, and its virtue and power, and the location of the hernia and the pain."
"So if it is healed by the first cautery, that's good; but if not, then apply the cautery again; for those pains are usually caused by pressure on a member near the one in question, so it is necessary to reach those with cautery until the illness is healed."
"The forty-seventh chapter"
"Of cauterization of leprosy."
"Some lepers have been viewed as cauterized with little benefit and even harm if the type of leprosy is caused by decay of phlegm and melancholy."
"And therefore, when you want to cauterize that person, consider whether the leprosy is contagious and whether it has been cured with what we have said in the division above. If not, then be afraid that the corruption will spread throughout his entire body and complexion. Therefore, cauterize him on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, another towards the end of the forehead near the hair; two on both horns; and one behind, on the nape or top of the neck."
"Finally, press your hand with the cautery a little deeper until it impresses slightly on the bone, and remove the scabs that have formed there, so that the expiration of thick vapors may be alleviated from him; and cauterize on the chest as is necessary."
"And if the leprosy has already spread over the person and appears manifestly, then you must cauterize that person with those cauteries which we have mentioned for the head; and cauterize on the tip of the nose, and with two cauteries on both cheeks, and with two cauteries on both shoulder blades, and with six cauteries on the spine of the back, and with one large cautery on the spine near the buttocks, and one on the buttock itself, and with two on the ankles, and one on each ankle, and with two on the knees and one on each knee, and with two on the elbows and two on the muscles of the calves; and cauterize him on all the joints of the said limbs and feet, and on each heel of his feet, and on the hollows of his hands."
"And beware not to burn those nerves which are situated on the heel lest you should injure them."
"Sometimes it is necessary to cauterize with one cautery on the bone of the sternum and another on the mouth of the stomach and another on the liver."
"And know that the more closely you apply the cauteries, the greater is the benefit and efficacy; and know that the person does not feel pain from the cautery as he would from his own sores, because his body has become numb."
"And it is necessary that the cauteries be large or small according to the limbs and joints as is prescribed by the nature of the instruments."
"And afterwards, dress the wound with fine bran flour mixed with honey and with another dressing until it heals."
"Chapter XLVIII"
"Of cautery for swelling."
"If any limb is paralyzed or numb and is treated with medications, oils, and plasters, but does not heal, then cauterize that paralyzed limb with a cautery according to the size of the limb or its smallness."
"And insert your cautery into the spine through an incision." And then care for him until he is healed.
Sometimes, certain wounds are cauterized which affect the hands and feet, the spine of the back and waist, and the nerves that move those limbs. The wound is then healed.
Only let those presume to do this who are wise in anatomy of the members and in the exit of nerves that move all the body.
Capítulo XLIX
On cauterizing warts that have been removed.
When the ulcer is ancient and does not respond to some medical remedies, then cauterize it with a pointed cautery according to the quantity of the specificity of the cord, until its whiteness and color are removed, and its color is changed.
And appropriate for this is to cure it with flour of barley and lentils mixed with olive oil and leaves of sage, and with dove's blood or hen's blood, giving each one a portion and mixing all together, and then placing it on a cloth on the affected area until it is healed.
Chapter One
On the cautery of a boil.
When a boil begins and you wish to open it, then cauterize around its circumference with a circular cautery in the circuit of it thus as it turns.
And the wise say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle of it; but I have not seen this, because I fear that it may become ulcerated, and I have seen it happen sometimes.
And it is more correct to cauterize around its circumference with a circular cautery as we have said above, or with several cauteries.
Chapter Two:
"Regarding the cautery of whitened skin."
"If some skin whitening is delayed in maturation, this may be due to superfluity produced by that (area), or because of the condition of the patient, who is elderly and decrepit with little blood, or because of time, and you wish to expedite the maturation of whitening; therefore cauterize around it with a small pointed cautery iron; and leave that (area) until it has matured."
"But if you wish to perforate with the cautery, then heat the cautery of which this is the shape: and place it in the middle of the whitening where the chain penetrates."
"And if you cauterize that (area) which is lower down, so that the flesh of the arm may be alleviated, and then treat it until it has healed."
"Chapter LII."
"On the cautery of ulcers."
"Ulcers are corrupting wanderings in the member, which consume that as dry wood consumes fire."
"Therefore if you cauterize that ulcer where it can withstand fire cautery, then heat cautery needles few and large according to what is suitable in that place where the ulcer is."
"And then cauterize it from beginning to end until you have completely eradicated all corruption and there remains no cause of it."
"And then leave it for three days, and bathe the cauterized areas solely with olive oil mixed (with honey) until all scars are eradicated and all corruption."
"And then treat it with fresh flesh-generating ointment."
"But if after three days you find that the flesh does not grow healthy where there is no corruption, then heat the cautery again on what remains in the corrupted places."
"And ulcers are sometimes treated with sharp medicine, because that is a halfway measure instead of cautery." "But truly cautery with fire is the easiest remedy."
"And I have already spoken of the treatment of ulcers with sharp medicine in their division, and therefore take that when you begin to encounter them."
"Chapter LIII."
"On the cautery of chilblains and similar conditions."
"Very often in the lower parts of the leg there appears a disease called chilblain, which is caused by cold and dampness, making the flesh numb. And it is treated in two ways: cautery with fire and cautery with hot water."
"But cautery with fire is done by heating the cautery concave similarly to a vulture's feather, which should be made of iron according to the quantity that the chilblain encompasses from beginning to end, and it should have thin edges."
"And then place that heated cautery upon the chilblain and then rotate your hand with the cautery around the circumference of the chilblain until it reaches the depth of it." "Then leave it for three days until it begins to swell." "And then apply a plaster of wild mallows pounded with salt, and leave the plaster on it overnight, because that will eradicate its roots."
"And then treat the place with flesh-generating ointment until it is healed."
"And if it is not healed, and many times this occurs on the surface of the body, more often in the thighs and legs, then you should administer cautery with hot water there. And that is done by taking a cannula of brass or iron or vulture's feather and placing it upon the chilblain; and then pour some hot water into the cannula and hold your hand, and rotate that with compression from above so that the edge of the cannula presses upon the root of the chilblain and the hot water flows to the front of the root of the chilblain. And wait for the pain of the hot water for about an hour, and then remove it, because the chilblain along with its roots will be eradicated."
"And do this to those likewise until all of them upon which they have appeared on the body are removed."
"And then treat those with ointments that cause flesh to regenerate since the roots of the chilblains have been eradicated."
"Chapter LIV."
"On cautery for trembling."
"When trembling occurs due to chill in the nerves or fever caused by coldness, or some other similar cause, then you should cauterize it with four cauteries or five upon the vertebrae of the back, placing one cautery between each vertebra; and also cauterize its foot and over its stomach with an olive-sized cautery."
"And trembling will cease and the health of the cold disease will be restored."
"Chapter LV."
"Regarding the cauterization of sudden accidents in the body."
"When the body is suddenly afflicted with sores and pustules from which matter issues that is thick and corrupt; therefore, it is necessary at the beginning to appear promptly and cauterize the head of the fistula with a thin cautery made of myrtle wood whose end has been heated in fire or with an elongated eraser or lenticular cautery."
"And in subsequent sores it is cauterized again at the beginning of its expulsion according to this manner; and they are not believed, and the superfluity is disrupted making them and they heal."
"But it is necessary that this be done with proper evacuation through phlebotomy."
"Chapter 60."
"For cauterizing accidental bleeding from an artery by incision."
"And when a visible arterial hemorrhage occurs that is incised during surgery and flows abundantly, or if it's the incision of an aposteme or cautery of a limb, then seemly, and it's difficult to stop."
"Therefore when this happens to someone, then quickly bring your hand to the horrible wound of the artery, and press over it using the little finger first, so that you can see where the flow of blood comes from, and that it does not escape."
"And also press on the cauterizing olive oils, both small and large, by number, and exhale onto those until they are quite hot."
"And also take one of those oils, either small or large depending on the place and size of where the artery has burst, press it firmly onto that vein as soon as you have stopped the bleeding with your finger, so that the cauterizing may be complete and restrain the blood."
"And if the blood is still flowing from the wound of the artery when you remove your finger and apply the cautery, then quickly take another one carefully from those that are prepared in the fire, and keep doing so until the bleeding has stopped."
"And be careful not to burn the nerves that are nearby, and that it does not come upon some other mischief or misfortune."
"And know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to stop the bleeding by those means unless with one of four methods: either with cautery as mentioned above, or by extraction if it cannot be extracted (for when it is extracted, the ends of the membrane are burned and the blood is restrained), or by tying it with thread or linen with strong tension, or by placing medicines on it whose virtue is to restrain bleeding; and they should be pressed on with a poultice with appropriate compression."
"But he who applies proper restriction with linen and tension with cloth or by placing hot cauteries and similar things near it, does not perform but harms."
"But if it happens to someone and there is no doctor present nor medicine, then press the tip of your index finger on the wound of that vein as we have said, and understand how to apply great pressure on the inside so that the blood may be stopped from flowing out of the main part of the wound, and do not remove your finger from above it; and sprinkle cold water that has been rubbed vigorously onto the cautery until the blood congeals and thickens; and see if there is a need for cautery or medicine."
"Regarding incisions, punctures, wounds, and regarding phlebotomy and wounds and their like."
"We have already said in the first chapter all the diseases in which cautery with fire is convenient and useful, and the occasions and causes of this, and the instruments necessary for them in their forms; and we have arranged the chapters from the head to the foot."
"And I will proceed in this chapter in the same manner, so that whoever wants it may find what he has sought."
"First, know this: in this chapter on incisions and punctures, you will find what is said in the first chapter on cautery."
"And because caution is necessary in the operations that are in this chapter, many times there will be evacuation which is done with blood, with which life is lost due to aspiration of the vein or incision on an aposteme or opening for extraction or purification of the wound or extraction of an arrowhead or cutting of a stone and their like." "And all these are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in many of them death occurs."
"And I warn you not to fall into that which is doubtful, for sometimes you will find men with many manners who have many diseases." "And there are some who become angry with their illness and are hasty about it, even to the point of death, due to the severity of what they find in their illness, and the length of time they have had the illness, and because they fear that illness which signifies death."
"And there are those who give you their wealth and say to you, 'I hope for health from you,' but their illness is fatal."
"And therefore do not consent to that one who comes to you with this manner; let your caution be greater than greed and your rapacity; and do not presume on any cause except approved certain knowledge which verifies it for you, and from which successful outcome may occur."
"And use in the treatment of all your illnesses prognosis and indication of that to which health is converted, for in this you will find help in acquiring fame and renown, honor and glory."
"Oh, my sons, may God inspire His understanding to you and not remove from you direction and protection, for this is in His hand."
"And I have arranged this chapter distinguished by chapters according to what is said in the chapter on cautery of the head to the foot, so that you may find what you seek and need."
"First Chapter."
"Concerning the treatment of water that is held in the heads of infants."
"You should know that this disease often occurs in infants at birth, when the midwife stretches the child's head without its gentleness."
"And sometimes it happens for a hidden cause which is not known."
"But I have never seen this disease except in infants; and all those whom I saw were saved from death, for it is my belief that there was little hope in them."
"And I have seen an infant whose head was filled with water, and its head was always so swollen within that it could not cease even for a moment due to the greatness of its head, and more than the moisture increased within until death occurred."
"And this moisture is either gathered between the dura mater and the bone, or it is gathered outside the bone over the vertex."
"For if the operation is performed in that case where the moisture is between the dura mater and the bone and the aposteme is small, then you should make an incision in the middle of the head along its latitude, and let the length of the incision be two fingers so that the moisture may run out; this is the form of the spatula:"
"And therefore if the moisture has increased more and the aposteme is greater, then there are two incisions here according to this manner:"
"And if the moisture is outside the bone, a sign of this is that you will find the commissures of the head opened up completely and the water squeezed out when you press them with your hand on the inside; this is not concealed from you." "You should make three incisions in the middle of the head according to this manner:"
"And then extract all the moisture through the incision; and then stretch the incisions with bandages and cotton; and then on the fifth day annoint it from above with wine and oil, and then loosen the bandage and dress the wound with lint and egg whites, and then bind the head evenly; and let the patient eat dry food of little moisture until the member is strengthened and healed."
"And there is another manner of incision, which you should consider according to the magnitude of the aposteme and the collection of water, for sometimes it is more in the occiput, or in front, or on the right, or on the left; therefore make the incision where you see the aposteme and the fullness of water, and do thus as it seems best to you."
"And observe that thou dost not cut the artery, for it would cause a flow of blood which would harm the patient through that flow of blood with evacuation of humidity."
"Chapter two."
When there occur cataracts or ulcers in the eyes or breast, and these are ancient, and cure cannot be effected by medicines, then the last remedy in this case is incision of those two arteries.
And thus you must do when you wish to incise those arteries which the sick person's head has near to it, and first rub that place with rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and also bind the neck of the sick person with some cloth; and consider well where the vein pulses; and the places for cutting on each side are over the places which are near the ears below, and they are hidden except in certain men.
And then mark with a thread the artery you wish to cut, and then incise each one with a scalpel of sharp point, making an incision entering into the bone, and let this be done along the breadth of the head.
And if you wish, enter the scalpel blade between the artery and cut it with your fingers at the incisions above mentioned.
And let the length of the incision be two fingers' breadth, for when any vein is incised blood issues forth with a pulsating flow, which flows off by frequent flows.
But if the artery does not appear to your satisfaction, then you must measure from the ear the quantity of space of three fingers' breadth, and mark with a thread, and cut within the bone.
And that which it is necessary to let flow of blood is a quantity equal to one sixth part, and sometimes more or less, and all this is according to the quantity which appears of the virtue of the disease and the repletion of the artery.
And then consider the wound, and if there remains on the bone any cause of a phthisis, then cut that away, lest an ulcerous cautery should result.
And then strengthen the wound with feathers and cloth lint, and then cure it with ointment within until it be healed.
Chapter III
Of the extraction of those arteries which are in the temples.
When it happens that some ancient migraine or very severe headache occurs due to humid and hot qualities in the temples, or if it is an ancient vehement disease similar to these, and it is treated with the usual methods of medical cure without success, then we have proven in these diseases extraction of those arteries in the temples, or cauterization of them as we have shown.
And the manner of operation and extraction of those arteries is this: Shave the hair from those which are in the temples; and understand that the artery appears on the temple where it is indicated by its pulsation, although it may be hidden in few men due to great thickness of flesh.
And if it is hidden from you, then let the neck of the disease be strengthened with some cloth; and then rub the place with a rough cloth or evaporate the place with hot water until the artery appears clearly to you. And then take this scalpel which has this shape: And then cut the skin with that one easily until you reach the artery; and then open it there and extract that upwards to such an extent that you extract it from its sheaths and uncover those tunics which surround it on all sides.
But if the artery is delicate, then wrap it with the extreme end of a probe; and then cut one part of it according to how much its extremities are elongated and contracted, and there will be no flow of blood, for if they are not incised the blood will not come forth.
And then let out of it one sixth part or at most three parts of blood.
And if the artery is large, then you must tie it in two places with double strong thread of cotton or long cords, so that putrefaction does not occur before the wound is consolidated and there is no flow of blood.
And then incise the superfluity which is between two lint layers; and do this at that hour or another hour.
And if you wish, cauterize it with a caustic cautery or cutlery cautery so that its extremities are incised, and this will take the place of that operation.
And it is better to operate if the patient has fever or is of hot complexion, because cauterization helps those causes that promote humidifying qualities, and therefore it is better in this case.
And it is necessary that in the extraction of arteries the place of cutting be smeared with good ointment, and that they be powdered decently with dry medicines to make the flesh grow, and then it should be cured with dressings until it is healed.
And if while operating another time, blood begins to flow from the artery, then stop that blood either with caustic or with compressing the place of cutting, and strengthen your hand until the blood is stopped. And if none of those causes is present, then place your finger on the place until the blood coagulates, and then bore the place with cold water until the sharpness passes, and then strengthen it according to what is necessary.
And that which is put lightly in extraction of artery is this: You cauterize the vein with this caustic cautery having two cuts, for you have cut both places with a probe, and then ignite each one separately, so that they reach the bone and incise the vein in two places, so that what is between its extremities may be elongated, because it is not completely consolidated with this cautery.
And this is the form of the caustic:
And let the sharpness of the two cuts be thus But if they are not very sharp, then it is better to have two cuts, for if they are very sharp with two cuts near each other, they approach too close and do not cut the flesh quickly.
Therefore since there is some thickness in them, the heat of the fire is held within them and the flesh is easily cut.
And this operation is better than all others and is also easier.
And let the space which is between the two cuts be as great as the thickness of your finger
Chapter Four
Concerning the cure of wounds from sharp and acid tears of the eyelids.
When there are acid tears and it is the wound of those veins which are over the forehead of the head, and no cause for its cure by medicine can be found, then sometimes the face of the patient becomes reddened and he feels on his forehead a sensation like that of ants crawling around. The eyelids become weak and moist so much so that their hairs stick together and the skin is scratched by the sharpness of the tears. These ancient authors advise in this operation for its cure, and no other cure should be sought.
And you should order the patient to shave the hairs which are on his forehead; and then make three incisions in the forehead equally distant according to its length. And if the length of each incision is two fingers: let the first incision be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead; and the second according to the length a little above the movement of the lachrymal glands which are near the eye; and the third on the other side.
And take care not to cut the arteries which are in both sides, and stretch your hand from the continuation of both jaws. "And if each opening's space matches the amount of three mentioned."
"And if you have a sponge dressed in linen or dry cloths with which to wipe off the blood."
"And then insert the spatula of two pointed extremities, whose shape is that of the incision:" "which is from the line between temples to the second incision." "Carefully remove with that all the skin between two incisions up to the hip bone which is above it, and then do likewise from the midriff incision to the second incision." "And then stretch this spatula and insert it again into the first incision another time using another instrument called a 'cutellar,' sharp on one side and blunt on the other."
"And pause the blade of that sharp one between the attached flesh and the skin, and pass through it within the bone and employ this to reach the midriff fissure, and cut away with that all vessels descending from the head to the heels."
"But if there is a continuity of incision up to here then do likewise in the midriff fissure unto the other fissure."
"And since blood will flow in great quantity at this point, compress the places of the junctures of the blood vessels together."
"And then pause in each fissure along the cut with cotton wool dipped in vinegar and oil and vinegar wine, and see that it does not become inflamed."
"And on the third day untie the stitches and administer a large infusion of cold water or tea, and then care for it with basilicon ointment with rose oil and other remedies so that the wounds are healed."
"Chapter .v"
"Of the care of injuries by cauterization and of the heels descending from the parts within the head."
"When it happens that cauterization is done with sharp and continuous instruments, and the heels of the sick person are attenuated and small, and their gaze is debilitated, and the eyelids ulcerated and from them the hairs fall out, and there is acute painful sensation in the forehead with consequent external pressure, then you should know that these materials and cauterization come only from small veins of the parts proceeding within."
"And the best care for these is this: command the patient to raise his forehead, and then incise a fissure in that at the middle of the forehead, a little across (beginning with the left temple and going to the right temple; and let the incision be within the bone; and stretch your hand out from the lacertus muscles of the temples which are attached by mastication), until the bone is uncovered."
"Dry up all the blood with a sponge or with dry cloth, and then fill in between the two lips of the fissure with cotton wool or with linen." "And then strive above it with powders dipped in vinegar and oil so that it does not become inflamed."
"And when you have done this and see that the cauterization has diminished, then it is necessary to scrape the bone where the flesh begins, and then care for it with a dry regimen which makes the flesh fall off, thus: take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony, mix them together, and make a plaster from them, and apply it to these wounds in order that the flesh may be renewed."
"Chapter .vi"
Of treating that which falls into the ears.
Every cause that falls into the ears is of four species: either it is a mineral like stone or similar to stone, such as iron and copper; or it is from a plant, like chickpeas or beans; or it is fluid, like water, vinegar and their similars; or some animal.
And therefore when a stone falls into the ear or another cause similar to those causes that do not fit nor grow in the ear, it closes the ear and prevents it from breathing, then extract the stone with some remedy of olive oil or sesame, applying it abundantly. And make them sneeze by certain conditions, blocking their nostrils during the onset of sneezing. And also close the entrance of the ear with some pieces of cloth or wool, extending it over its parts above, because many times it is forgotten with these causes.
And if it is not extracted, then apply extraction of it with the instrument called "subtle epicicarian gesture," whose form is as follows:
And if it is not extracted with the gesture, then apply extraction of it with a subtle hook of few loops.
And therefore if it is not extracted by this, then make a cannula of silver and insert the extremity of the cannula into the channel of the ear, closing around the cannula with wax and softened oil so that nothing may escape except through the cannula. And also extract it with a little wind with strong attraction, because many times it happens with this method that we have mentioned.
But if it is not extracted in this manner, then take a heated candle or sometimes prepared with which birds are caught by taking just a little bit of it and place it at the extremity of the ear, and also wrap around that gently placed spot. And then insert it into the channel of the ear with ease, and also dry out the ear from moisture.
"And if you forget not all causes we have recounted, then proceed to cut that which precedes the formation of an abscess or spasm."
"And the manner of cutting it is that you first sanctify the patient with the sacred oil and extract blood according to its virtue, then make a small incision between your thumb and index finger and turn the ear towards its parts, making a small fissure at the root of the ear near the thick part of it." "And let the incision be crescent-shaped until it reaches the bone, and when the bone is exposed, remove it if you can with appropriate instruments; then close the wound quickly, and dress it until it is healed."
"And if the cause resides in the ear is one of those fatty substances that swell and become inflamed, then administer the treatment and extraction of it; but if it does not obey your examination, then take a thin and subtle spatula according to this form:" "And perform the abscess of that fat which has fallen into the ear."
"And do not perform it when you think that it has already been moistened by the vapor of the ear, and pause there in several parts, then extract what is inside with tweezers or subtle gestures, or through such an incision as we have mentioned, for the extraction will be easier."
"But in the case of water that enters the ear, it is necessary for the patient to sneeze forcefully at the beginning and fill their ear with a soft cloth, then tilt their head over the affected ear, and if it does not come out, then take thin and sharp stones according to the length of the finger, heat them slightly on the fire, and have the patient insert one of those into the opening of their ear and jump up and down on one foot of that side, striking with another stone on top of the stone that is inside the ear." "So continue this until all the water has been expelled."
"So continue this until all the water has been expelled." "Now take some paper or cotton and burn one end of it in fire until half of it is burnt."
"And then take another cotton and do the same until all the water is burned away, and then remove it with a cannula as mentioned above about the stone extractor."
"If an animal enters that ear canal, whether it's a small creature or one similar to it, cure it as mentioned in the division; but if it is a large creature which appears in the neck wound, then remove it with tweezers and forceps, and its cause will be easier than all other causes that happen in the ear."
"But in the extraction of a worm generated in the ear, if you cure it with what has been mentioned in the division and in the treatise on distillation and still do not succeed, then you should examine the ear in sunlight."
"And then if you see any cause of the worms, then remove them with tweezers or fine forceps; but if you do not see any cause, then take a cannula which is narrow at one end and wide at the other, whose shape is like this:" Enter the thin tip into the ear according to the amount that the patient can tolerate; then suck strongly with it, doing this many times until all worms are removed.
If you do not obey the aforesaid instructions, then close and seal the opening of the cannula with wax as mentioned earlier; afterwards administer distilled waters which have already been prescribed in previous treatments for worms, and you will find this in the treatise on distillation.
And here is your funnel with which you will pour medicinal oils into the ear using this instrument, of which this is its shape: Make it of silver or brass, narrow and straight, with a small hole at one end and flat on top.
Thus let it be made such that it fits into the concavity of the cannula, continuing here where it will be necessary And if you wish, take the wand and wrap it around the end of the cannula decently, and then place oil in the concavity of the instrument, or juice of some herb, or whatever medicine you want in the cannula — which is now in the ear — and then place the wand with its tip down and squeeze gently with your hand so that the oil is expelled into the concavity of the instrument and the illness feels the oil inside.
And whatever has been poured into the ear should be immediately cauterized with fire a little bit. And make sure that whatever you distill into the ear is not too hot, for ear medications do not tolerate this.
Chapter VII
Of the treatment of earache.
Sometimes, some children come out of their mothers' wombs with closed anuses, and this has happened to some men, causing earache because of phlegm or flesh stuck there; sometimes the blockage is in the opening of the auditory canal which does not allow for sound, and sometimes it is outside at the openings.
And that which happens in the front of it, which does not admit sound, is among the most difficult to cure conditions.
"And in that one where you succeed in finding the vein, then place your ear on the patient's solar plexus and listen." "Therefore if there is apparent oppression, open that small space with a subtle spatula whose form is like this:"
"For the end of it where its width is small, one part is pointed and the other is not; and let the spatula be of two lion's teeth in such a way that it does not harm the ear."
"And if the oppression is due to skin grown over the ear or its membrane, then use those subtle tweezers and carefully cut that violent inflammation so as to remove all the skin."
"And if oppression is in the entrance of the ear, then take a thin lion's ray and heat it slightly over fire, and carefully place that within the flesh of the ear."
"And therefore if you find oppression with that which the patient draws with facility, for the gravity of his hearing, ease that oppression with facility; and take care not to plague the nerves of the ear."
"And carefully insert into the ear drops of it according to the quantity of the width of the wick which you have inserted in the Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the plug; or that you take some wax and insert that into ears and powder over it thrice and use it; and if sometimes the ear is already apostematous, then it is necessary that you extract the wax and replace it with another wax which you will envelop in cerot made with rose oil until the apostema is cauterized; and carefully cure it until it is healed."
"But if it happens that there is a flow of blood, then submerge some linen or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear, and use the other cure which you restrict the flow of blood, which is called in the treatise of distillation."
"Chapter VIII."
"Treatment for eye inflammation that occurs in eyelids."
"Eyelid inflammation sometimes causes tearing, sometimes they are dry."
"You should hold those hands while having them raised or lowered, and then carefully separate those hands from their roots, and slowly lower them onto the places indicated."
"If there is pain with blood flow, then cauterize those with a fine antimonial cautery."
"And the best cauterization is when the incisions are made and often retaken until there remains no cause for their roots; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return."
Chapter IX
"Treatment for swelling that comes to the eyelids."
Often, swelling occurs in the eyelids due to some cause which is similar to hardness and toughness, and for this reason it is called hardness.
"And it is an accumulation of thick humidity in the left eyelid above."
Therefore, the operation in this case is that you should consider whether the swelling appears on the outside of the eyelid and is swollen all over; and its cause will be light.
Therefore, make an incision along the width of that [swelling], and then carefully cut it open all around with ease, and then raise it up and sever it.
And if the swelling is large, then you should adjust it with stitches; and cure it until it is healed.
But if it is small, no harm will come to that one because the ointment for that restores it and makes it grow again.
And if the swelling declines towards the inside of the eyelid, then you should lift up the eyelid and suspend the swelling with a hook, unless you make an incision; press it all around, and if the eyelid is lengthened by the incision, then it will be known for no cause.
And after making the incision, wash the eye with salt water; and cure that place with something that makes it grow again until it is healed.
Chapter X.
On the treatment of inflammation in the upper eyelid.
"Eyelid inflammation is common, especially in children, causing eye irritation and difficulty seeing due to excessive tearing."
"Therefore, these individuals often rub their eyes and face while awake and asleep. Their eyelids are swollen with excessive moisture, which is already covered by inflammation. There is a visible indication of infection in the eye. When you press on this location with your fingers, you can feel the pulsating heat."
"Some method of operation is required for those who pause their head on the side they are facing, draping themselves and their foot over it. First, measure the circumference according to the quantity of earthworm present in each section. Then place the circle around that area and press firmly with your fingers all around so as to accumulate pus in the middle of the circle. Finally, make an incision with a scalpel along the width, ensuring that the incision is not larger than that made during phlebotomy."
"When opening the head wound, ensure that you reach all the way to the pus, as in many cases it will ooze out through the incision like a white, viscous fluid."
"Then remove those drapes which you had wrapped around the parts using your fingers and shake them between your right and left hand until all pus has been shaken out."
"And be careful not to insert the scalpel too deep into the incision, lest you pierce the eye or cause injury."
"But if pus does not appear at the beginning of the incision, then insert the scalpel gently into the incision until pus begins to flow out. Then remove it as we have described. Next, rinse drapes in water and vinegar and apply them to the location, and finally powder those drapes."
"And some also use salt and apply it to the concavity of the incision so that any remaining pus may be drawn out."
"And finally, dress the wound until it is healed."
"But if you encounter an abscess in the location, then treat it with cataplasms made of leadwort until it heals."
Chapter XI
"Of ways to examine the eye."
When the eyelids are born with defects due to improperly grown lashes, then they affect the eye and cause diseases such as constant tears, inflammation of the eyelids, and damage to the eye tissue, which is called entropion of the eye. There are four methods of treatment: either by cauterization with fire; or with acute medication as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cauterization; or it is done through incision and suturing; or with canthotomy as I have said before.
Then gently lift the patient's head towards them; next, with their left hand, they should turn the eyelid of the affected eye inward. If it turns inwards properly, that is good. But if not, then insert a needle into that part of the eyelid where the lashes grow and make the needle penetrate upwards close to the edge of the eyelid where the lashes grow. Then pull the thread out from above the eyelid and turn that eyelid inward with their finger.
And next, make an incision in the middle of the eyelid just below the lashes with a scalpel entering the larger lacrimal gland into the smaller one. Then remove the thread and pause near the eyelid using small cotton swabs or cloth, and then press on the eyelid with your finger so that it forms like a leaf of myrtle.
However, the shape should be according to the amount of eversion of the eyelid, because this is already varied among individuals. Therefore, some people require that a larger portion of the eyelid be incised according to the amount by which the eyelid has turned outwards.
And next, make an incision with the scalpel along both lines that you have marked out, starting from the larger lacrimal gland and entering into the smaller one. If your incision is close to the natural lashes so that it matches the thickness of the reed (i.e., not too deep).
And then take forceps and grasp one of the two ends of the thread. Then cut off all of it, and next join together both lips of the wound using silk or fine wool thread and cleanse away any blood. Then make what is superfluous from the threads adhere to both eyebrows with some adhesive substance if you wish to do so; otherwise, do not bother.
And then leave the suture of the threads in place for three or four days, and then remove it and care for the wound.
And if you wish, leave the plaster on without removing the suture and care for it with something that dries and constricts, because the eyelid is elevated due to the sealing of the plaster and its adherence. But sewing is better. This is what the ancient authorities say.
However, if there is concern about the illness, it is good to operate, and there is no reason to fear doing so.
And there is another method of sewing, which is to mark out on the eyelid a figure like a leaf of myrtle, and then raise the eyelid using three forceps separated and gathered together in this shape:
But if this is not possible, then hold the forceps and do not let go of them. Then take a needle with thread inserted into it and put it in the middle of the figure. Then insert one end of the thread near the larger lacrimal gland and the other end near the smaller lacrimal gland. Then adjust both ends of the threads equally between your fingers, and then raise your hand while lifting them up gently so that the entire thread marked out is raised as we have recommended.
And then join together both lips of the plaster with a suture, and care for it until it has healed.
But if an abscess forms over your incision or wound, cut into the abscess with a scalpel and drain it, and apply a poultice.
And sometimes it happens that the hairs of the eyelid are turned inward. In this case, you should use the method we have described for incision; but stitching in each case is more artful.
To stitch with needles, do it like this: "Now you must turn the eyelid and cut the figure that lies beneath, according to what has been described; then with art make two tubes or two thin needles whose length is equal to the length of the eyelid and their width less than the width of the spatula." "And now you have already cut into the ends of each half, where you hold the threads."
"Next, gently bring together what is superfluous of the eyelid on both sides and press the tubes of each half with great firmness; leave it thus for a few days so that the thread may die, be rejected, and fall out by itself."
"But if it is delayed, then cut it with the scissors; next clean the wound until it heals."
"So when it has healed, the eyelid will be raised and the hairs will not touch (the eye)."
"And this is how you make the two tubes which you should make according to this form:" "and they should have exactly the same length and width, neither more nor less."
Chapter XII
"Of raising hairs that are sticking into the eye when the hair is hard"
"When the hairs are not natural, hard and sharp and sticking into the eyes, then the operation is this: you should take a fine needle and insert it under that fine thread of cedar and lion's hair, and carefully adjust its ends without hurting each one in any way." "And let the length of the threads be as much as half a palm (about 7.6 cm)."
"And next take another fine thread and tie it around that one if you wish."
"And then place the patient's head on a suitable support and keep it near the light so that your work may be clear, for this operation is subtle and precise."
"And next insert the needle into the root of the hair that needs to be removed and make it penetrate into the eyelid quickly until you pull out that one from above the natural hair."
"And then pull out the hair and insert this one in its place; and let there be one, two or three hairs at most, not more."
"And next pull your hand away from that until the hair is completely pulled out with its root in the eyelid along with the natural hair."
"But if it is pulled out but not completely removed with its root, then pull gently from both sides using the thread that you have made with it until it is completely removed with its root underneath."
"And then examine the eyelid with the eye because then you will pull out that thread and knot each one and close the eyelid, leaving it like that for two or three days until the hair adheres to its place and grows over good flesh."
"And if the hair is too short, then adjust a long natural hair and raise it with that one or let it grow for some space until it grows longer, and then raise that."
Chapter XIII
"Of treating the pain that comes in the eyelid from above."
"When the eyelid suffers from pain, it is due to the contraction of the eyelid when it contracts upwards, on either side, due to poor healing of a wound or cut or burn, and this is called 'leporina', which may be natural or accidental, caused by poor healing of wounds or cuts or burns, or by resembling those who are ill."
"The manner of operating on this is to divide that contraction and separate the eyelid's lips, and place in it a wick of linen soaked in water, and tie those together until they are healed."
"And it is not necessary to use the treatments that dry and constrict because if you do that, it returns to causing pain worse than before."
"Use on that causes moistness such as fenugreek, and soak it in water with cooking salt and honey or diacylon, which is melted with some oil, and immerse the wick in it and treat with that."
"And the treasure of your treatment is to persevere with all your strength until nothing remains unhealed as at the beginning."
"And this operation that we have described is only a slight correction of eyelid inflammation that does not restore its original form."
Chapter XIV
"Of treating the pain that occurs in the outer corner of the eyelid."
"This inflammation that occurs in the outer corner of the eyelid is called 'ptosis' properly speaking. It may be due to some natural cause or other accidental causes."
"Accidental causes include wounds, cuts, burns, and similar afflictions."
"The method of operating on this is to take a needle with double thread and insert it into the flesh, passing from the left lacrimal duct to the right one until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh."
"And then extend the flesh upwards with the needle and cut it with the needle, and incise with a broad scalpel." "And then if the shape of the eyelid returns as it should, that is good. But if not, take the thread and place it in the cut shape, and with that turn the eyelid over and close both incisions on the outer side of the eyelid."
"And let both ends of the incisions meet at two angles of the incision that you have made, so that when they come together they form an angle with a well-shaped figure."
"And this figure is the Greek letter lambda (λ)."
"And then remove that flesh on the side where it tapers towards the outer corner of the eyelid."
"And then adjust the separated parts and sew them together with thread, and then treat them with moisturizing medicines and bandages until they are healed."
"And if inflammation occurs due to a cut or suture or burn, then it is necessary to make an incision with a scalpel over the hairs of the eyelid as described previously." "And then separate with forceps between the two lips as we have said before."
"In summary of the speech on treating inflammation when it is above or below, follow the operation according to how the inflammation is prepared, and that is in many diverse forms."
"And the wise artisan always prepares various methods for treating inflammation in every possible way to restore its natural form or close to it, according to what suits that condition and the operation and instruments used in the best conditions."
Chapter XV
"Of adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or the cornea."
"When this adhesion occurs in many people such that the eyelid is stuck above with a film of mucus and movement is difficult and natural functions are prevented, then it is necessary to insert the outer end of the thread under the eyelid and lift it up or extend it with forceps."
"And then incise the adhesion with a fine scalpel that is not too sharp to avoid hurting the eye during the operation."
"And let your incision be such that it easily removes that adhesion so that the eyelid returns to its natural shape and all the adhesion is healed."
"And then apply salt water to rinse the eye, or distilled rosewater dissolved in water."
"And then separate the eyelid from the eye with forceps and apply compresses of lanolin-soaked wool to the eye. On the third day use consolidating ointments until it is healed."
"Chapter XVI."
Of the incision of a nail and the excision of flesh from the lacrimals.
Know that a nail is of two kinds: one is nerve-like, and resembles hard cartilage; the other is non-nerve-like, resembling thickened white humor, which, when touched by iron, may be forcibly severed without the iron entering it.
And both species begin only at the larger lacrimal, which gradually decreases until it covers the sight and prevents light and its movement from passing through it.
But the manner of operating in the incision of it is that the patient should raise his head towards the ceiling, and widely open his eyes, and lift up the eyelid with your hand, and carefully take hold of the nail with forceps and extend it upwards. And then take a needle and insert it under the nail a little way with horsehair or cowhair or oxhair or similar hair, or strong thread, and fold over the tip of the needle bit by bit and insert it into the middle of the nail, and pierce it with the needle, and tie the nail with thread; and extend it upwards, and cut away with the hair the side of the nail which covers the pupil. And thus you should follow that with the hair behind it.
And then you should incise the remnant in the root of the lacrimal with a fine spatula or small forceps, and lift up the natural cartilage of the lacrimal so that by cutting into it there would be no continuous flow of tears.
And sometimes the nail with its edge extended or tied with thread, as we have said, and then it should be cut away with this kind of spoon:
"Be mindful so that with the scalpel you do not touch the corneal tunic and that it ruptures, causing the pupil to be perforated."
"Near the incision place a bit of salt or clean oil of sinapis and let it remain there for another day; then treat it with water so that it can heal."
"If the nail is not attached and you cannot insert the needle, nor is it fixed in that place, then sometimes this type of nail can be cured with medicines, and it will heal like the rest."
"If you wish to incise there, then first open the wound of the disease and take a scalpel made from lion's claw with sharpness according to this form:" "with subtlety." "And if it happens that it is rarified and congealed and sticks in that way, then distill some of your saliva into the wound with clean oil of sinapis or with rose oil or with crushed salt, and cover the wound overnight."
"And again perform the operation on it until all that belongs to it is removed, so that instead of a tumor there may be an ulcer in the wound, because sometimes when you leave it alone, the tumor will begin to heal."
"And again perform your operation on it with reason until it is healed."
"The membrane of the lachrymal gland, if it is noticed in the wound causing great harm, should be suspended with a clamp. Then cut into it there through one opening only, and do not extend the incision lest tear fluid flow out."
"And again distill rose oil and oil of sinapis into the lachrymal gland until it is healed."
"Chapter XVII."
"Of Incision of an Abscess and of That Which Is Born from Adherent Flesh in the Wound."
A lump of flesh may sometimes be born in the eyes of some individuals, and it is pressed upon and covers the pupil, or approaches or presses upon the eyelids, forcing them open from outside, appearing like a ball of ivory.
The operation in this case is that the patient places their head on the operating table; and then carefully opens the eyes of that person and collects all that flesh with suitable scissors to that end, taking it with a forceps or with tweezers; and then cuts the flesh at its beginning so that it is entirely finished with the scissors, guarding yourself from the eye not to let anything fall during your operation.
And let your incision be that with which you cut those [tissues], or use the spatula we have mentioned in the incision of the nail, or small forceps with which you collect what comes afterwards according to the form that this chapter will explain.
And when your incision is completed and all that flesh has been removed, then fill the eye with finely crushed salt or distilled into powder for rogues and similar to the medicines corrosives, and cover the eye from outside with an egg white until it is assured of cauterization.
And if there remains some cause of inflammation and the blood is not completely cauterized, and you fear cauterization apostema, then leave the eye alone and treat that apostema with what will ease it, and then repeat this operation until it is healed; and similarly do for the flesh adhered to the eye in this condition.
But you must ensure that all care of the eye is done naturally or accidentally without using iron instruments, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that member has recovered from that operation.
Chapter XVIII.
Of collection of pus in the eye.
"The veins become hardened over time, hindering their proper function; thus, it must be revealed through a longitudinal cut after several days."
"Therefore, at the outset, you must consider whether the hernia in question is strong and not due to another condition resembling a hernia. Then you should collect that hernia."
"And then you should order the patient to hold their breath and suspend those veins with an ounce or two of water according to your discretion, using a fine doubled thread like this:"
"Or gradually introduce two ounces of water into the body following this method:"
"And then those veins should be ligated with fine threads carefully and gently, wiping away the blood at each step until you see that those veins are completely detached from the hernia and turned back."
"And be careful not to tie the hernia too tightly with the spatula's edges. If your operation is performed during the middle of the day facing the sun, be particularly firm in your technique so that you only ligate those veins and do not include any others."
"And when you have completed this, then distill rose water or pomegranate juice onto the hernia chief to burn away anything remaining from the tumor with its sharpness."
"But if this is not possible for you to do all at once, then plaster the entire area with whatever relieves pain and allow it to rest for several days until the pain has ceased and there is assurance of a clean wound."
"And afterward, continue treating it according to the usual manner until it is healed."
"And this is the form of the forceps:"
"Chapter XIX."
"For the reduction of deviation of the nose."
"If you treat nasal deviation with cauterization or an irritating medicine according to the recommendation given and it does not heal, then do not incise over the abscess until it has matured, and then extract all the fluid that is inside it, opening up the bone so that it is exposed."
"And when the bone is exposed and there is corruption or blackness in the wound, then clean it with an instrument of this shape:"
"And it is called 'sharp headed', and should be made of iron, with the head round like this, pierced with holes made by a file or awl for subtle puncture."
"And press that over the corrupted part of the bone, then turn it between your fingers and press gently until you know that the corruption has been scraped away."
"And after doing this several times, then dry out the wound with drying and styptic agents."
"So if the wound is consolidated and there is healthy new flesh growing in it, and the skin has healed around it for 40 days without any recurrence of inflammation or abscess formation, then you know that it has healed."
"But if not, then it is necessary to reduce the fissure back into the shape of the nose, and this is done in the following way: first, uncover the bone with a chisel or cauterize it with an irritating medicine until the bone is exposed. Then take a drill like this:"
"The end of the iron is triangular, and its body is thin and gradually comes to a point at the end."
"And then place the drill on the bone near the lacrimal bone. Then hold your hand a little way off and turn the drill until it has penetrated all the way through the bone. You will feel pain when it hits the opposite side, at which point you should withdraw your hand."
"So then dry out the wound with styptic and drying medicines as before."
"So when the flesh has grown together and the wound is healed, then the material that used to flow outwards returns to its place in the nose, so this is a lighter form of pus."
Chapter XX
On the reduction of prominence of the brow.
When the brow projects excessively and there is no disfigurement or loss of sight resulting from it, then it is necessary to alleviate this condition by following this procedure: first, perform scarifications and cupping on the back of the neck for good suction; then apply a liniment made of aloe, myrrh, and tragacanth gum over the brow, followed by applying an emplaster made of quicklime powder.
"And the way to prepare this powder is to take some quicklime and fold each piece of cloth into four layers. Then make the powder from this."
"And then apply these powders one over another according to the amount needed for the brow's prominence." "And then apply a hard cloth with strong compression over these powders. Then perform cupping again with suction without scarification. Finally, remove the cups and leave the brow bandaged day and night."
"But if during this time the bandage becomes loose, then it must be tightened."
"And remove the bandage day and night as mentioned earlier."
"And if the brow is reduced enough, that's good. But if not, then repeat the application of the plaster with powders, compression and cupping until it is healed."
Chapter XXI
"Regarding the incision of the prominence of the uveal tunic."
"When there is disruption in the uveal tunic and it protrudes prominently like a grain of sand between the eyelids, and appears round as a man's eye due to this, and you wish to incise it, then do as follows: first insert the needle into the edge of the uvea from below upwards, then insert another needle on the side of the lacrimal gland, let the first needle penetrate and follow its position; then incise the location of the double ligament and pull with it the edge of the uvea around the needle."
"Then remove the needle and pause while placing some lint infused in egg albumen on the wound, allowing time for the thread to become moist with the blood."
"And then dress the wound with this, so that it may heal well, until the plague is healed."
"And sometimes gather all the edges with a circle of cloth around the wound's prominent elevation, and then pierce it with a subtle spatula that reaches the bottom of the wound, allowing the purulent humor to run out, and let the wound descend and heal quickly."
"And then ensure that it is healed well."
Capital XXII
Of the treatment of sciatica
This condition called sciatica is nothing but pain that runs along the leg like descending water, not the one above.
To treat this condition, have the patient sit on a prepared chair and lean their head back into your hands. Then find where the pain is coming from and stop it from spreading further down the leg. Then cover them with a blanket and let them rest in that position so they can see what you're doing.
And if it does not descend any further, know that it is water.
But if the flow of pain has not been directed downwards as previously described, then have the patient sit between your palms and take a thin spatula to press gently on the skin above the connective tissue around the junction of the conjunctiva and tunica cornea at the crown (i.e. the area indicated) until the pain is released.
Once you have released the pain, then mix honey with water or with boiled fenugreek and honey water to make a caudate mixture.
And also treat it with other causes until it is healed.
**Chapter XXII.**
About treating water descent from the head.
We have already spoken of the types of urine in division and which is convenient to perforate, indicating it according to health.
Then you should make the patient sit between your thighs on a chair and hold their head down with your hands tightly.
And then place your left hand near the eyelid of their left eye if it is the left ear where the water is, or place your right hand there if it is the right ear.
And then with your right hand take a bandage if it is the left ear, or with your left hand if it is the right ear.
And then place the end of the bandage near the crown, as thick as a ray from the ear towards the inner corner of the eye, and then gently press the bandage with your hand over it.
And then penetrate into the ear canal until you feel that the bandage has reached the eardrum.
The length of the bandage should be measured from the front to match the distance between the pupil and the end of the blackness in the ear canal, which is the crown of the ear; because you will see the pupil through the clarity of the ear drum.
And then place the bandage in the ear canal where the water is, and then quickly pull it out once or twice. If the water drains immediately afterwards, then the patient's hearing should improve immediately, and the bandage will be wet from the earwax.
And then wait a moment; if the water has drained, then place another bandage in the ear canal, but be careful not to push it too far.
And then if it does not drain, carefully remove the bandage and gently rotate it a little bit inside the ear canal to try to break up any wax. Then dissolve a small amount of table salt in some warm water and use that to rinse out the ear canal. Finally, place a cotton wool ball or piece of lanolin-infused gauze soaked in rose oil into the ear opening to help absorb any remaining moisture.
But those who are from our time, pause over that command with a sigh of relief.
And if the bandage does not enter easily due to hardness of the earwax - as is sometimes the case with men who have hard earwax - then you should use a curette called an "albired" which has this shape:
And then carefully insert the curette into that junction, and do not push your hand too far into the ear canal. And if you cannot make a way for the bandage, do not proceed further.
Then gently insert the bandage as explained earlier.
Before beginning your work, ensure that the patient is lying down comfortably on their side in a dark room where they can remain still without moving.
Ensure that the water you are using is clear and does not contain any impurities or contaminants, and do not wet the patient's hair on either side of their head.
And ensure that the bandage is well positioned according to its shape on the third day.
And then remove that bandage in the dark room and expose the patient's ear canal to fresh air. Allow them to see some light for a short time, then return the bandage to its position on the seventh day.
You should not perform this procedure during the hours of fasting or immediately after taking medication. Be sure to do this gently and carefully, as water can easily enter too quickly and forcefully into the ear canal with great regard for the patient's comfort.
But if an abscess forms, then you should remove the bandage on the seventh day and adjust it with something that will help drain the abscess.
Then uncover the ear and place a dressing over the face of the opening to direct the discharge away from the eye for several days while keeping the patient in the dark room.
And then gradually remove that bandage and explain the causes to them.
Know that even in the classroom, it is not always possible for a student to observe everything at times, and therefore you should be careful about performing this operation.
And it has come to our knowledge that some of those who are skilled in this art have said that they create a fire in the ear using a heated probe, with which they suck out the water.
But as far as we know, this method has not been seen in our land nor is it mentioned in any of the books by the ancients. Therefore, it may be a new method.
And these are some methods for performing ear syringing which can serve as guides for those who are unfamiliar with them:
And these ear syringes can be made of silver or iron, and their ends should be carefully crafted with this triangular subtlety, with the tip being sharp like this:
**Capital XXIV.**
On the treatment of flesh torn in the nose.
When various pieces of flesh grow together in the nose and some cause is assembled that resembles the sting of a scorpion or a polyp's growth; this illness is called polyps because it resembles that fish. And its flesh is cancerous, inflamed, and dark in color; but if it is not flesh of lion, then it is not of dark color.
Therefore in that which is not a fraudulent flesh of lion nor cancerous, you should make the illness cease between your palms and expose it to the sun, and rub its nose, and pluck out those pieces of flesh there. And properly extract that from the parted flesh, and properly incise what you have comprehended of those with sharp and subtle spatula, from one part until you know that all the flesh is removed; for if there remains any cause by which amputation is possible, then remove it also with one of the subtle instruments easily, so that nothing remains. But if there is an ulcer with blood or occurs an abscess, then you should stay until it is necessary; for if they are malignant abscesses, then cut and cauterize there until all the blood has been extracted and all cavities have been cleaned.
And properly let it be dressed in the nose with proper incisions of wine and water or vinegar. But if the nose is opened and moisture proceeds from it to the palate, then you should know that it is healed.
But if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you should know that within there is flesh dead in the full pus of the bones of the nose to which amputation has not reached.
Therefore you should insert filiform in there where there is some thickness, and tie it with knots, and pause between each knot the quantity of the finger or less, and remove the illness and insert one extremity of the thread into the nose with the hook or with any other cause that is possible for it.
And after this has been done, that it draw its odor through the canals of the nose, and be exhaled over its palate, for often children at school have seen it done in such manner, and it is an easy thing for whoever wishes to do it.
And properly pause the two extremities of the thread, one extremity that emerges over the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and properly apply a suture of flesh with the knots that are on the thread, and do this until you know that the flesh is joined with the knots of the thread.
And properly extract the thread, and pause in the nose with the abstraction of blood once a day, and do this for three days or more until the corrosive ointment has corrupted all that is raw of the flesh.
And properly at the end of the treatment, pause in the nose a lead canula for several days until it is healed.
But if you desire a dry cure, use this one.
And this is the form of the instrument called capipurge-maker with which oils and medicines are distilled in the nose:
Make it of silver or brass, similar to a small open lamp, like a small pan, and the mouth similarly.
And if you wish, make a closed canula like a tube, and the opening of the instrument called capipurge-maker should be flat and open; to which attach it at the back end, with which you hold it when you squeeze out the oil or whatever liquid or extractable substance you desire.
Chapter XXV
Of sneezes from the extremities of the nose.
Many times a sneeze happens at the extremities of the nose, and it is magnified and fomented in several days within which much attention should be paid to its regard.
And therefore you should insert that into the beginning of the appearance of it, and erase all of it. "And next apply a cautery or medicine that burns where it is placed."
"But if the incision is delayed until it has become magnificent [i.e., grown large], then consider whether it is hard, tough, dark in color and lacking sensation. If so, do not touch that with iron, for it is a cancerous aposteme; many times have I seen this aposteme kill its master through his great folly towards him who had made the incision."
"And if the aposteme is of a bright touch and not dark in color, and if incision is possible throughout that entire area, then evacuate the morbid matter and incise without fear, and dress the wound with something that dries and constrains until it is healed."
Chapter XXVI
"On the suture of the nose, lips, and ear when continuity has been disrupted by plague or injury."
Know that when discontinuity occurs in one of these cartilages (i.e., the nose, lips, or ear), little is gained from that operation except among certain people.
Therefore, when it happens to someone that there is some cause of discontinuity in one of those areas due to a fresh wound with its blood, then join the two lips of the wound together with suture and dress it until it is healed.
"And if the lips of discontinuity are already separated and each is free from inflammation, then you must excise each portion of its visible border until there comes forth blood." "And then join the two lips together with suture and strengthen them, and sprinkle dragon's blood powder on them and let them rest for three days or two, and place a plaster of diaphoretic powder or some other consolidating plaster over it, and leave it like that for two or three days, and then remove the plaster and replace it until the wound closes by itself, and dress it with an ointment until it is healed."
"However, the method of suturing is that you approximate the discontinuity either with needles as we have recommended for abdominal suture, or else you approximate it with thread as you know how to do."
Chapter XXVII
"On the extraction of those causes that come out between the two lips in wounds within."
Many times it happens to many people that in the wounds within their lips there are hard abscesses resembling boils of ears, some small and others larger.
Therefore, you must cut open the lips and incise each of those hardnesses from every part, and then perform abscess drainage by inserting a probe well-tressed until blood flows freely, and then wash it with vinegar and dress it with an astringent until it is healed.
Chapter XXVIII
"Regarding the incision of attached skin in the gums."
"Many times they press upon the attached gum which they call 'albulus', therefore you should suspend that one with a hook or hold it with forceps and incise that part until it bleeds."
"And for that purpose pause upon the wound with some troche of three parts or other powders, either styptic or caustic."
"And if that flesh returns, you should then incise it again and cauterize it with fire so that it will not return again."
"Chapter XXIX."
"Regarding the removal of teeth with forceps."
"When on the surface of the divided teeth and those of foreign origin, and between the attached gums there are rough, thick, hard, and sometimes black spots which appear yellow or greenish with pus running between the gum and causing the teeth to appear loose."
"And therefore you should make an incision between the two gums and place a bandage on it afterwards, and scrape those teeth where these rough spots appear, causing sand-like matter to come out from them without any cause, and this is due to their blackness and yellowness or other defects which have become altered."
"Therefore if that which is spoken in the beginning of this reason is not so, then you should repeat this reason upon those teeth on another day and a second time and a third time until it comes to the final statement which you desire."
"And know that teeth require various kinds of forceps with different shapes and forms, depending on how you prepare your operation." "And therefore the forceps with which a tooth is extracted from its socket is different from the forceps used to extract teeth in other ways, and these forms of forceps should be prepared by you, as you will see shortly:"
"Chapter XXX."
"On the extraction of teeth."
"You should first relieve the tooth of its pain with all haste and care in every extraction of it, for there is no cause why you should postpone the view of it when it is extracted, because it is a substance which becomes elevated at the time of its extraction."
"But when it is necessary to extract that tooth, you should firmly be certain what is the painful tooth, for often the pain deceives and goes from one tooth to another which is healthy, and you extract that one and yet the pain does not cease until the diseased and painful tooth is extracted, as we have seen by experience in operations of barbers."
"Therefore when you are certain what tooth is painful, and know it well, then you should scrape around the tooth with a spatula having some virtue in it until it has dissolved from the gum of all its parts, and then remove that with your fingers, or with fine forceps little by little until that is completely removed."
"And then place the strong forceps with good purchase or firm pressure on it, and hold the head of the diseased tooth between your fingers so that you may not damage it, and extract the tooth in a straight manner so that you do not break it, nor give greater pain to the diseased person."
"And therefore if it is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments and place it behind the tooth on all sides with ease and effort so that its removal may be facilitated as was done at the beginning."
"But if the tooth is decayed or eaten away, then you should fill that cavity with cloth and strengthen it with the extremity of a subtle thread so that it may not break at the time of your constriction upon it with forceps."
"And you should work carefully with scraping around all parts of the gum and beware of your strength so that you do not break it and cause further damage to it, and return upon the diseased part because of the malice which is greater than the first pain."
"And beware that you do not do what ignorant and reckless barbers do in their haste and boldness concerning the extraction of teeth, without administering what we have recommended; for often they bring great diseases upon men which are harder to cure than they were to extract, and some of them leave behind all or some of those roots, or extract that one with some bones of the jaw as we have often witnessed."
"And then after the extraction of it, let the mouth be washed with warm water or vinegar with salt."
"And if there is bleeding after that, as often happens, then take some quantity of the plant sage and sprinkle it on the wound, and if this does not stop the bleeding, cauterize."
"The shape of the forceps and subtle tweezers with which the tooth is grasped at the beginning should be of long length, short handle and thick, so that they may not bend when you use them."
"And they should be thus shaped with thick handles within which when you grasp with those forceps they may not bend, and have short extremities."
"And they should be made of wrought iron, straight at the extremities, and at the extremities of those there should be teeth into which one tooth enters between another and grasps firmly by constriction. And sometimes the extremities of those are in the shape of a bird's beak called ciconia, that is to say, broad, and they have strong constriction."
**Chapter LXXXI.**
**Of the Extraction of Teeth and the Breaking of the Bones of the Jaw That Are Locked.**
When you must extract a tooth that has become rotten and some cause remains, then you should place yourself beside the spot with caution for one day or two until the spot becomes softened; and then insert tweezers or forceps whose ends are shaped like those of a bird called a ciconia or glove.
The ends of them are made within thus like a file or rasp.
And if you do not succeed with this extraction using these forceps or forceps, then you should cut into the flesh and uncover all the roots and insert the instrument called an elevator, of which the shape is like this:
And it should have a short, thick end, and not be pointed lest it break.
Therefore if the root is not extracted by this means, then help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the shapes:
The second tool should be triangular in shape and have a very sharp point.
And then you will be helped with this tool having two prongs, of which the following is its form: "And with other instruments which are used for filing teeth; because much help is done with this instrument which resembles an awl, and this is the form:"
"The triangular extremity is bent or shortened, which should have some thickness, and not too sharp so as not to be torn."
"Moreover, the instruments used for removing teeth are similar to other instruments."
"But the skilled and subtle artist finds for himself, according to what he understands about the operation and various illnesses; because there are diseases which the ancients did not give or provide with proper instruments, due to the shapes of different species."
"But if the bone of the jaw or other bones of the mouth are broken or shattered, then it should be carefully cured with appropriate instruments and forceps which we have mentioned in the extraction of roots of teeth, and this is the gesture:"
"There is some small thickness within him, little by little, and it should be tightly held or bound with the mouth so that it does not escape until all of the bone is hollowed out. Then restore the area with appropriate medicines."
"If in the bone there is a small opening, then immediately remove that part and its darkness, and cure within until it is healed."
Chapter XXXII.
"Of the treatment of prominent teeth above the others."
When teeth protrude beyond their natural course due to deformity of shape, especially in women and particularly elderly women, it is necessary for you to consider: if one tooth is not close to another tooth and no rearrangement or splint can be made thereupon, then that tooth should be extracted. But if the tooth is attached to another tooth, then incise that tooth with this instrument of which this is the form; it resembles a pork trotter and should be made from Indian steel with an extremely sharp tip.
And let your incision be such that you cut through that tooth in three days due to the hardness of the tooth, and do not damage any other teeth.
And if it is an erupted tooth requiring reduction, then grind it down with an Indian steel file of which this is the form
And let it all be made of Indian steel and well sharpened; let it have many small pointed ends like a file with which the teeth are made into needles, with which the tooth is ground down little by little over many days with ease, so that no other tooth is damaged or injured. And finally grind it down at the end, and polish it with a soft pumice stone
And if it is a tooth whose edge is broken and irritates the tongue, then you should grind down that edge until its roughness is smoothed out and flattened so that the tongue does not rub against it and speech is not impaired.
Chapter XXXIII
Of restoring damaged teeth with gold or silver foil
When it happens that teeth are damaged by concussion and removal due to percussion or a fall, and the patient cannot chew properly despite your efforts with medications meant to promote healing, then know that those which have been strengthened with gold foil, not silver, remain strong for many days. Silver tends to tarnish and become brittle over time, whereas gold never changes.
And let the foil be of such thinness and fineness according to the amount that can fit between the teeth. The way to prepare it is to take the foil and fold it double over two healthy teeth, and then twist it in two places between the broken parts until the foil reaches the healthy part of the other tooth. And then carefully work the foil into the broken part where you started, and strengthen your hand with skill and ease so that it is not damaged.
And let your grasp be firm with which you hold the foil between the roots of the teeth so that it does not slip out.
And then cut off the excess ends of the foil with forceps or scissors, and tuck them away in each place with care, and fold them over and hide them between the healthy tooth and the broken one, so that they do not cause injury to the tongue. And then press it down tightly like this with a stone.
But if it comes loose or breaks off, strengthen it again or those with another piece of foil in the same manner at all times.
And this is the shape of the teeth and the way to prepare two healthy teeth and two broken ones, as shown in these examples:
"When a tooth returns to its original position or two, and they are placed back in their places as recommended, and they remain."
"And it is not done by anyone else but these skilled artisans."
"Sometimes it is appropriate to use cattle bone for some cause, and it is made into a form like a tooth, placed in the location where there's a tooth deficiency, and tightened as mentioned before, and remains and serves with that for a long time."
Here comes sentence number two:
"The incision of the ligament that reaches the tongue, preventing speech."
"This ligament which comes from the tongue sometimes occurs naturally or is present at birth, but it may also be acquired due to injury that has already healed."
"The operation is as follows: Have the patient lie on their back with their head elevated. Pull out the tongue and make an incision through that nerve ligament along its length where the tongue has been freed from its attachment."
"But if there is any hardness or resistance there, and this is due to scar tissue from a previous injury, then use forceps to grasp and cut through it along the length you have already incised in the ligament until the resistance is overcome."
"And be careful not to make any fissure in the front of the flesh, and do not cut too deeply or cause bleeding."
"And then rinse the wound with warm water or vinegar and gauze, and apply a bandage to keep the tongue in place each night until it has healed completely."
"But if there is bleeding, apply pressure with a wet compress of lint; but if the bleeding persists, then cauterize the area with a hot iron that is suitable for this purpose." "And then treat it with the usual remedies until it is healed."
Chapter XXXV
"On the removal of a ranula from under the tongue."
"Sometimes, an ulcer appears on the tongue resembling a small tumor and preventing it from functioning properly. This can be quite serious."
"The operation involves opening the patient's mouth facing the sun to examine the ulcer."
"If you find it black or hard and the patient feels no pain, then do not touch that area as it is cancerous."
"But if it appears white and moist, then you should use a probe to touch it gently. If it bleeds during the procedure, pause for a while until the bleeding stops, as this indicates that there is a vein present."
"And then return to your work until you have completed it. Then clean the wound with vinegar and salt water, and dress it with another dressing until it heals."
"Chapter XXXVI."
"On the removal of ulcers from the ears and those located in the throat, as well as other kinds of ulcers."
"When a swelling appears in the throat, it is often due to glands that have become inflamed. Sometimes these swellings appear externally and are called 'earlobe-like' growths. If you treat them with water as previously described and they do not heal, consider whether the ulcer is hard, black, or painless. In such cases, do not touch it with an iron."
"And if the ulcer is red and has a large root, then do not touch it with an iron because of the bleeding. Let it be until it ripens, and then you will remove it or it will break open on its own."
"But if the ulcer is white, hard, and has a thin root, then it should be incised."
"And the operation on him is that you consider, before your operation, if he has already rested the apostema of him caut with rest complete or if it is diminished with some diminution; and then make the patient sit facing the sun, and his head be in its place, and open his mouth, and the servant taking between his hands presses the tongue of him leaving with a most noble instrument, of which this is the form:"
"And it should be made of silver or of brass, and be thin like a razor."
"Then, when you press the tongue with that one and see the apostema, then cut him the head vein, now take hold of it and place it in the clamp, and pull it outwards as much as you can." "Otherwise, if any cause from the clothes, now cut into that with the aforementioned instrument of which this is the form:"
"Otherwise, if any cause from the clothes, now cut into that with the aforementioned instrument of which this is the form:" "And it is like forceps, but its extremities are curved, so that the point of each one is on the side of the other, very sharp, which should be made of iron, tempered."
"But if this instrument is not present to you, now cut that with a scalpel of which this is the form: And it should be sharp on one side, not sharp on the other."
"And after you have cut one vein, cut the other in the same manner of cutting, and then wash away the wound with water rubbed."
"But if there is a flow of blood, wash with water of decoction of oak bark or myrtle leaves and similar things that have the power to stop bleeding, until the flow of blood is stopped, and then heal it until it is healed."
"And sometimes we find other apostemas in the throat or on those two ears, and cut them according to what I have said about the cutting of two veins equally."
"And I have already treated a woman with an apostema that was born in her throat, which had a dark color and little feeling, which had closed her throat, and the woman breathed with great difficulty, and it had been prohibited to her food and drink of water, and she had already reached death if there had not been for one day or two."
"And the apostema had grown so much that it had two branches that issued through two tubes."
"Therefore I made a hole through it and stayed in one of those tubes, and pulled out that one, and threw away the greater part of it, and then I cut off that which came from the other tube, and then I opened her mouth, and pressed her tongue, and then I stayed on that apostema."
"And then you cut off a large part of it, and there was no running out of it but a little blood." "Absolutely it is the fault of that woman, and she began to drink water immediately, and also took food, therefore I did not cease to incise that abscess many times for a long time, and succeeded in removing an abscess from that place which had grown longer."
"Soon I took a scalpel and cauterized the ulcer of hers, therefore nothing else remained; and immediately she got up and did not know what God had done to her."
"Chapter .xxxvii."
"On the incision of a swelling when it is abscessed."
"When pus descends to the swelling, and it is abscessed and elongated, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is at the joint of the thigh, thick and round, then it is called a bubble."
"But when it is cured with what we have said in the division, and your cure does not help, and especially if an abscess has already been cauterized and is still remaining and becomes subtle, then it is necessary for you to incise that which is attached round; and if it is at that length, and it is sanguineous, of dark color or black, and it is not to its center, then it is necessary for you to tempt the incision of it, for there is fear about the illness."
"And when you cut it according to the manner that I have said of its whiteness and length, so that you make an end to the illness and press the tongue of it with an instrument which processes its form and immediately place the onion in the new one, and draw that downwards and incise it with one of the instruments which are mentioned in the incision of two melons."
"And it is necessary that you do not incise it except what is appropriate to the natural term without addition, for if you cut more of it, you will destroy its speech."
"And properly in the incision, use that which we have recommended in the incision of two melons, and cure it until it is healed."
"But if the illness was frightened by the incision of it, then it is necessary to use a cautery in the cauterization of it without fear, and the manner of the cautery on it is not except with sharp water, which you heat the head of the illness in its seat, and properly press the tongue of it with the instrument which we have said, and properly take of the water which we have said in the chapter of cauterization, and bring with that live cause, and pause it neither thick nor subtle, and with that fill the concavity of the instrument whose form this is:"
"Be the extremity of the concavity in which the medicine is paused like the concavity of a spoonful of wheat, and pause the instrument with the medicine on the valve, and let the illness lie on its side so that saliva or spittle of the mouth of that does not fall through the internal medicine for some reason upon the throat of it and that it descends."
"And properly place your hand on the medicine, and express that upon the uvula for the space of half an hour until you see it become darkened and quiet by the biting of the medicine."
"And if you want to, take cotton and wrap it upon the extremity of the ray, and submerge the cotton in the medicine, and insert the ray with the cotton into a cannula above until the cotton adheres in that cannula, and do this many times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the uvula, and properly leave it for three or four days until it dries up and falls."
"And if you need to repeat the medicine, then do so, and properly after cauterization cleanse it around the uvula with cotton dipped in bode, and wash that which is on its circuit of the medicine with warm water, and cure it afterwards with an embrocation, and finally with gargarisms until it is healed."
"And this kind of treatment was saved for incision with much fear."
"Sometimes the uvula is cured with something more subtle than cautery and incision, for it is cured by sublimation in this manner: take calamus, hyssop, origanum, rue, Arabic cumin, camomile, broadleaf plantain, and similar herbs of that kind, and adjust all those causes, or some of them, in an earthenware pot, and let them be submerged with sour wine, and boil; and the pot should be well covered with decent clay, and there should be in the middle of the pot a tube upon which is paused a concave instrument of iron according to this manner; it may be made of silver or iron."
"And let the extremity of it be inserted into the mouth of the illness until the vapor reaches the uvula upon the uvula until the uvula is much obscured."
"And properly repeat this many times until it is dry, and make sure that you do not perform this treatment at the beginning of an occurrence of aphthae, for it would too closely fit with the aphtha, and you should not do this, but rather declare the cure of the aphtha."
"But if this instrument is not at your present disposal, then take a reed and compose on its extremity a close of wool, so that the mouth of the illness may be covered, for the close of wool prohibits the vapor from burning the mouth."
"And this treatment is good for health."
"Chapter XXXVI."
Removal of splinters and of that which adheres in the scrotum and other causes.
Translation:
Then it is necessary that you remove what appears to be a stone in the throat, upon which your gaze falls, because by pressing the tongue with an instrument beforehand, its nature will be declared.
And that which does not appear and is hidden in the throat, it is necessary to make the patient vomit before the food has been digested in the stomach, because often the cause of obstruction is not forgotten through vomiting; or else give the patient a piece of napkin or lettuce leaf or a mouthful of dry bread; or take a piece of damp sea sponge, squeeze it well with a sieve and place that against the patient's throat, for when it reaches the place where its spines are extracted, they will then be forgotten. And you may also take an eel and beat it well with a sieve, and put it inside the table and suddenly pull it out; or else take a pot and suddenly put it in and suddenly take it out.
And if these causes are not forgotten as we have said above, then you should use an instrument of lead made in this way:
And let it be thicker than a small reed, and at its extremity there should be a hollow cavity which you can insert into the patient's throat with ease.
And let him raise his head upwards, and make sure that the instrument does not touch the patient's throat, lest it penetrate into the flesh with its point or spine, or else do this carefully with your own hand.
But nevertheless the patient should insert it himself, according to his own knowledge of the location of the cause and its surrounding area, and pull out his hand with the instrument upwards, all this according to the quantity that has been prepared beforehand until the cause is forgotten.
Chapter XXXIX
Of extracting blood attached to the throat
When a leech is attached to the throat and it cannot be removed with medicines as we have said in the chapter on treatment with medicines, then consider this: examine the patient's throat under sunlight, since you have prepared an instrument made of bone which we have recommended for you.
Then if you see the leech, remove it with a small hook or with gentle tweezers, carefully.
And if it is not possible for you to remove it with that, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the patient's throat, and place a hot iron pin inside the cavity of the cannula, and do this several times (until the leech is dead and removed from the throat), and abstain from giving the patient any water for the rest of the day.
And then take a vein full of water that has been heated and press it on the patient's mouth, and wash his mouth with it; and do not swallow any of this water, but keep it in your mouth for an hour or so until the leech becomes numb from the heat.
But if it is not removed with this method that we have recommended, then fumigate the patient with sulfur or with asafoetida using the instrument that we have recommended for fumigating the uvula.
Do this, so that it may fall off.
And here is another method of operation in fumigation: take an earthen pot in which there are burning coals and cover the pot with a lid in the middle of which there is a hole, and place the extremity of the instrument in that hole; then start fumigating from above; place the patient's mouth at the extremity of the cannula, and close his mouth so that the smoke does not escape until you know that the smoke has reached the leech, for it will fall off immediately.
And if it does not fall off, then repeat the fumigation many times, and do not let the patient drink or eat salty foods or anything else, and do not give him any water until this treatment has been completed.
And this is the shape of the instrument with which one treats a leech in the throat when it is seen; and it resembles forceps as you can see, except that there may be some curvature: which is inserted into the throat and its extremity resembles the beak of an ibis, which is wide and rough like a file, so that when it grasps something, it does not let go.
Chapter XL
In this chapter is the sum of the sermon on the treatment of boils and their incision.
Boils are many species, of many kinds, according to their appearance, as they are mentioned in this book for each one.
And they are diverse in their perforation and incision methods, of which there are two kinds: one for the specific type of boils; and for what is extracted from them by humectation.
And the second method is according to the parts of the body where they occur, for a boil on the head is treated differently from one on the buttocks, and a boil on fatty tissue is different from one at a joint, and each has its own treatment method.
And moreover, there are some boils that should not be perforated but rather await their maturity or completion.
Some boils should be removed when they are hard and not allowed to reach maturity or completion, such as those near joints, for when a boil is near a joint its substance extends until it can burst, and often the ligaments or nerves of that joint are corrupted, causing contraction of that limb; or it is near a main limb, and if you delay perforating it until it is matured it may harm the main limb; or it is near the buttocks, then perforate it even if it is not yet matured; do not perforate one that is hard and incompletely digested, but rather one that is near the buttocks, so that you do not cause prolapse of its contents and elongation into the inner parts of the buttocks, resulting in a fistula. But know this: the time for perforating a boil is when it is matured.
Know that a boil is matured when there is a decrease in pain and fever, and a reduction of redness and pulsation, and the head of the boil is sharp-pointed, and other signs.
And know that perforation should be made in the location where the boil is purest and where the purulent matter comes out from the opening of the boil.
Always perform perforation along the length of the flesh or skin if boils are located in the areas of the chest or belly, and in the location of ligaments, tendons, nerves, arteries, and in any other hidden locations where reflection is not possible; for those that are reflected upon, use perforation according to that limb.
But when the boil is in fatty tissue, it is better to let perforation happen after digestion is completed according to what has been said; for if you perforate it before that time, the flesh of its opening will be prolonged and much putrid matter will come out, and often the lips of it are hardened and the depth of it is increased.
But some boils are perforated across the width of the flesh or skin due to necessity, or according to what that limb requires.
And you should perform a small perforation for smaller boils and a large, wide one for larger ones or many sections depending on the variety of sizes of the boils.
And there are other boils in which the boil should be incised with curved forceps and cut when it has begun to appear, as happens with those that occur in mumps and buboes.
"Of those that are situated in section having three angles; and of these is one in which it is inscribed thus like the figure of a mirror leaf, like the blisters of angles."
Of those where round section and crescent moon section are administered, similar to these.
But that one which is not like its superficial blisters of lions, you should pierce it with superficial or flat piercing alone.
And when the blister is large and has already collected much pus, you should pierce it and not worry about extracting all the matter at that hour; having extracted some of it, apply a poultice to the blister again the next day, and then extract a larger portion, doing this many times according to degrees until it is completely healed.
And especially if the patient is of a weak constitution, or pregnant woman, or young child, or elderly in decay, for the animal spirit many times is resolved with the exit of the pus, and quickly death may occur, so operate wisely.
Therefore guard this chapter with great caution, and especially the piercing that you perform on these blisters, taking care to cleanse the wounds and consider whether the wound of the blister is small or a flat section; then you should administer the remedies of lye or old cotton. And if the blister is large and the fissures of the piercing are many, then you should pause for some time until they heal together.
And if in the blister a portion of the skin is severed or concave at its circumference, then you should fill it with old cotton or thread made from linen cloth without moisture, just as when dressing wounds from cuts or scratches; strengthen that on the third day; and then proceed to treat it and heal it with whatever ointments are necessary until it is healed.
But if bleeding occurs during your operation, then you should administer water and vinegar mixed with linen cloth, pressing it on the location of the bleeding several times.
But if the bleeding persists, then it is necessary to administer remedies and treatment and powders which are recommended in many places throughout this book and its divisions.
But if it is wintertime and the location of the blister is a place with many nerves, then you should wrap powders in warm wine and oil and press them on those locations.
And if it is summer and the locations are fleshy, then you should press powders soaked in water and oil or wine and oil, and all of this should be done frequently until the third day, as we have said. Then you should dress the blister and cleanse it and administer to its cure whatever is appropriate for it until it is healed.
And this is what is necessary regarding the knowledge of the cure of blisters in general, but according to the way of distinction, I have already said how each type of blister should be cured individually, by chapters specifically.
Chapter XL.
Of the sectioning of blisters that occur on the neck.
On the neck of the child, small blisters appear and these are of the species of knots that contain tunics which are produced from them; and there are many species of them.
And among them are pimples, and those contain moisture resembling lime. "These are those that contain moisture resembling dust, similar to them; and those that are like stones, hard."
"And in the section of all [organs], and in the extraction of these, there is no fear, because the extraction of those does not cause great harm."
"And the operation in section of these is that you spread them apart with an instrument whose shape appears like this, which is called 'entromes,' until you know what it contains."
"For if that which it contains is moisture, then cut it open lengthwise with a superficial section according to this shape:"
"And begin at the section of line B, ending at line G. Thus, when the moisture is evacuated, then you excoriate that which contains that moisture, leaving it without any cause whatsoever, because viewed troops return if there remains in it any cause."
"And immediately submerge it in Egyptian gum, if available, and if not, in water and salt; fill it with that and leave it there for another day, because with that you will corrode all that remains of that skin."
"And then iterate over that cut with Egyptian gum second and third times if necessary, until you are confident that there remains no cause of that skin; then cure the wound with gum until it is healed."
"If an abscess contains fatty nodules, then incise it according to this shape:" "with a section having the form of a cross, and make an incision between both lips of the section and scrape it clean from all sides, and strive with all your strength to extract the tunic which contains that [abscess]."
"But if your arrow meets resistance, then do as I told you initially."
"And similarly do for the lapsed abscess in section and care according to what we have told you; and the incision on a lapsed abscess is easier, because it contains little blood and little moisture."
"And sometimes some of these abscesses are in the head of some men with whom there is no humidity at all; which is because you incise over an abscess on the head of an old woman and it appears like deaf stone, rough, white, which could not be punctured, and if someone were struck by that, they would be harmed."
"But in other accidental abscesses on the head, except this one, it is not thus, such as those that occur on the heads of children and at the roots of the ears; but the incision for these altogether should be a superficial incision."
"And pause the perforation of those with thin walls because it is lower down, so that the body may be relieved of the pain in the lower parts."
"And then cure them with what is appropriate for that particular cure."
"Chapter XLVII."
"On the incision of scrofulas that occur in the neck."
"Many times these abscesses occur on the neck, shoulders, and armpits; sometimes they also occur in other parts of the body."
"And those that occur on the neck are many and are often generated between them; and all scrofula of these is inside its own tunic, like in knots and abscesses of the head, as we have mentioned."
"And there are many types of these scrofulas, for among them some are stone-like, others contain moisture, and still others are malicious which do not yield to treatment."
"Therefore in that one which you find to have good disposition upon examination, of which the color of what is revealed is similar to the color of flesh, and it is movable on all sides, and it is not attached to any nerves of the neck, nor veins, nor artery, and it is not hard, then incise it with a superficial incision from above to below the body from line G to line B., and scrape it clean from all parts, and extend the lips of the flesh with an incision or several incisions if you have need of them, like we said for abscesses of the head, and extract it little by little."
"And it is more cautious that the vein or nerves not be incised."
"And let the spatula not be too sharp lest your hand slip during the incision and cause harm, or that you incise something which it is not necessary to incise; for if you should incise a vein or artery and hinder yourself from your operation, then pause with the powder of vitriol triturated or other powders which stop bleeding, and compress the wound, and let it rest until the sharpness of the abscess abates and the inflammation subsides and begins to heal." "When blood is let out."
"So return to your operation once the blood has ceased."
"And then inquire with the little finger if there are any other causes of the other small scrofulas; therefore incise them and clean them."
"And if it is near a large vein, then do not incise the scrofula at its root." "Then bind it with folded cloth tightly and let it remain until it falls off by itself without harm."
"And then fill the wound with old wax which you have already melted in Egyptian oil, and then dress it."
"If you incise that entire scrofula, then it is necessary for you to approximate the two lips of the wound and suture them immediately, so that there remains no surplus."
"But if you find that there remains surplus after the size of the scrofula, then it is necessary for you to extend the incision along its root and draw it out, and apply a suture and what is said."
"And those scrofulas that contain moisture, pierce them with a superficial incision here where it appears to you to be the point of maturation, and cease the incision from what is below the skin."
"And when administering an incision, be sure to cleanse it with ointment and bandages, so that what remains of the corruption is destroyed." "And also when you see that the wound is already cleansed, then dress it with a healing ointment until it is healed."
"Chapter XLIII."
"Of the incision of the head of an accidental tumor inside the gullet."
"The ancients called this section 'the epiglottis,' and we have not seen anyone in our land who has performed it."
"And this is the inscription of their speech."
"But in men who suffer from quinsey, it is advisable to avoid the extraction of the epiglottis, because by doing so there would be damage to all the veins and major arteries of the throat."
"But in those who have tumors caused by cautery in the mouth or throat or ears, when the disease is not in the canal, it is advisable to perform an incision of the epiglottis to avoid the damage that can be caused by piercing."
"Therefore when we want to do this, we should incise the epiglottis on its left side with three circles of the epilothic circles or four with a small incision across its width in that which is between two circles in quantity, so that the incision is made in the cartilage and not in the cartilage itself. This location is convenient for an incision because it is devoid of flesh and its blood vessels are remote."
"And if the physician is fearful, then it is advisable to extend the thyroid cartilage of the throat with an awl, and afterwards cut through the cartilage until it reaches the canal, but avoid damaging any blood vessels if they are visible."
"And then incise the epiglottis according to what we have recommended, and it is indicated by the swelling that occurs there due to that which has come out from the disruption and by the absence of voice."
"Let the wound remain uncovered for a short time."
Therefore, when the hour has come in which perforation is feared, apply two leaves of cabbage from the garden, and remove that alone which is the cartilage.
Then promptly administer medications to cause flesh to grow within so that it may be healed.
And Al-Bukhāris said that the main point of this lecture is to explain that veins which some of these boils have already obstructed the windpipe of the patient, and the patient has come close to death, and their breath has been cut off, and some want to incise the epiglottis so that the patient may breathe over the boil for a little while, and thus save them from death.
And therefore command to leave the boil uncovered until the evil of the illness is consumed; and the evil of it lasts for three days; and then command thus to treat the boil, and cure it until it is healed.
And this is what I have seen with my own eyes: a servant took a knife and inserted it into his throat and incised a part of the pulmonary artery, and I was called to care for him, and I heard him moaning thus as the dead moan, and I uncovered the boil and drew out the blood which had issued from the boil little by little.
And therefore I confess that he had not incised any vein or artery, and the wind issued from the boil, and I cured it until it was healed.
And do not blame the servant if he did not speak in his voice, but returned to his usual manner some days later.
And now you say that there is no fear in the section of the epiglottis.
Chapter XLIV
Chapter XLIV: On incision for an abscess that occurs in the throat externally, which is called a throat hernia.
This abscess commonly called "throat hernia" is large according to the color of the body, and is common in women.
And it occurs in two ways: either naturally or accidentally.
"And in nature it is not born to cure."
"And accidental heat comes in two ways: the first is like fat knots, and the second is like an aposteme which is made by the knotting of an artery; and there is fear in that." "And iron should not be presumed to him unless it is requested." "And then you should examine that [the node], and if you find it similar to fat knots, and it is not suspended from any of the veins, then cut it like nodes, and extract it with this: " (The rest of the sentence is incomplete.)
"Chapter XLIV."
"Of the sectioning of types of knots."
"And there are many types of knots, all of which I have already mentioned in the division."
"However, you should also explain the difference between a node and an exitura when there is doubt."
"Therefore you say that in an exitura there is heat and fever and intense pain until the ebullition of the superfluity is suppressed; and it is complete putrefaction which then causes the fever, pain, and heat to cease."
"But in a node there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains only a small amount of fluid which is in its proper place."
"It is according to the color of the body, and its beginning appears like a boil and grows thus as an empty vessel, larger or smaller, and there are two kinds: either they are fatty and contain moisture, and the colors of this moisture vary, as I have said in the division."
"So then, when you come to the treatment of a boil, examine that person and ask him about its beginning with an instrument called 'intromes,' according to what the shape will be in the chapter which follows this one."
"And it is the method of inquiring about boils and all kinds of swellings, which is to take this instrument and insert it into the moist place that you find in the boil, turning your hands little by little until you know that the instrument has entered the channel."
"And finally, draw out your hand according to the measure of the size of the boil, and then remove the intromes and observe what has come out in its place."
"And if it is forgotten moisture that comes out, of whatever color it may be, then you shall cut it with a superficial section according to what I have said about other boils."
"But if there is no moisture from the trace of the intromes, then know that it is fat."
"And dry it with a section having the shape of a cross according to this form:" "So that you may know how to do it, and suspend it with bandages, and tear out the channel from all parts easily, keeping the skin or sac, if possible, over it, and draw out that matter with the boil."
"But if it is broken during the operation and it is not possible to draw out that matter, many times you will find there, and then you shall draw it out bit by bit until nothing remains."
"For if something remains, little or much, the boil returns according to its usual manner."
"And if you see that some small part remains, then fill the wound with some sharp and strong caustic powders, cover it with a plaster for cauterizing boils, and treat it with the other treatment until it is healed."
"And if it is a large boil, then cut both lips of it and cure it with what you find there."
"But if the pulsatile vein appears on the contrary side, or non-pulsatile, then cover and dampen the place of cutting with threefold treacle that is vitriol and let it rest for two days or three until the wound clears up and the boiling of the blood calms down; and then return to cut what remains of the boil."
"Chapter XLVI."
"Of the forms of instruments necessary for sectioning and piercing."
"Of these, some are large in form, others medium-sized, and still others small."
"This is the large intestine shape:"
"The small intestine shape is this:"
"These are made of iron, of a fuller's earth, and of curved extremities, so that they can be inserted quickly into the openings."
"And these are the shapes of the instruments, and they are named albedo. One of them is called 'berid'."
"And there are three kinds of them: large, medium, and few."
"The shape of the large experiment is the form of a lyre:"
"The shape of the medium experiment, form of lyre:"
"The shape of the few experiment, form of lyre:"
"It is convenient that they are used for those openings and outlets and fistulas and buboes because among these there are those of the bones and other causes."
"And redounding ones, thick ones, lions-shaped ones, like large needles with which the sutures are sewn, and they are made of citrine brass or bronze or iron or silver. And the best ones are those made of citrine brass."
"And they are made of black lead experiments, which it is agreed that through them the fistulas should be opened in the concavity of which reflections are reflected, and they are reflected with their own weight along those reflections."
"And there are three kinds of them: some of them are long, others medium, and others short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and the stricture of its lumen."
"Shape of the large lead experiment:"
"Shape of the medium lead experiment:"
"Shape of the small lead experiment:"
"The shapes of the hooks are of many kinds, for some are simple ones with only one curvature, and there are three kinds of them: large, few, and medium."
"And they have hook-shaped ends, and there are three kinds of them."
"Among those hooks, there are some with two curvatures, and there are three kinds of them:"
"And among them, there are some with three curvatures, and there are three kinds of them."
"And all these are necessary in their place."
"Shape of small simple hook, form of lyre:"
"Shape of large hook with two curvatures:" "Shape of medium hook having two curvatures:" "Form of small hook having two curvatures:"
"Form of large hook with three curvatures:"
"Shape of medium hook with three curvatures:"
"And these are the shapes of the scalpels with which the nodes and boils are cut and scraped, and there are three kinds of them: large, medium, and small."
"Shape of large scalpel:"
"Form of medium scalpel:"
"Form of small scalpel:"
"The extremities of those with which the section is made are sharp, and the others are not-sharp, nor paused in such a manner, but so that the fear of incising a vein or nerve may be avoided in the scraping of nodes, and so that the illness may be healed and tranquility obtained by the slight burning which occurs after the excoriation of the boil."
"And these are the shapes of spatulas, and there are three kinds of them: large, medium, and small, as you see."
"They are made of iron and resemble a rod with which alcohol is made."
"And it has at its extremity a hole pierced with spatula hidden, and through that channel the parts inside and outside flow when you want them to, as you see."
"The shapes of spatulas, which are hidden among the said ones after the perforation of boils and do not cause harm, and there are three kinds of them: large, medium, and small." "And these are the forms of those:"
"The shapes of forceps with which the flow of blood is absorbed, and there are three kinds of them: large, medium, and small; forms of lyre:"
"They are made of citrus iron, round with some length, and are subtle."
"And it is necessary that these kinds of forceps be large, medium, and small for you, so that with those the flow of blood can be absorbed quickly in case of necessity, especially when medicine is not immediately available."
"However, do not use those for absorbing blood in all parts of the body, and use them only in fleshy places, such as the armpits of the arms and thighs, and the nipples and bellybutton and genitals, and similar moist fleshy areas."
"And sometimes those instruments are made of others small ones resembling little forceps according to this form: with which blood is absorbed when it is done by flebotomy or in case of incising a vein or artery."
"And sometimes they are made round according to this form:"
"Chapter .xlvii."
"Of the care of the nipples of men, which resemble those of women."
"Sometimes the nipples of some men become swollen during deep sleep when they begin to get hairy, and around them the nipples become swollen and resemble those of women with pimples."
"And to that which you see above, it is necessary to incise those with a crescent-shaped section according to this form, from line B to line G, and then scrape all the hardness, and then fill the wound with an ointment-containing dressing, and then join the two lips of the dressing with suturing, and cure it until it is healed."
"But if the nipple leans towards the sides and becomes softened by its size like those of women, then it should be cut in two on its own side with two crescent-shaped sections, each contained within the other at the end of each section, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form: from line B to line G. And then scrape the cord which is between the two lips of the dressing, remove the pus, and apply what we have said about suturing and powders as necessary in the cure until it is healed."
"And if you do not fulfill the incision of that which needs to be incised because of the agitation of the illness and the flow of blood, then it is necessary to fill the dressing with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment and leave that until it has corroded what is rough, and then cure it until it is healed."
"Chapter .xlviii."
"Of the perforation of boils that arise from the armpits."
"Those boils that arise from the armpits are of the kind called scrofulas, hard ones which contain a point that is to be extracted."
"And of those that contain moisture; and those that contain moisture should be incised with a crescent-shaped section according to this figure: from line G to line B. And when all that is in the boil has been evacuated, then fill it with cotton wool and leave it until the next day."
"And then the cotton should be removed and the boil cured with an appropriate ointment for that purpose, until it is healed."
"And if an abscess of the joints or scrofula is present, then incise it as we have said in the section on engorged scrofulas."
"If the inflammation has spread so that there is putrefaction, then apply cautery according to what we have said earlier."
"Chapter XLIX."
"Regarding the incision of abscesses that occur due to heat or phlegm."
"When the heat is broken and the cord that is on top of it becomes solid, then many times an abscess occurs. The signs by which inflammation and abscess are known to be due to artery or vein are: for when an abscess is caused by heat, it is long and adheres to the chest; and when you press the abscess with your fingers, you feel a harsh sound."
"And that which is due to a vein extends towards the belly of the body."
"And regarding this abscess, it is an error, especially in those that are situated near the axillae, around the joints, in the neck, and in many other places of the body; and if it is large, then its cauterization with iron should be avoided. And likewise, those that are on the extremities or on the head."
"Furthermore, regarding that which occurs due to inflammation of the tissues caused by heat, it should be incised along its length. Then, carefully open the incision with hooks and expose the artery, freeing it from its sheaths."
"And then place an needle on that side and insert it so that it pierces through to the other side. Then tie the artery with double thread in two places: this is useful for the extraction of two arteries which are located at the temples."
"And then pierce the spot that is between two ligatures with a spatula until all of the blood within it has been expelled, and thus the abscess will be resolved."
"And then apply a dressing that generates heat in order to keep the ligatures warm until they have fallen. And also dress it with appropriate remedies according to what is necessary until it is healed."
"And if it is an abscess due to the section of a vein, then you should hold with your hand what is possible of the abscess with the incision. Then insert the needle on that side which you have held with your hand and make it penetrate. Then tie the abscess with a double thread so that you can extract it from the other side, and then ligate the abscess with two threads according to what I have told you in the section on the grape of two parts with two extremities of the thread."
"But if you fear that the thread may break, then insert it with that needle along all of the abscess from its initial incision, and tie your threads in four places."
"And then dry the abscess in its middle part until it is completely drained. Then incise the excess of the incision, and leave what remains tied."
"And then place over it a poultice which you have moistened in wine and oil. Then apply the dressing that is made with dough and appropriate remedies until it is healed."
Chapter 1 of the abscess that occurs due to twisting of nerves
Just as an abscess can occur in an artery or vein, similarly an abscess can also occur in nerves when they are struck or due to excessive exertion.
And it most often occurs in the locations of the extensor muscles or the heel, or in any location where joints are strained.
And it is a serious abscess, resembling the color of other flesh, and it has its greatest disposition without fever. When it becomes very tense, there is a sensation of numbness, as if in a state of stupor.
And it is not an abscess that occurs on the chest, but rather outside of it, and it extends to all parts without reaching the front or back parts.
Therefore, those that occur at the joints should not be covered with iron, for this would cause severe contraction.
But one that is on the head or forehead can be opened with a scalpel. But if it is a small abscess, then you should press it with your fingers and incise it with scissors.
And if it is large, then you should suspend it with a hook, scrape it out, and remove it. Then adjust the flap with sutures, and dress it until it heals.
Chapter 2
Regarding the incision of an abscess that occurs in the belly
There are certain men who have seen in the bellies of those and other parts of their bodies, tumors that are called funguals due to their similarity with fungi. Their root is subtle but their head is large. Sometimes their lips are turned inward, and they are either small or greatly magnified.
And I have seen one, and in his belly there were two tumors resembling fungi, with no difference between them, being small and white.
And the lips of these tumors were inverted and split open, and moisture flowed from them continuously.
Therefore I incised those tumors and removed one weighing eighteen ounces and the other six ounces.
And the procedure for their incision is this: first consider whether the illness is moist, and if the color of the tumor is white, moist, and has a subtle root. Then incise it with a broad scalpel, and have cauteries ready in the fire at hand, for many times much blood flows out during the section, and if blood comes out, cauterize it.
But if the illness is pale and fearful, beware of incising with iron. Instead, take fresh lead wire and insert it into the tumor according to the manner we have described, and leave it for two days.
Then adjust at the constriction of the lead wire; continue to insert lead until the tumor is completely absorbed and falls off without being touched.
But if the tumor has a large root, then its incision can cause fear and trembling, especially one that is in the belly.
But it is possible to incise most of it and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
And dress it until the wound heals.
But beware that you do not presume to incise a tumor that is of dark color, has little sensation, and is guarded well, for it is cancerous.
And I remember this in connection with cancer.
Chapter 52
Regarding the treatment of an umbilical hernia
An umbilical hernia is caused by many things: either by fissures of the skin that is over the belly, or from the tissue or bowel protruding through other ruptures; or by blood flowing from a vein or artery, as has been mentioned before, or by constricted wind in it.
But if it is due to a fissure of the skin and protrusion of tissue, then the color of the abscess will be similar to that of the flesh, with little pain. It will appear in various places. But if it is due to a prolapse of the bowel, then its location will be as we have described above, with great variation in position. When you press on it with your fingers, it disappears but soon returns. There is much noise and pain with it, and it becomes greatly enlarged during bathing or vigorous activity.
But if it is due to moisture, then there will be little noise and it will not disappear when you press on it with your hand. It will neither be constricted nor enlarged.
"When it's due to blood, then this abscess appears blackening."
"If it's due to flesh, then the abscess is severe, large and hard, and its amount varies."
"But if it's due to wind, then touching it feels like a lion."
"And the operation is to consider now if the prominence of the navel is due to arterial blood or veinous blood or wind, then you should be prohibited from treating it, because in this case there is fear and dread as I have taught you in the chapter where I spoke about apostemes by artery and vein."
"And if the prominence of the navel is due to the bowel or tissue, then you should command the patient to lie on their back and stay stretched out. Then, mark around the entire navel with your finger and then command them to turn onto their hands and knees but still over their two hands, and then surround the navel's area marked with a broad spatula. Then extend the mass of the abscess upwards using a large hot poultice, and finally bind it around firmly with a bandage or cloth in the appropriate manner."
"And then heat the middle of the extended abscess over the bowel and insert your finger into that spot to seek out the bowel. And if you find it and hold it with your fingers, then gently extract it and push it back inside the abdomen."
"And if you have found the tissue, then take a pair of forceps and cut out its excess."
"But if it is against your artery or vein, then surround that area and return to your operation. Then take two needles and insert them into those two strong threads and insert the two needles into the circuit you have made around the abscess in a cross-shaped manner, making sure they penetrate. And then stretch the abscess in four directions over the needles."
"And if you wish, remove the needles and allow the location to close up naturally with the stretched skin falling back into place. Or cut it open when it has softened and become supple, and then dress it using whatever is appropriate for wounds until it heals."
"And if the prominence of the navel is due to fat or humidity, then you should incise the abscess as we have said and extract the blood or humidity that you find in it. Then dress it with whatever is appropriate and ensure that the location is consolidated."
Chapter .liii
Of the treatment of cancer.
"We have said, in the division of the species of crab and in what manner it is to be treated with medicines, and that its cure is hindered by iron lest it should become ulcerated; and we have spoken of a crab generated in the greater and lesser care of the treatment of it."
"The ancients said that sometimes crab is found in places where its eradication is possible, such as on the breasts or between the thighs, and they advised excising all of it, especially when it is beginning small."
"But when it is advanced and deep-seated, do not approach it, for you will not be able to heal that ulcer nor have I seen another like it."
"And the operation in that case is as follows: you should first relieve the pain and purge black bile occasionally, and then apply a poultice if there is a manifest swelling present."
"And prepare the patient for the operation, and apply a poultice in that location with caution, and prohibit cutting wounds which are not necessary; and also hollow out all parts with the chain saw with good precision so that no cause of the roots of the ulcer remains." "And let the blood flow freely, and do not remove it too lightly; express the locations and wipe off all of the thick blood with your hand or with an instrument which is at your disposal among the instruments."
"But if it causes you difficulty to remove thick blood from a vein or artery incision, then cauterize that place until the flow of blood has ceased, and then treat it with another treatment until it is healed."
"Chapter 52."
"Of the care of dropsical persons."
"We have already discussed, in the section on the classification of dropsies of water, and the signs of each type, the treatment of it with medications."
"And that which is treated with iron is only the species of dropsy alone, and it is not approached with iron to the species of catarrh nor to the species of sciatica, for this is fatal."
"And when you have treated this species of dropsy catarrh with medicines and it does not improve, then consider whether the patient has already obtained relief from their illness, or if it is another kind of dropsy, such as that which affects the lungs or intestines and similar ones. Then beware that you do not treat it with iron, for fear there is in this matter."
"But if you want to treat the disease of excessive virtue, and in it there is no other illness but dropsy alone, not childbirth nor old age, then the manner of performing the operation is that you raise the patient between your hands, and the servant presses their belly with his hand, expelling the water from its opening, and immediately takes a sharp-pointed spatula in this form:"
"It should be long with two pointed ends, like a spatula, but nevertheless it should have some shortness little by little, so that in the operation you do not go inside the bowel and harm it."
"And consider also if the generation of dropsy is from the bowels, for then you must cut along with the section through the navel by the quantity of three fingers' breadths at the openings below, on its right side over the pubic area."
"But if the generation of dropsy is due to disease of the liver, then your section should be on the left side of the navel by three fingers' breadth."
"And if the cause of it is from the spleen, then your section should be on its right side."
"And do not make your section over the side towards which you want to draw out the excess fluid, for fear that it might flow into that place."
"And immediately perforate with the instrument all the canal, and enter into that section, and raise your hand with the spatula between the canal and the siphon, and you shall draw out from it; if there is the quantity of a fingernail or even more."
"And immediately perforate the siphon within so that the spatula reaches the place desired, which is the place of water." "And then draw it out and insert an instrument with this shape:" "And it resembles a thin silver cannula; it is made of silver or iron or latten lion, at its lowest part there is a small hole, and on its sides there are three holes: two on one side and one on the other side; and its extremity is cut in the manner of a feather, like this:"
"And at its uppermost extremity there is an armilla (a small hole), because when the instrument reaches the water, then that water will immediately descend upon the instrument, so that it evacuates water into the middle ear in moderate quantity; for if you evacuate more than necessary at that hour, it may cause sudden death due to the resolution of its animal spirit or approach the fifth stage near death."
"But evacuate it according to its quantity, considering the strength of the patient, the symptoms of the disease, the virtue of the pulse and his condition."
"And then remove the instrument and retain the water which is kept by the canal that retains the hole made on the siphon which you were advised to perforate in this manner."
"And repeat the operation on another day if the patient can tolerate it, and draw out a small quantity of water; do this for several days with caution, making sure that not much water remains."
"But if you draw out too much water from the patient, then cure him with embalmment in hot sand, and rub him with a lot of salt in his bath, and expose him to the sun for a long time; and treat him with drying medicines until he is healed."
"And cauterize the stomach and spleen near where you drew out the water, according to what I have told you previously."
"Chapter Lv."
"Of the treatment of children who are born withimperforate openings for urine."
Sometimes, some children are born from their mother's womb with the head of the mixture not pierced (or drawn too tight or not in its place).
So immediately after birth, cut it open with a sharp and very fine scalpel like this:
Then sew it up with a thin lead needle and thread, and let it rest for three or four days.
And when they want to urinate, remove the bandage and then replace it.
If you don't use lead thread, it's possible that urine will not close this wound.
But the one whose bandage is drawn too tight should be treated with a lead needle, as we have said, for several days until it has widened.
But those in whom the bandage is not in its proper place should be treated by leading it back to its position. The cause of this is that some children are born with the end of the foreskin attached so that they cannot urinate properly until they lift the foreskin with their hand above the opening. This is not due to their birth, but rather because semen cannot reach the mother's womb correctly, and it is a serious illness.
The method of this operation is that the sick person should be placed on his back. Then grasp the head of the penis with your left hand and pull it out forcefully, and cut off the foreskin from the glans penis with a sharp scalpel, just like cutting a feather, taking care not to remove any skin. Thus the middle of the penis will resemble the head of the penis, and the bandage should fall into its proper place as needed.
And be careful during your operation for hemorrhoids, as many times it happens that... And stop the bleeding with whatever you use to cut it, and treat the wound until it is healed.
Chapter 56
Of the whitening of the foreskin on the glans penis, and of its roughness, blackness, and adherence to the glans penis.
This whitening often occurs on the penis and is a fleshy prominence.
"Of those, one is malignant and another is not malignant."
"And the benign one, after suspending it with a fine hook and excising that part which was tainted, place your hand over it using the Egyptian method; then cure it by applying a fine bandage until it is healed."
"And if it happens to be malignant and of dark color, you should apply a caustic remedy next to the incision and its surroundings."
"But if it happens on the foreskin of the head of the penis in an uncircumcised person, and one part of the inflammation is inside the foreskin and the other part is outside, then you should remove the inflammation that is inside at the beginning until it is consolidated; afterwards, cure the outer one, because if you cure them together with the foreskin, it may become constricted."
"And if the same happens in the genitals and on the blackened foreskin and gangrene, then you should remove all that which is already necrotic and which threatens to decay or has already decayed; then apply a plaster made with honey, which is moistened with bran of millet flour ground three times and sifted."
"And apply this plaster together with another cure until it is healed."
"But if there is a flow of blood, then apply cautery according to the following method:"
"because cautery is useful in two ways at once: it stops bleeding and prevents gangrene when it becomes corrupted."
"And if the head of the penis is eroded and completely destroyed in one hour, then you should insert a lead cannula into the meatus of the foreskin so that the urine flows through it."
"In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not occur except in one whose foreskin is intact, and over which circumcision is not required; and when adhesion occurs due to gangrene or an abscess), you should excise with a blunt spatula until the adhesions are dissolved and the head of the penis is completely freed from all parts."
"And if it is difficult to separate those parts meticulously, then you should excise with a sharp spatula some flesh from the head of the penis and foreskin, because this is why the foreskin, when thin, easily adheres lightly."
"And then separate the foreskin and the head of the penis using a thread made of silk, which has been soaked in warm water so that they do not adhere again."
"And then treat it with astringent wine until it is consolidated."
"Chapter LXVII."
"Of the purification of children and the treatment of what happens to them during circumcision."
"Circumcision is not a cure for continuity like other diseases: but since it is within our operation and willpower, and its purpose is specifically for children, it is necessary that we assign the best operation and easiest way to achieve health."
"So they say that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books, because they did not use it in their laws. But this is only because they had acquired it through experience, which is why I have found most skilled craftsmen and barbers using circumcision and purification with a razor and with torches; and they use liniment with chalk and make incisions with the nail."
"And I have already tested all these methods and did not find better purification with tweezers, liniment with chalk or purification with the nail, because many times it escapes the cord above, because the skin of the foreskin has two tunics, and the inner one remains, which is why another incision and safe pain are forced." "And in the purification that is done with a scalpel and is digital, which is used by barbers, the incision of the tip of the male member is not secure, because it often goes inside the skin."
"But in the operation with a nail, you often cause bleeding and ruin your operation." "And the skin of an infant is short by nature, and many times it appears in such a manner that it has no need for purification, as I have seen."
"But from the purification that is done with tweezers and liniment with chalk, I find it good through experience, because the tweezers are of proportional incision, because the sharpness that is above is as much as the sharpness that is below; therefore when you press your hand so proportionally with two sharpnesses, you cut according to a comparison in one time; and compression of chalk is made with a figure containing the skin of the whole foreskin, without any error."
"And the first manner of operation is that you should keep the child more comfortably if he is one of those who understands a little, so that you do not do anything except lay the chalk on his foreskin alone, and leave it there for another day."
"And therefore I advise in all this manner that is within your power to do so much as his understanding receives." "And therefore I advise you to keep the child between your arms and prepare him well, without being afraid; and hide the tweezers in your hand or behind your ear, so that the child does not see them nor anyone else of the instruments."
"And therefore put your hand on the foreskin of him and blow on the skin, and pull that which has come out and cut off the head of the foreskin, and then purify it from whatever dirt has gathered in it."
"The form of the tweezers for purification is as follows:"
"Let the outer blades be blunt and not cutting, and let the others be sharp, so that the nail does not come out, and let the length of both sharpnesses be as long as the length of two clenched fingers."
"But the error in purification is when you pull too much the intrinsic skin completely or cut off part of it with the incision."
"Therefore, you must extend that from your hand with your nail in front of the aposteme of the place and cut that according to equality."
"And if you cannot hold it with your nail, then remove it with tweezers and cut it."
"But if three days have passed and there is still something inflamed behind the foreskin, then you should leave it until the inflammation has calmed down and carefully scrape it off and cut it according to what you are prepared for."
"And guard against the head of the foreskin, because it will not be there."
"And therefore cure it with whatever ointment that consolidates the plague from the powders that we have recommended in the treatise of powders."
"And if it is cut from the skin according to measure and you follow the parts above, then there will be nothing missing."
"But also cure it with whatever we have said until it is healed."
"Chapter LVIII."
"On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder."
"Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obesity or by stone, or by dropsy or by coldness, and it is similar to those that we have said about the methods of treatment in the division."
"And if it is not dissolved even with what we have said here, then the cause of the disease is violent, so that evacuation is necessary using an instrument called a syringe, which has this shape: it should be made of silver and polished like a reed quill, as thin as a feather's tip, about the length of a palm and a half, with a thin tube at its end."
"And the manner of irrigation of urine through that is as follows: take the doubled thread and tie it at its end with good binding; and insert the ends of the thread into the part behind the syringe, and cut off any excess thread with scissors, but then insert the thread into the tube with violence And appropriately you join the syringe with a border and albumen of a hen egg."
"And then make the patient lie on their side, insert the syringe into the bladder and the catheter with olive oil, oil of juniper berries, and warm water."
"And then carefully insert the syringe into the catheter until it reaches its root; and appropriately bend the catheter upwards at the point of the navel; and appropriately push the syringe through that; and appropriately push that until it reaches the bladder, and then centa the disease is reached to the empty cause, but if not done in this order, then do it according to the twisted path."
"And then gradually extend the thread with the catheter little by little, because urine sticks to the thread."
"And then remove that and make urine pass for cure, and use a syringe, do not cease doing this until the bladder is evacuated and the disease has been alleviated."
Chapter LIX.
Of the quality of irrigation of the bladder with chamomile and similar instruments which are suitable for that purpose.
When there is ulceration or an abscess in the bladder, or blood clots in it, or it is obstructed by stones, and you want to instill waters and medicines into it, then it should be done with an instrument called a chamomile, which has this shape:
but at its end it is blunt, so it is closed." And in that there are three tubes: two of one part, like this ☹.
At the beginning there is a concave place, in which water is pushed in, and it should be according to the quantity that it can hold, without addition, until when some cause is drawn from the humidities by it, it may be drawn out, and when it is expelled, with that it may be drawn out, and when it is expelled for a long time, as chamomile does in naval battles."
Therefore when you want to instill humidity into the bladder, insert the end of the chamomile into the humidity, and push water with that which is pushed up into the tubes above, because the humidity is drawn into the concavity of the chamomile."
And then insert the end of the chamomile into the catheter as we have recommended in the syringe; and then push the humidity with that which you push, because that humidity will reach the bladder quickly, and the disease will be relieved."
Shape of the fine irrigation instrument with which the bladder is irrigated, and this is its shape:
A silver or brass instrument should be made, whose tip resembles a small feather, which is then inserted into the wound.
Then take a bladder, place inside it the moisture you wish to crystallize in the bladder, and tie it firmly with two strong cords around its neck. Then heat that moisture over a fire.
And then insert the tip of the crystal into the penis
Then press your hand over the bladder with the stretched skin, making sure that patient feels that you are pressing on the bladder.
But if you cannot find the bladder, then take a piece of parchment and make it into a circle; pierce that through its entire thickness; then insert fine thread through those holes, so that it may be rotated. Then attach the circle as it is attached to the funnel, because you place in that one what you want from the humidities, oils, and waters.
And then tie that onto the instrument and do it as you did with the bladder, pressing your hand on it until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter LX
Of the Extraction of a Bladder Stone
We have already discussed in the division of species the types of stones and their treatment with medicines, and the difference between stones generated in the kidneys and those generated in the bladder, and their signs.
And we have said that in some operations on stone, hand manipulation or incision is required.
And the stone generated in the bladder properly is that which remains in the bladder.
And thus we explain this with clear and concise exposition.
Therefore it is said that stones generated in the bladder mostly affect children. And among its signs are that urine which exits from the bladder resembles water in its fineness and appears cloudy; the pain feels like a sting, and many times it prevents urination, and at other times it flows freely; and with that there is often straining of the anus.
And it would be easier to cure children of this condition while they are still young, before they reach fourteen years of age; but it is difficult to treat in the elderly. But among the young, it is midway between these two extremes.
And of that person in whom the stone is large and its removal will be easier; but if it is small, it is difficult to treat.
Therefore, when we approach the treatment of this condition, it is first necessary to alleviate the pain using a catheter that extracts all the sediment that lies in its channels. For sometimes these channels prevent the expulsion of the stone during its investigation.
And then place the patient on his back and have him lie down quietly, lifting his hips with pillows so that the stone descends to the neck of the bladder or near it.
And then prepare the catheter that you have selected and place it near the things necessary for this procedure, so that the bladder may be entirely filled declining towards its sides.
And then wait until it is full and empty it completely.
Therefore, if you feel the stone in its place, then promptly make an incision above it.
And if you do not feel it with your touch, then apply olive oil to your index finger and insert it into the anus of the child or middle finger in that of a full-grown person. And wait for the stone to lie near your finger. Then gradually bring it towards the neck of the bladder.
Then press on it with your finger and expel it through the sides outside where you have made the incision.
Then command the assistant to press on the bladder with his hand; and command another assistant to extend the thighs upwards with his right hand, while with his left hand he presses down on the cord that lies beneath them near the place where the incision is being made.
And then introduce a spatula made according to this design: "Make the incision between the patient's buttocks and genitals, not in the middle, leaning towards the left side; let the cut be on that stone (kidney) and your hand be in the anus, and make a transverse cut, so that the outside of the cut is wide and inside is narrow according to the amount the stone can possibly allow, no more, for otherwise you will crush the testicle which is behind the stone where the cut should be made."
"You must know that some stones have an acute angle or margin, which makes their extraction difficult because of this."
"That stone is like a glans (penis head), round and easily extracted."
"Therefore if it has acute angles or margins, adjust it in the slit."
"And if it is not easily extracted, then you must press down upon it gently and decently with your finger whose tip should be like a chisel with which you press down on the stone, without sliding off of it; or else you may insert one of those thin curved instruments into it."
"But if you cannot press down upon it, then widen the incision a bit; and if you see blood flowing out, cauterize that with burnt vitriol."
"But if there are more than one stone, then at the beginning you should insert your hand into the mouth of the bladder and cut open upon it; and similarly push a little further onto it; and similarly proceed if there are many more stones."
"And if it is a very large stone, then ignorance would be to cut into it with a wide incision, for it happens to the sick one of two causes: either it remains there or else it becomes dissolved by the continuous distillation of urine, because that place is not entirely consolidated."
"But if you administer expulsion from within to push it outwards, or else use forceps within the fracture to extract that in pieces."
"So once you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with poultices of aloe and dragon's blood, and cauterize it." "And apply over that dressing soaked in olive oil and wine, or in rose oil and clean water, so that the wound may heal without inflammation."
"And similarly let the patient lie on his back for three days, and do not remove the ligature until the third day."
"And when it is removed, wash the place with warm water and much oil; and then treat it with delicate ointments and with ointment of diaphoretic powder until it is healed."
"But if inflammation and corrosion occur in the wound, becoming hard and eating away like if blood were frozen inside the bladder, and because of this urine is prohibited (and this is recognized by the exit of blood with urine), then therefore insert your little finger into the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains it provokes irritation of the bladder and its putrefaction."
"And then wash the wound with vinegar, water and salt, and apply whatever ointment is appropriate for this type of cure until it is healed."
"And be sure during all the time of the treatment to keep both sides warm and to apply the medications that are placed on the location."
"And if the stone is small and is in the middle of the urethra, and it cannot pass urine, then treat it with what I have recommended before to reach a section, for many times this cure has been accused of causing a section; and therefore take a filet of iron made like this:
"of triangular shape at the end, sharp, placed in wood."
"And then take some flaxseed, and tie it with that around the urethra below the stone so that it does not return to the bladder."
"And then insert the iron into the urethra, perforating with ease until the filet reaches that stone." "Revolve the drill gently in that small stone with your hand, and continue drilling until you have pierced through it on one side so that urine may be expelled."
"Then press your hand over what has been broken off from the stone at its exit point outside the tube, because that is constricted and forgotten with urine, and the patient is healed."
"If this treatment does not suit you for any reason which prevents it from being done, then insert a catheter into the stone and another on top of the stone." "Then cut the stone in that tube between two ligatures." "Then extract it." "And then untie the ligature and change the blood-soaked cloth, which is located in the wound."
"And it is not necessary to use a catheter in the stone unless to prevent it from returning to the bladder. The other ligature on top is only used until the exit of the stone, because when that ligature is untied, the tube returns to its place and closes the wound."
"And that is why it is necessary when you have inserted the catheter above, to elevate the tube at its exit points so that it may return completely and close the wound as we have said."
"Chapter LXI."
"On the Extraction of Stones from Women."
"Stones are rarely produced in women."
"But if a stone is found in one of those, its treatment is difficult and prohibited by many reasons."
"One reason for this is because women are ashamed to show their private parts."
"And the second reason is that it's difficult to find a woman who knows how to examine herself and report to her doctor whether she's a virgin or has been married."
"The third reason is because there are few women skilled in this art, particularly the operation of lithotomy with a knife."
"And the fourth reason is that the location of the incision for a stone in women is far from the location of the stone itself, requiring an extensive incision which can cause fear."
"But if necessity requires it, then you must take a midwife who is well-skilled and not easily embarrassed."
"But if you are unable to find such a midwife, then look for an experienced and skillful doctor who can present himself discreetly, or bring in a respectable woman knowledgeable about women's matters, or a woman who has some experience in this art."
"So bring her in and command her to do everything that you order, starting with the examination of the stone. First, she should examine whether the woman is a virgin, for which she must insert her finger into the vagina and feel for the stone."
"So if she finds it, have her withdraw her finger, and then command her to make an incision over that spot."
"But if she is not a virgin, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the vagina of the patient and examine for the stone, placing her left hand on the bladder and pressing firmly with good compression."
"So if she finds it, then gradually move her finger from the opening of the bladder to the sides with great caution and strength until you reach the root of the matter."
"And then make the incision over that position of the opening of the vagina where you feel the stone stuck on either side of it, keeping your finger close to the stone without removing it."
"And make the incision small at first. Then insert the hook into that incision and feel for the stone. If you find it, adjust the incision according to its size so that you know how much of the stone will be expelled from there."
"And note that stones have many shapes: some are small and large, round and jagged, long and round, or branching."
"So you should know what type of stone it is based on what you feel about its shape."
"And if you see blood flowing, adjust the location of the incision with a cauterizing iron and leave it for an hour until the bleeding stops. Then return to your operation until the stone is expelled."
"And make sure you have prepared all the instruments mentioned in the extraction of stones in men, so that you may be assisted by them during your operation."
"And if you see blood flowing and know that it is coming from the incision in the artery, then place powder on the location and apply pressure with a tightly-wrapped cloth and strict compression. Do not repeat this action, and leave the stone alone without extracting it, for it will cause great harm to the patient." "And then dress the wound."
"So when the bleeding has ceased some days later and the location has healed, then return to your operation until the stone is expelled."
Chapter LXIII.
Of incision for incarcerated hernia.
A strangulated hernia is nothing but an aggregation of moisture in the white membrane which is left behind by the descent of the intestines containing the hernial sac, and it is called a "white membrane."
And sometimes it is in the proper integument which nature has prepared in the area of the hernial sac, where it was once another hernia; and this is the cord of the intestine between the white membrane which we have mentioned, but this is nothing but fat.
The cause of this hernia is weakness of the intestines, which occurs when this matter flows out from them, and sometimes it happens due to a blow received on the abdomen.
And this moisture has many colors: it may be yellowish or reddish, red, blackish, or a milky white color. This last is the most common.
And the signs by which it is known where this aggregation of water is located are these: if it is in the white membrane which we have mentioned, then the abscess will be round and slightly elongated like an egg shape, and the intestine will appear because the moisture contains it on all sides.
And if the moisture is in the proper integument, then the abscess will be round with a depression like an egg, and because of this it is believed to be another hernia.
And if the moisture is between the cord of the intestine and the white membrane, then the patient will complain of pain.
And if you want to know the color of the moisture, then express the color of the moisture in the abscess with an incision made beforehand; and according to what is expressed in the tracks of the incision, judge what is beneath it.
Therefore, when we come to the treatment of this with an iron, it is necessary that we order the patient to lie on his back if possible, and let him raise his body up.
And then have him lie on his back over some high cause or a little above it, placing many blankets beneath him.
And then sit on the left side of the patient and order the assistant to stand on his right side. The assistant should extend his arm towards one or both sides of the cord of the intestines and the navel area of the abdomen.
And then take a broad spatula and cut the cord of the intestines lengthwise in the middle, close to the pubis.
And make the incision with great care along this line, far enough from the skin of the intestines so that it reaches the white membrane enclosing them.
And excise that, and observe, and take care not to incise it; and the excision you make should be done gently so that nothing is suspended with the egg membrane, and explore as much as possible with the excision according to its quantity.
"Then pierce the bladder full of water with a wide perforation, and remove all the water."
"Then separate between two lips of the section with forceps and stretch the bladder at its sides; and do not touch the cord that encompasses the genitals, and cut open the bladder in that manner that is possible for you." "And cut it open with its entirety or in pieces and especially its thin side, for if you do not carefully examine the incision of it, there is not much certainty that the water will not return."
"Moreover if you proceed that way from outside its cord during the time of your operation, then when you have completed the section of the bladder, water will return inside it, and therefore adjust the two lips of the cord of the genitals with suture, and then take care of it as you would other wounds until it is healed."
"And if you find the bladder corrupted by another illness, then you must tie the vessels that are close to it and remove the bladder, and then take care of it with what we have said."
"But if water is accumulated in two separate places at the same time, then you should know that there are two hernias. Therefore cut open that part according to what you have done with the other hernia equally; and if it appears to be an operation, then perform it."
"And also you should clean the blood, and then put into the incisions wool immersed in oil or rose oil; and pause outside with other wool which you have immersed in wine and oil, and expand that over the genitals and navel of the belly; and put upon it doubled cloths and powders, and bind those over with linen according to this form:"
"And also two cloths should be taken and filled with wool carded in this manner; and their ends should be made with cotton or wet wool, and they should be tightened with a strap to the breeches of the breeches, and one of the ends should take from the buttock within the two, and the second should take at the parting of the thigh, and two other ends should go over the left and right knees, and two other ends over the ankles, and all the straps should be adjusted in the breeches of the breeches."
"And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with caustic instead of sectioning it with iron; and you should take a subtle cautery knife and cut into the cord of the genitals with it, and ignite it according to what we have recommended until the white cicatrix containing water is revealed, and then you should take caustic in this form:" "And it resembles the Greek letter Gamma."
"And also perforate that cicatrix with it, and ignite until all the moisture has been expelled."
"And also stretch the cicatrix with forceps and scrape it with forceps and scrape it with an ignited subtle cautery; and cut into that according to what is possible for you until you have removed all of it, and guard yourself from hot water so that fire does not touch it."
"And know that this operation is safer and farther from bleeding than an operation by section."
"But if you encounter an aposteme during the time of sectioning or cauterizing, or bleeding, then you should take care for what is causing it to you according to the cure that is appropriate for it, as has been said."
"But if the patient is afraid and does not await a second operation due to its horror, then perform perforation according to what you recommend for it; and this is when you are certain, by that which we have said about meanings, that that hernia is watery."
"Therefore you should make the patient sit on some elevated cushion, and then perforate the aposteme at its lowest part with a broad spatula, and continue the perforation along the length of the body."
"And let the aperture be wide until all the water has flowed out."
"And also pause upon that place and close it with cotton and leave it there, so that the remaining water may flow out." "And then treat it until the wound is healed."
"But if there is difficulty in the outflow of water at that time, then perforate it: and this happens only because the white panniculus in the opening of the wound causes difficulty and hinders the exit of water. Therefore you should put into the wound a needle or instrument with which water can be drawn out from dropsies, the form of which is described above; or adjust to the opening of the wound a small tube."
"And know that the water returns and increases again about six months or around those times. And when it has increased, then perforate according to that same method, for the patient will thus pass their days."
"Chapter LXIII."
"Of sectioning a fatty hernia and its cure."
"I know that in this section about hernias, there is great danger of losing the patient due to complications in major cases. For this reason, it is my opinion that he should be dismissed and saved by another means."
"Do you remember the operation we performed on that one and the specifics of the abscesses?"
"Therefore, I say that abscesses are born in the bodies of those who are pregnant and this happens for many causes: either by acute acid surplus, which is poured into the genitals, or by percussion."
"And the color of the abscess follows the color of the body, and it is not found in the pain, and it is a serious abscess."
"And a large white abscess is one that has been calcified, whose color is dark, and it is not felt internally."
"And sometimes this happens due to the nodulation of the arteries, and by inflammation of those vessels as already perceived in its recall, or by inflammation of veins."
"But what happens due to the inflammation of arteries is known by the dispersion of the abscess when you press it with your fingers, and it does not need to be touched."
"But what happens due to inflammation of a vein is not dispersed by pressing it with the fingers."
"And it is possible that an incision may have been made on this type of flesh and on other kinds of flesh; and it is done by inserting the knife into the genitals, and extending the hand up to its parts, extracting the white abscess, releasing the suspensory ligament of the vessels, tying them, and cutting the suspensory ligament so that you release it from all attachment of the parts of the testicles."
"Therefore, if the testicle is already attached to those flesh adhesions, then it is necessary for you to extract the testicle and cut away that adhesion."
"And if there is an adhesion within some cause of the abscess, or between what is between the vessels, then it is necessary for you to release all that adhesion and cut it away with a rounded incision."
"But if there is a growth of flesh in the place where that adhesion is located behind it, then it is necessary for you to cut away all of that and extract the testicle as we have said."
"Therefore, once your operation is complete, then fill the wound with lanolin infused in rose oil and wine; and soon afterwards cure it with another cure until it is healed."
Chapter 64.
Of the treatment of hernias that are caused by wind.
Wind hernia is an abscess wrapped in some wrapping similar to a bubble with softening of the testicles, and it makes difficult physical exercise and walking on the sick person.
And in the treatment of this illness, fear is the cause that precedes memory.
"However, what we call operation in that according to what they did first."
"I say that you should place the patient on an elevated chair; and appropriately, expose the suspensiony ligaments of the testicles at their roots; and also grasp the spermatic cord with your fingers as it exits from the scrotum; and hold those other helpers who are with you, and extend them with great force."
"And now, incise with a sharp scalpel along the scrotum transversely on the right side of where the vessels are visible."
"And then carefully cut away all the skin in this manner as we have said for extraction of the hernia, which is on the temples."
"And then take a needle with doubled thread, and insert it at the first location where you noticed the opening, and insert it again at the last of those locations." "And then incise that in the middle location with a straight cut along the length of the body, and extract what has accumulated from the fetid and corrupted humors."
"And then heal the wound with the same care as for other wounds, so that the vessels which you did not tie off do not cause any harm."
"But if you find that all the vessels are tied off, then it is necessary to either extract the testicles or tie them off with the vessels, so that they are deprived of all nourishment due to the incision of the vessels. And then they should be removed, so that there is no harm from them."
Chapter LXV
**On the Treatment of Intestinal Hernia.**
"Hernias occur due to a rupture that happens in the ciphac [ possibly referring to the diaphragm], stretched out over the abdomen on the side of the navel, causing some intestines to protrude through that opening."
"This rupture occurs either in the diaphragm or as a result of an incision made there. It can happen due to various causes such as percussion (blow), sneezing, coughing, heavy lifting, or severe exertion."
"And when it's due to an extension of the diaphragm, it happens gradually over time and not suddenly. It also tends to form an abscess between the chest and the abdomen because the diaphragm presses on the intestines."
"And when it's due to a rupture of the diaphragm, sharp sudden pain occurs initially. An abscess forms on either side of the spine near the chest wall, caused by the contents of the intestines herniating through the hole in the diaphragm."
"Sometimes, a portion of the intestine gets stuck outside the abdominal wall, and this type of hernia is called an 'incarcerated' or 'strangulated' hernia."
"Sometimes it causes bloating and discomfort, sometimes the intestines slip back into the abdomen through the opening in the diaphragm, where they can become trapped, causing significant pain, especially when pressed."
"And in the treatment of these conditions with iron, care must be taken to avoid damaging or cauterizing the tissues there."
"The manner of operating on this condition is as follows: first, the patient should be made to reduce their abdomen by pressing inward with both hands at the sides of their convexity. Then, place your hand on their chest and elevate their arms upwards."
"Then, grasp the spermatic cord where it passes over the pubis, and incise it throughout its length. Then, use forceps to hold open the two lips of the incision as needed."
"And if the incision is made long enough, then that portion of the hernia can be pushed back through it."
"Then, carefully excise any sac surrounding the herniated portions of the intestines until the white, glistening peritoneum of each side is exposed."
"Then, insert your finger between the white peritoneum and the hernial sac which is behind the testicle, carefully separating them from each other."
"Then, grasp the spermatic cord at its external portion with your left hand, and extend the white peritoneum upwards with your right hand, elevating the hernia along with it through the incision. Then, command the assistant to extend the hernia further upwards, while you dissolve any adhesions present behind using saline solution."
"And then check with your fingers that there is no bowel wrapped around in the white peritoneum." "But if you find any cause, then immediately reduce it back into the abdomen."
"Then, make an incision below the spermatic cord to allow for the free flow of blood and pus, as we have previously recommended."
"Then, apply lanolin soaked in oil to the wound and dress it; also apply the ligature that we have recommended (and occasionally cauterize the white peritoneum around the incision to prevent bleeding, as often happens). Then, leave the ligature in place to fall on its own."
"But if there is excessive bleeding, then hot water should be poured onto it and pressure applied until the bleeding stops as we have said."
"And then treat the wound with the usual care for wounds until it heals."
"Chapter 66."
"Of Ventous Hernia."
"In this hernia, there does not appear to be one that has been burned during its treatment with iron."
"And the first [servant] said that it was done as we had recommended in the hernia which is with pus: that you lie the vessels close to the section over that with facility of it; and close in the middle place around the aposteme with water that works that, until the vessels fall."
"And cure the wound as we have said until it is healed."
"Chapter 67."
"Of the dissection that is done in hernias."
"Sometimes there happens rupture in hernias as we have said, and it becomes inflamed."
"And they do not give the cause of the bowels to the physician; and if they do give [it], that is little; and it returns again in all hours."
"But if the time is prolonged with that, there is made an adjusted fissure in the scrotum until the bowel goes into the scrotum; and this happens because of the extension of the scrotum which is in the hernia as we have said, which causes the scrotum to be stretched out, and around it becomes softened and the place becomes apostematized and inflamed."
"And the cure of that is with cauterization as has been preceded by its narration."
"And sometimes it is cured with iron according to this manner: and that is that the patient lies on his back between two tables, and around the place of rupture of inflamed apostemes, it is dried by section across according to three fingers."
"And then strengthen the scrotum white which is under the cord until it becomes visible."
"And then take a rake and press that upon the prominent place of the scrotum, and press that on the front of the abdomen."
"And then cut the two prominent places over the extremity of the scrotum's rake, and join them together with a suture one to the other."
"And then extract the extremity of the rake, and do not put back the scrotum entirely, nor extend the wound, nor any other cause as you wish to know in the cure of intestinal hernia."
"And then cure that with the cure of wounds, and when you incise the skin, clean it and restore the wound until it is consolidated; for the scrotum is contracted and the prominence of rupture is not adjusted."
"And cauterization is better in this place, for it is closer to health."
"Chapter 68."
"Regarding the softening of the spermatic cord."
Frequently in some men, the spermatic cord becomes softened because the flesh that is between it becomes softened, and this can be felt through touch.
Therefore, it is necessary for the person treating him to make the patient lie on his back and cut away all the softened spermatic cord that is over the natural one; and then approximate both lips with a suture.
And if you wish, at the beginning, remove the excess softened spermatic cord with three or four stitches and close it tightly with a suture.
Then, cut between the sutures; and then treat for other wounds until it is healed and the stitches fall out.
"Chapter 69."
"Regarding castration."
Know that castration is forbidden by our law, but it is necessary to mention this in this book for two reasons: the first being that it falls within the knowledge of the physician when he is consulted about it, so that he may know how to treat him who suffers from it; and the second reason is that often we have had need of castration of other beasts for our own benefit because of those animals, such as horses, goats, pigs, and similar beasts.
And therefore I say that castration is performed in two ways: either by crushing or by cutting through the division [of the spermatic cord].
But in that which is done by crushing, the procedure is as follows: make the beast lie down on its back with its hindquarters immersed in water until the genitals are softened and limp and hanging down. And then take them with your hand so that they may be resolved and not appear detached from their touching [i.e., without pulling too hard].
But in castration performed by cutting and dividing, you should hold the beast down and press the spermatic cord of its testes with your left hand.
And then ligate the suspensiony ligament, and cut above each one with a single section so that two pieces result.
And then cut off those which you have castrated. Do not leave any cause on those of the scrotum, but remove the delicate scrotum which is over the testicles.
And this manner of castration is better done by crushing because crushing leaves no cause of the testes so that the beast desires copulation.
And then dress the wound so that it may heal properly.
Chapter LXX
On the treatment of hermaphroditism
Hermaphroditism in men occurs in two ways: one is when something appears that fills the space of the spermatic cord between two testes, resembling a vulva in form in which there are no testes.
And sometimes from it urine flows which is in the spermatic cord of the testes.
But in women there is only one kind: it is that the vulva above the pubis appears like two testes of a man, somewhat diminished at its opening just as in men's pudenda and two testes.
And the treatment is of three kinds for men and one kind for women. And it is necessary that you cut away those adhered tissues so that the emission of fluid from that may cease, and then dress them with treatment for other wounds.
And in the second kind of men's hermaphroditism where urine flows from what is in the spermatic cord of the testes, there is neither treatment nor operation for it.
Chapter XXI
On lentigo and flesh raised by causes of women
A true lentigo is firmly attached to natural causes which are roughened and appears flat with regular growth, but sometimes it is enlarged in some women to the point that it becomes spread out like that in men and may interfere with copulation.
Therefore you should grasp the excess of lentigo with your hand or with a poultice and cut it off.
But do not finish cutting too deeply, especially in front of the anus, lest bleeding occur.
And then dress it with treatment for wounds so that it may heal properly.
But flesh raised is flesh that grows in the pubic region until it fills up there, and truly resembles a tail (and for this reason some first called it "tail disease"); therefore we should cut it away just as we cut off lentigo, and dress it so that it may heal properly.
Chapter LXXII
On the treatment of hemorrhoids
Hemorrhoids are when the vulva is not perforated or has a small opening. And it may be either natural or accidental.
Accidental hemorrhoids occur due to a preceding illness and are caused by either adherent flesh, delicate scrotum, or thick skin.
And they occur either in front of the pubis or on the sides of it, or above it, or below it. They prohibit copulation and conception and childbirth, and truly prohibit menstruation.
The diagnosis of hemorrhoids is made by examining the vulva: if prolapse is apparent, it should be reduced; but if not apparent, you should search for them with your fingers or with a speculum.
But if prolapse is due to delicate scrotum and it has prolapsed between the two labia majora, then cut away that scrotum.
And if it is suspended between the two labia minora, then suspend your fingers from both sides of its edges.
And let the woman lie on her back with her buttocks raised, and then spread apart the two labia majora with force so that delicate scrotum may break open and prolapse be reduced.
And then take wool soaked in oil and place it on that area, and cover it with a bandage for one day so that the wound may not be consolidated.
But if the scrotum is thick and tough, then cut it away with a broad spatula or with myrtle leaves.
But if prolapse occurs due to flesh, then suspend that with a poultice and cut it away.
And use the medicines which stop bleeding without bites, such as aloe, dragon's blood, and frankincense mixed with egg white.
And then insert a wide lead cannula so that the wound may not heal too lightly.
Hold it for several days and apply hot water compresses.
And then dress it with other wound-healing treatments until healed.
Sometimes it happens that other flesh is born from the natural vulva, and then cut it away in this manner. But if this occurs due to a hard abscess in the vulva, then do not cut the hard abscess with any iron instrument.
Chapter LXXIII
"Treatment of hemorrhoids, tail, and red buttocks that occur in the cunt of women."
"Hemorrhoids are caused by the inflammation of many veins around that area, which constantly bleed; and when these hemorrhoids are old and hardened, they become piles."
"And as you have said in the division of species and their signs, I will say which of these receive treatment and which do not."
"Therefore, I say that hemorrhoids and piles when they are in the front of the anus and not apparent to the touch, at that time there is no need for cure with iron."
"But those which are in the opening of the anus and can be felt, are those which require treatment."
"And you must put the woman in a warm bath and then extend her buttocks with forceps or rough cloth, and incise those with razors."
"And then powder should be sprinkled over them where the blood flows from one of the incisive powders without biting, such as acacia and similar things."
"And then she should lie on her stomach for an hour, and then pause that in warm water."
"And if the bleeding of blood persists, then let her be seared in a decoction of sumach and of cork oak acorns and of millet grains and of similar things."
"And then take barley flour and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a plaster with that over her back."
"And if the blood is cut off, then it is good; but if not, then let it adhere with two leeches and let the nipples be scarified without cutting."
"And then take wool and immerse it in juice of cilantro or juice of hyssop or juice of rue with repent wine, and let it adhere to the place, and also cure the place with lint until it is healed."
"And cure it until it is healed."
"Chapter seventy-four."
"Of accidental perforation of the bladder."
"Many kinds of tumors accidentally occurring in the bladder, such as cancer and tumors that ulcerate and adhere and infiltrate and fester and form fistulas that bleed and secrete pus and bile and other tumors." "And I have already spoken of these diseases and their kinds and their symptoms and the treatments for them in the division [of medicine]."
"Now I want to discuss in this treatise the cauterization that is done on the bladder when it comes to those tumors that are thought to be incurable, and if you want to know how the operation of it is performed with iron."
"So then you should consider whether the pain of the tumor at its beginning is acute with percussion and swelling and fever, and sometimes that reddening and if cats sit on it does it hurt, and therefore do not perform an operation for it until it has ripened enough so that the sharpness of the symptoms ceases."
"And then you should make the woman lie on her back with two pillows under her head; she should recline on her shoulders and adjust her weight to where the tumor is pushing out below the belly, and let her knees be spread apart, and pause her hands away from her thighs, and tie each one with a bandage convenient for water."
"And then the midwife should follow on the right side and administer the instrument with which the opening of the bladder is made, the form of which will be shown in those causes that will follow."
"And it is necessary that when you want to administer this instrument, you should place yourself at the right of the woman's groin, and only the part of the instrument that enters the bladder should be inside it, and lead the sick person." "But if the instrument is larger than the opening of the bladder, then it is necessary that you should place poultices on the tissues around the opening of the bladder so that the entry of any instrument into the opening of the bladder is prohibited."
"And it is necessary that you should place the point that runs in the instrument on the right side and above, and that the person who administers it holds the instrument and turns the point until the opening of the bladder is opened."
"And when the outlet appears, and it is touched with the hand and it is hot and moist, then it is necessary that you should dry it with a wide spatula."
"And when the urine is evacuated, then it is necessary that you should place in the wound a gauze soaked in rose oil or green oil in which there is some astringent; and press the catheter on the section in the opening of the bladder."
"And then cover the bladder with clean cotton wool soaked in water in which mallows have been boiled."
"And let it be cared for properly for two days, anointing it with that ointment convenient for this until it is healed."
"And sometimes the bladder and the wound are washed with rose water and honey, and also with water in which either red roses or long-stemmed lilies have been boiled; and then it returns to being anointed."
"And if the wound is inside the bladder and it has been wounded, then it is necessary that you should prohibit its cure with iron; having care of it with what we have said in this division."
"Chapter LXXV."
"Chapter LXXV To teach midwives how to treat women who give birth according to an unnatural figure."
"Natural childbirth is necessary for the midwife to recognize at the start through signs of it. When you see a woman pressing her thighs apart and wishing to smell the air, and she is comforted by what is upon her during labor, and she hastens the exit of the infant, then you know that this birth follows the natural figure, and the second one hangs with its mouth or suspended or pendent from the navel."
"Therefore, when you see those signs, it is necessary that the belly of it [the infant] be compressed so that the embryo descends gently, and when it has descended upon its head, then let the second one come out, and may it be cleansed of those superfluities with good cleansing."
"But that which is another than this birth is unnatural and blameworthy; for when the embryo has exited upon its feet and the body of it has come out before the head of it and its feet, and one hand of it, or one foot of it, or the head of it and one hand of it, has come out, and then the rest of it is turned over onto its neck, this resembles those figures that are blameworthy."
"Therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all of these causes, and that she guard against error and deception."
"And I have shown you the entire figure of those [birth positions], and what kind is in them so that it may be understood by this and it was placed upon this."
"When the head has exited upon its head by natural effort and it is vehement against the woman, and this birth is difficult for her and her strength has already been depleted, then let them make that plaster or whatever women have, and evaporate with hot water mixed with fenugreek seed and humid oil."
"And then let the midwife insert her hand between its buttocks, which are small and divided, and remove with that the second one or cut it with her nail within what is in her of humidity." "Then press upon the woman's belly until the child descends."
"But if it does not descend, then it is necessary for the woman to be anointed with powder of mastic and powder of fenugreek mixed with cumin."
"Then command her to be pressed, or anointed, and make her sneeze with incense; and hold her mouth and nostrils closed for one hour, because the child will soon be forgotten."
"And if both of the child's shoulders have been forgotten at the beginning, then it is necessary for you to bring them out little by little with gentleness." "But if it does not obey the insertion, then place the woman on a cushion and lift her feet up, and then strike the cushion upon the ground; and let the woman be held so that she does not fall due to the shock."
"And if the shoulders are not easily turned and the child is dead, then cut them and extract the remainder of the child or tie the cord to its hand with cloth and extract it gently, because that one will be forgotten."
"When the child emerges upon its feet, then it is necessary for you to push those down and turn the child gently, and also scrape that with your nail, and also take one of its feet and extend it little by little."
"But when it is within the thighs, then command it to be pressed and make it sneeze with incense, because it will soon be forgotten if God wills."
"And if it is not forgotten with what we have described, then return the child little by little until you place it according to its natural figure, because it will soon be forgotten with gentle emergence."
"And if it is prohibited with everything that we have described, then take mastic powder and dissolved gum, grind them together well in the mortar, and then line with that the woman's mouth and the lower part of her belly." "And then make her drink hot water until she sweats from the hypochondria."
"And when sometimes the parts of childbirth are inflamed, then make her inhale steam from myrtle and apply poultices to her." "And when she has inhaled steam for one hour, then make her sit upon a cushion, and also make her sneeze and clear her mouth, and lift her up, and press the lower part of her belly gently, because the child will soon be forgotten."
"Emergence of the child laterally while one of its shoulders is pendant." "It should be gently reduced by the hand of the midwife, but if you cannot reduce it, then raise the woman and make her walk."
"And if she cannot walk, then have her lie upon the bed and strike its buttocks with violent blows, and also administer remedies which you know and have described of mucilages."
"And if the childbirth has come, then make her sit upon a cushion, and study upon the reduction by hand, and scrape the child according to its natural figure, and make the woman sneeze and command her to press herself until it is forgotten."
"Emergence of the child upon the nape of its neck with its shoulders spread out, and its face turned towards its mother's back." "It is necessary for the midwife to have her hand on the child's head and also turn it little by little, and bring it out with ease."
"And when that is done and when it has been scraped, then place upon its head what we have described of oil and mucilages."
"And then command her to rub it little by little, and when you have done that, then make her sit upon a cushion and command her to lean towards the right side, and also command her to press herself, and make her sneeze with incense." "Emergence of the prepared fetus upon one side."
"When there is horrible emission from the mother according to this manner, consider it, and then make an incision with your nail into the second one until it is evacuated of moisture."
"And if the child is suspended upon its face and nape of the neck, then make an incision into the belly to prevent it from being retained and dying."
"And then push the child towards its parts inside until you place it according to what is necessary, and command the woman to press herself several times, and it will be forgotten with light emergence if God wills it."
"Emergence of twins or multiple fetuses." "Know that twins are often born, and sometimes three or four, but this is rare and strange, though it happens by nature's decree."
"And count those [ovaries], whether they be multiplied or not, and separate them by cyphac, distinguish each one within the ligament in the navel of each."
"And if some of them are difficult to remove at childbirth and arrive at what we have said about the unnatural shapes, then you take care of those as we have recounted."
"And if the midwife is subtle and does what she does with ease and subtlety, and slowly, and has the skill according to all shapes as it was prepared by the ingenious [person] bringing about health."
"Remembrance of that which is formed in the womb from embryos and those which are aborted."
"Some are formed in the mother's womb one by one, two by two, three by three, four by four, five by five, six by six, seven by seven, and more than ten, and it has been verified that one woman aborted six, and another gave birth to all ten, fully formed, which is a cause noted by the glorious wise men through measurement."
"And also, it belongs to the science of the midwife to know well that which is similar in this small creature, and therefore she should pause at that until she knows what it is."
"Chapter seventy-six."
"About removing the fetus when it is dead."
When you treat a dead fetus according to what we have said in the section on medicine and it has not yet emerged, and you wish to use manual operation, then consider if the woman is of sound virtue and not among those with conditions which could lead to harm upon her.
Then the woman should be placed on her left side on the bed, with her head lowered and her hips elevated.
And the assistant should hold her from both sides or tie her to the bed so that her body does not extend during the extraction of the fetus.
And then you moisten the mother's mouth with humid oil and a poultice made from marshmallow, fenugreek, and sesame seeds.
And then the midwife anoints her hand with those oils and poultices, and gently inserts it into the mother's mouth, and seeks with her hand the place where the hooks will be inserted in the fetus.
And the appropriate places for this are: then consider if the fetus is prepared to be expelled from its head and position the hooks accordingly in one of these locations: its cheeks, its neck, its mouth, its palate, below its chin, at its beard, at its collarbone, near its ribs, or below its chest.
But if the expulsion is happening from the feet of the fetus, then place the hooks on its heels or on the middle of its back.
And hold the hook with your right hand and pause its curvature in that place between the fingers of your left hand. Then gently insert your hand into the appropriate location we mentioned earlier until you reach the cause of the obstruction.
"And then place one or two additional pillows near them to support their back, ensuring they lie evenly and do not extend beyond their usual position."
"And also heat should be applied to the entire area, so that the inflammation is relieved as it would be during the eradication of the tooth."
"And also ensure that the extension is softened with water; and if any part of it is retained, then the midwife should anoint some of her fingers with oil and carefully insert them and move them about with the water that is retained."
"Therefore if the childbirth is delayed, then let the hands be changed for another who can be more useful; and do this until the entire childbirth has been completed."
"But if the hand becomes stuck before the other one, and it is not possible to reduce that by pressing on it, then a cloth should be wrapped around that; and carefully pull that out until everything has been delivered, and incise either at the joint of the hand or in the elbow."
"And likewise do this with the other hand and with both feet."
"But if the head of the child is large or there is difficulty in its delivery due to contraction of the passage, or it is stuck at the entrance of the waters, then let the space between the aforementioned spinous processes be opened and cut the head and remove the water, or else use an instrument called "alundat" to perform this operation, the form of which will come with the forms of other instruments in the chapter that follows."
"And similarly do this if the child has a large head by nature: and then it is necessary to incise with an instrument called "gemat", or use the aforementioned "alundat" in this way as we have said; and afterwards remove the bones with forceps."
"And if the head has exited but is constricted behind the pubic arch, then let it be cut until the humidity that is in the pelvis has flowed out."
"But if there are no complications and the birth is not obstructed, then you should incise the head as soon as it is possible for you."
"And if the left side of the belly is inflamed or in a state of dropsy, then it is necessary for you to pierce it until the humor that is inside it flows out."
"But if the child is above its own feet, then its attraction will be light and its direction towards the mouth of the mother will be easy."
"But if it is constricted behind the belly and the pelvis, then you should remove it with cloth that you will have wrapped around your hand, and cut the belly and pelvis until water flows from them."
"But if the other members are obstetrical and the head returns, then let the metron enter with the left hand; but if the mother's mouth is covered, then let the hand enter into the perineum of the vulva, grasp the head with it, draw it with the aforementioned entrance to the mother's mouth, and afterwards insert one or two hooks and draw it with those."
"And if the mother's mouth is obstructed by an ulcerative swelling that has occurred on her lip, then it should not be troubled with that; but at that time it is necessary to administer a purge of thick humid causes." "And apply poultices; and follow the patient with waters that soften and moisturize."
"And if the child is lying on its side, then if it is possible, turn it; and administer what we have said for a live birth."
"But if that is not possible, then let it be incised in pieces, and let it be removed."
"And you must not leave any cause inside the secondine."
"And when you have completed your entire operation, then administer what we have said about the cure of ulcerative swellings that occur in the mother."
"And if there occurs a flow of blood, then let her drink waters that are styptic and administer the other cure."
"And I have seen a woman in whose belly there was a dead child, and again afterwards pregnant over that same focus, and again the child was dead." "It happened to him that for a long time an ulcerative swelling appeared on his abdomen; and it swelled until the focus was covered, and he began to have pain in his arm."
"And I was called to cure him, and I treated him for a long time, but the plague did not consolidate."
"Then I applied over it poultices of strong attraction for some causes, and removed from him one bone, and after some days passed, I removed another bone. And I was very amazed, because there are no bones in the belly."
"And then I realized that they were the bones of the dead child."
"Therefore I cured the ulcerative swelling, removed from him many bones, the woman existed in good health, and already lived for a long time, running around without any pain in her arm."
"And I do not affirm that this is strange, but rather because in this there is science and help for the artisan physician who administers cure with his hand."
"Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to remove the child."
"Mode of treatment by which the womb is opened:"
"This is the form of stretcher on which the patient lies, at the ends of which are two handles for turning over the patient." "But this virtue ought to be more subtle than a strap, and made either of ivy or of oak wood."
"And the width of each stick should be two fingers and the margin between each one also two fingers, and the length of each is one and a half palms; and in the middle of two sticks there are two adjustments for that same stick which are already fixed, the length of which is about one and three-quarters palms, and the width of each is two fingers or a little more."
"And these two adjustments are inserted into the mouth of the womb so that it can be opened with them when you turn the two prescribed virtues."
"Another form similar to this, but more subtle and lighter:"
"It should be made of ivy or oak wood according to the shape of forceps." "But nevertheless at the end of it there are two adjustments like this, and the length of these adjustments is about one palm, and the width of each is two fingers."
"And when you want to open the womb with them, then you make the woman lie down on her back with her feet hanging down, and open what is between her thighs." "And then you open your hand with the instrument as you do with forceps to grasp according to the amount that you want of the mouth of the womb, so that it can fit where you want."
"The form of virtue which they said in ancient times:"
"The form of pushing with which the fetus is pushed:"
"The form of sideways with which the large head is contained"
"And it is similar to forceps whose teeth are at the end like this, sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form, like this, whose teeth are like the teeth of a comb with which it is inserted and contained." "The form of little sideways:"
"The form of a hook having one spine:"
"The form of a hook having two spines:"
"The form of spatula having two extremities with which the head is cut off:"
"The form of two broad spatulas:"
"All those instruments are exercised and when they are multiplied in their species and prepared by the craftsmen, it is easier to its operation and more skilled are the people because of their quantity."
"And do not make use of those instruments in any case, for the necessity of them is not excusable."
"On the extraction of the afterbirth."
"When the afterbirth is retained during childbirth, then you must command the midwife to retain her breath, and then make the woman sneeze with some condition, and stretch your hand over its mouth and nostrils, and if it comes out by this means, that's good."
"And if not, then you take a cloth and make a hole in it and place it over the mouth of the womb with these herbs burned: calamint, rue, fennel, camomile, saffron, and costus." "All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the cloth, and place it over the fire."
"And then place a reed cane in the mouth of the womb, and keep it there until the vapor comes to the cavity of the womb."
"And then make her sneeze as we have said, and the afterbirth will come out quickly expelled."
"But if this remedy remains and is not expelled, then you command the midwife to immerse her left hand in sesame oil or in althea emulsion, and then insert it into the vagina and search for the afterbirth with it. And when she has found it, then take it out little by little. But if it is attached to the lining of the womb, then insert your hand as we have recommended, and when you have found the afterbirth, extract it gradually according to rightness so that the woman does not suffer from violent traction." "It is necessary that they be changed on the right and left sides with ease."
"And if the mouth of the womb is obstructed, we have already recommended the remedy with sneezing and with medication of the cloth with herbs."
"But if it is not expelled by all the causes which we have recommended, then be careful not to weary yourself in repeated attempts at abstraction, but what comes out of it into the mouth of the womb must be placed on a cloth near the woman's genitals and then dress it with ointment and tetrafarmacon; for that will make it disappear quickly, dissolved and expelled."
"But when it has disappeared, there will be an evil odor rising to the head and stomach, and that will afflict the midwife. And then fumigations and suitable remedies should be administered."
"But some of the Ancients used fumigation with narcissus and dried figs."
"Form of an instrument with which women are fumigated during retention of menstruation and afterbirth:"
"It should be made of glass or brass."
"And the subtle extremity should be placed in the vagina and the wide one over the fire, and the fumigation should be applied to the embers of the fire."
"And keep that up until that fumigation is consumed and repeat another."
"On the treatment of the unperforated anus in childbirth."
"Many newborns have unperforated anuses which are very thin and closed." "So the midwife must perforate that with her finger; if not, then perforate it with a sharp probe, taking care not to touch the nerve."
"And then place lanolin soaked in wine and oil over it; and dress it with ointment until healed."
"But if you fear that it may close again, then place a probe cannula in the hole for several days and remove it when the child wants to defecate."
"And sometimes the anus closes due to consolidation of a phlegm or an abscess; then that consolidation should be incised and then dressed with what we have said about the treatment and lead."
"On the treatment of fistulas that form in the rectum."
"The fistulas that develop in the lower part of the rectum are large and thick, which develop near the anus outside or in the space between the two buttocks."
"And it is one fistula or many."
"And with that thickness being old and running with moist white humidity or subtle pus, and sometimes there are penetrating parts from these fistulas."
"And these penetrating parts are recognized by what comes out of them through their exit and windiness; and sometimes the disease itself shows the exit, and sometimes it is clearly evident when worms come out."
"And sometimes there are penetrating parts from those fistulas entering the bladder and the glans of the penis; and these penetrating parts enter the junction of the vulva and into the opening of the vagina."
"And that which distinguishes a penetrating fistula from one that does not penetrate is this: when you insert your finger into the anus and find no tortuosity in the fistula, then it is not penetrating."
"If it is tortuosity in that area, then insert into that subtle vein of lead or horsehair until you feel the vein or hair under your finger."
"If you do not find anything at all and there is no evidence of obstruction, inflammation or wind, as mentioned earlier, then you should know that it is not penetrable, and therefore cease treatment."
"And when the fistula is penetrable into the bladder or into the urethra, its meaning is the escape of urine from there and the prevention of it, as this location is well-established in medicine."
"But if it is penetrable into the joint of the hip or into the bone and there is pain in the region, its sign is that the vein has entered here, unless it is tortuosity within the bone, causing pain at the outset. And from this, it always results in gangrene; and no remedy helps there, nor is it established with ointment."
"And in all those penetrable fistulas there is no cure at all, and the treatment of them is the fruitless labour and folly of foolish physicians."
"But in that which is not penetrable and is not old, healing with iron is hoped for according to what you will advise, based on what I have already said."
"And it is that the disease passes between your thighs and mostly on the two sides, raising its swellings within them. The hips are inclined towards the belly of it, and it enters with a tendency to plumb or earth if there is tortuosity in the fistula, so you should know the place where the vein has entered."
"And if that one feels the disease around his buttocks, then it is necessary for you to insert your little finger into the anus."
"And if you feel the vein already entering uncovered with your little finger, unless you feel something between the little finger and that flesh or skin, then you should know for certain that it is penetrable; and therefore do not treat that one, because there is no cure for him, as we have said."
"But nevertheless some say that some men are cured."
"And of the treatment by which it is hoped to obtain benefit from it, it is that you ignite cautery subtly according to the width of the fistula, as it has been said before, and insert that burning into the fistula until it reaches around the anus; and then repeat that two or three times until you know that all those flesh joined by the fistula are burnt, which resemble the quill of a bird's feather."
"And then dress that with compresses wrapped in bandages until all those burnt flesh have cooled down, and also treat it with medicines that generate and solidify the flesh. And if it is healed, well and good; but if not, then it will never be healed by any other treatment."
"And if the vein enters but does not penetrate within the little finger which is in the anus, and between that and the vein which is veiled by skin or flesh, and sometimes the fistula runs along the surface of the thigh, then cut off the thigh from the beginning of the fistula. And you see it being cut with the vein, until the section reaches the place where the extremity of the vein has entered. And through the vein it will be freed and cured."
"And then cleanse those flesh joined by the fistula which resemble a bird's feather quill, and do not break them off for any reason."
"But if there is a flow of blood which comes between you and your operation when you are cutting those flesh, then the best thing to do is cauterize with fire or with an acute medicine, because cautery with fire has two good habits: it is the burning of those joined flesh, and the ablation of blood, exsiccation of humidity."
"And then dress it with compresses wrapped in bandages or in clean cloth until that place becomes sound. And then afterwards treat the wound with hard and solidifying medicine."
"And such medicines are those which have astringent and drying properties; when they are applied, the wound is restored and it will never be inflamed again."
"But if the fistula has already entered into the anus and is elongated along the surface of the body, then insert your little finger into the anus and search with it."
"And therefore if you feel the vein and between it and yourself there is veiled skin or flesh which prevents penetration, then it is not an operation but according to faith and hope."
"And therefore in this case there are three ways to proceed: either cauterize it as we have said; or dry it out until you achieve the concavity of it so that you can insert your finger into it and perform the proposed cure. And do not proceed with cutting because you might wound the lappet containing the anus, which would cause great suffering for the patient without his consent. And then dress it as we have said because it will heal quickly. Or else elongate that veil and clean out the pus from there near the anus as we have said, either with your finger or with another instrument of pointed extremity. And then cleanse those flesh joined by the fistula which are in the section where you can perform cauterization. And finally strive to make the restoration of all the wound with a cut, and if the upper opening is not solidified, and the fistula remains open at the partition of the anus, then it will cause further suffering." "And when the fistula is finished in this manner: it is when you insert your finger into the fistula, and on the side of the anus around the surface of the body with the thigh, then take a needle with a perforated extremity which is like the one used for preparing hearts in this form:"
"and insert it into that vein wrapped with a thread or around those veins, and then insert your finger with the thread into the fistula until you achieve the concavity of it."
"But if it is penetrating into the margin of the anus deeply, then you pull out the thread from that wound in such a way that you insert your little finger into the anus. And then extract the extremity of the thread and join both extremities together. Then cut each one separately, and leave it like that for one day or two days. And when you see that the thread has become incorporated into the flesh, then cut it carefully until those flesh which are between both extremities of the thread have fallen off."
"And then dress the wound until it is solidified and healed."
"But if the opening of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate, in whatever way you are prepared to do so, but not too deeply into the anus because you should not do this yourself lest you wound the lappet. And then dress it until it is healed."
"The form of the spatula with spines used to open the fistula is like this: its curvature is very sharp and the other edge is not sharp so that you do not wound anything unnecessarily, as it happens often."
"On the suture of hemorrhoids which bleed at the incision of those."
"There are two kinds of hemorrhoids: one is between the buttocks resembling these coals; the other is when those are like grapes." "And of those there are small and large ones; some always bleed and are one; others are many and are outside the anus at its extremities."
"But those which are outside the anus are due to little humidity, from which yellow water or a little blood with continuous discharge comes out and they appear according to the color of the body."
"The cure for this condition, which affects the heart, is to order the patient to sit up and press their chest until the heart appears." "Then you will take hold of one with your fingers or whatever you have at hand, and carefully cut where their roots are."
"However, if your fingers are not strong enough because of the humidity and softening of those parts, then you should take them with rough cloth or cotton or a piece of woolen flannel, extract them with your hands, and carefully cut where their roots are. Then sprinkle some dry powder on that incision so that it may burn those parts instead of cauterizing." "And then treat those parts with the other cure until they are healed."
"And if the wound does not close, then you should cleanse the patient with a cleansing agent that causes a small bite. Let it be washed with water from the heart until it closes gently when the patient squeezes."
"But if the hemorrhoids are outside of the anus, then their cause is slight, and it is sufficient for you to take them with your fingernail or grasp them with a small forceps and cut them. Then treat them with water as previously mentioned until they are healed."
"And for one who has had an incision made beforehand, you should administer suturing of them in this manner: Take some linen thread and wrap it around a needle. Then insert the needle into the skin at the edges above where the hemorrhoids are located. Next, make the needle penetrate into the other part of the skin at the edge below. Wrap the two ends of the linen thread around the needle in such a way that they cross each other laterally. Then tie the hemorrhoid with great tension and cut off the excess linen thread."
"And do this for all of them, leaving one alone and not tying it, so that the superfluous blood may flow out from there."
"And then apply a cloth soaked in rose oil or wax over the anus, and also apply some on the belly. Command the patient to keep quiet." "And then leave that alone until it heals. And when it has healed, treat it with an ointment or another cure so that it may be healed."
"And if those are old and not useful in that medicine, then you must remove them with the point of a spatula or your fingernail until they are wet and remove the pus on top, which prevents consolidation; and then cure them once they have consolidated."
"Then remove those with violent scraping until the first blood comes out and they are raw; then cure them once they are healed."
"Know that leprosy, the key disease, is not recognizable by any reddening of the skin like a pinhead; rather it appears throughout the body but most notably on the sides of the feet and hands, where pain often occurs."
"And then it is necessary that this be inscribed on what is in the circuit of the key and held with forceps or tweezers and removed from its root; then cure it."
"And if you wish, cauterize the second one that preceded it on its head."
"However, a wart is a small, rough, flesh-colored elevation with a round, indented surface that appears most often on the faces of children."
"And its treatment is to stretch and incise it, or scrape it off with a file or pumice stone until it bleeds." "If you wish, cauterize it with fire or an acute medicine, as we have said."
"However, a mole is a small, fatty or flesh-colored elevation with a rough surface that appears frequently on the forehead. When it is rubbed with a finger, it resembles the bite of an ant; they are found all over the body."
"And its treatment is to take a quill of an owl or vulture feather, thick and sharp, place it on the mole so that the circle of the quill contains the mole's perimeter; then rotate your hand with the quill so as to incise what is around the mole, pressing down on the skin. Then eradicate the mole from its root."
"And if you wish, do it with a cautery iron or red-hot needle in this way:"
"Make the tip of the needle thin, blunt (i.e., not perforated), and covered with something so that when you hold it, its point is smooth and easy to rotate."
"And if you wish, cauterize the mole according to what was said earlier in the chapter on cautery regarding the treatment of warts."
"On the shapes of the instruments used for cautery."
"Sometimes cautery is performed using silver or lead or molten iron or brass; and sometimes it is done with small or large instruments according to what is available. For example, the instrument used for treating young children should be small. And those whose handles are crooked or bent, their cauteries should also be small."
"The shape of a large cautery with few points:"
"The head of the cautery needle at its top should be wide like this; and it should have the same distance from where the purse is tied to where it ends."
"And the bottom end of it that is inserted into the handle should be blunt (i.e., not open) but pointed at its tip, tapering to a sharpness. And on one side there should be two holes and on the other side one hole, with the width of the holes being according to the thickness of the rays, with larger ones being smaller."
"And the purse in which bladder medicines from beasts or sheep wool are placed should have a root of one palm [approximately 7.62 cm]."
"And it should be pierced with many holes around it, so that when it is rotated, the space between the holes is equal to the thickness of your finger."
"And then insert strong, hot iron wire through the holes of the purse. After inserting it, fit the purse onto the cautery instrument and tighten it securely at the top of the cautery between two points with great force. Then cauterize using this method for each hole: But the key to cauterizing in this way is that you should fill the purse with the medicine, heated according to the tolerance level of the patient; be careful not to make it too hot or too cold."
"And then have the patient lie on their back and raise their buttocks up. Place a cloth or towel underneath them to protect them from soiling themselves. Then apply oil or egg white or fenugreek mucilage or similar substance to the tip of the cautery instrument, insert it into the anus gently, then have the assistant take the purse, squeeze it with both hands and press it vigorously until everything inside the cautery is expelled from the bowel. Then remove the cautery instrument and let the patient lower their buttocks back down."
"If the medicine forces them to evacuate strongly, have them hold it as long as they can. And if they sleep with that in place for the whole night, it will be more effective in its action."
"But if you cauterize someone for disorders of the belly with evacuation and bleeding from there, then repeat the cautery procedure until they are healed."
"And if there are hemorrhoids or bleeding fistulas in the anus, then use a small and pointed cautery, such as those used for cauterizing children."
"On treating plagues:"
"I have already mentioned in the division of plague treatments what was necessary for this book. And I will now explain how to treat them using me and medicines according to their respective requirements."
"So I say that plagues are differentiated according to the condition in which they occur, and according to the location where the plague occurs."
"And the causes why plague often occurs are as follows: such as fracture of bone, or incision with knife or spear, or cut with sword, or blow with lance, club, or arrow, or similar things from many causes."
"But the plagues that occur in different parts of the body are as follows: such as plague that occurs on the head, neck, chest, abdomen, buttocks, and similar ones on the limbs."
"And I am recounting here the treatment of some plagues because this reasoning and rule can also apply to other plagues."
"I will begin with simple head wounds, as the treatment of compound ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter."
"So I say that when a simple wound occurs on the head and it is not a fracture, then consider this: if it was caused by a blow from a stone or similar object and only the scalp has been affected, and it is a large wound and you fear that there may be an abscess forming, then immediately perform a cephalic trepanation and flebotomy on the head. Do not delay in doing this, unless there is some other reason preventing flebotomy, especially if the blood that has flowed from the wound is sparse."
"And perform the trepanation on the opposite side of the parted wound. Keep the patient from exertion and strong drink, as well as heavy food."
"But if you prohibit any cause because of the minuteness of it, then let him have only light food and avoid meat and wine."
"And pause on the wound. If an abscess forms, cut into it with roasted rose oil or wine mixed with tragacanth gum."
"If you are certain of an abscess, then place hot water over the inflammation if it is recent, mixed with its blood and air has not changed that powder which I will recommend soon."
"If the air has already changed there, then place hot water over the ulcer until it is healed."
"If the wound is large or made by a sword cut and does not have its edges aligned due to dust, then align them with stitches according to my recommendation for wound stitching."
"If the wound is already open and exposed to the bone and only has slight swelling rather than retention, then incision should be made there and appropriate care given to the wound using medicines. The flesh should also be restored appropriately in place of sutures, and the patient commanded to abstain from foods that are coarse: cabbage, beans, peas, lentils and similar things, until recovery is complete."
"If you find putrefaction in the wound and it does not adhere to the bone, then incise all that is putrid, remove it, and dress the wound appropriately."
"If in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which blood flows profusely and cannot be stopped by medicines, then inquire about the artery. If you find that it has not been incised, then incise it with a scalpel or ligate it; if necessary, cauterize until the bleeding stops."
"If these wounds are simple and small, then their cause is light. Therefore, you should powder them with this powder, so that they may be consolidated before the air can change them."
"And the method for making this powder is as follows: take one part oil of sesame, two parts dragon's blood resin, three parts myrrh resin; grind them all together and sift it. Use this powder to fill the wound and constrain it with good constriction until it adheres well and coagulates with the blood."
"And then apply this powder to it from above and leave it alone. Do not remove it while it is still adhering, because the medicine has not yet been eradicated from there until it is healed."
"Sometimes you can use only cauterization when sesame oil and dragon's blood resin are not available to you."
"And this same operation should be performed on large wounds when it is appropriate to place them over those and they are straitened, especially fresh wounds with their blood, which have not yet been altered by the air."
"But if the air has altered them, especially during summer time, then it is not appropriate to use this powder. In that case, treat those wounds with what we have said earlier: apply some suitable ointments over them, or use flour of barley mixed with water and honey until they become putrid; and then treat them with the other cure until they are healed."
"But if a fracture of the bone occurs in a wound that is small, then you should treat it with this [powder]."
"And I say that the treatment for fractures of the head is given above."
"Regarding wounds of the neck:"
"But if a wound occurs on the neck, there is no difference in treatment between it and a simple head wound."
"But if the nerve or artery of the neck is cut, then if it is a nerve, there is no other means than to avoid treatment with this [powder] that causes violent coagulation, such as vitriol and similar substances which harm nerves." "And do not apply any cautery to the wound for any reason, because the substance of nerves is fragile and their continuity is with the brain, which is the master of all members."
"And if it is treated with light medicines in this way, such as washing the wound with warm water, sometimes infused in uncooked or cooked oil, and then applying honey when washed with warm water and other minor ointments according to this method, and moistening them."
"But if the wound is large, then perform suturing or fasten the lips of it, and afterwards treat it with this powder until it is healed."
"But if the wound has depth or if it occurs in a low-lying part that becomes putrid, then pierce it at its deepest point."
"But if an artery is cut in the wound and bleeding occurs, then separate or dry it out, ligate it, or cauterize it if necessary."
"But if the vertebrae of the spine have been severed completely and the veins of the neck are preserved, then approximate the lips of the wound over the spine with suturing without touching that part. Then elevate it gently and reduce it to its natural shape. Afterwards strengthen it with decent traction, leave it alone for a few days; and afterwards treat it with ointments that have coagulating and stimulating properties until it is healed."
"But if the wound has already reached the bone, then strike it with a mallet. And if there are fragments of bone in it, remove all that you can. But what cannot be removed, leave it alone until the wound becomes putrid and separates, and its inflammation is relieved."
"And if the wound is fresh, then powder it with the powder that I have recommended to you." "But if there is a fistula in the wound, then treat it with what will be remembered shortly in its proper chapter."
"If it is a wound made by a lance or knife, and its depth varies according to the force of the blow, then consider whether there is any wind sound coming from the wound when the patient breathes. If so, know that the wound is mortal."
"And if it is not deep and the wound is fresh with its own blood, then pause in it with the first-hour powder, but do not compress it so that the blood does not accumulate in its depth and return to the heart causing harm. Instead, apply an attractive ointment and wash it twice a day."
"And if the ointment is not available, then place a piece of cotton in the wound to prevent anything from flowing out, and make sure that the patient sleeps on their side so that what has accumulated flows out."
"But if three days or more have passed and no spasm, heart palpitations, or lung constriction has occurred in the patient, and other conditions are good, then know that the wound is safe. And so treat it with bandages and other treatments until it is healed."
"But if its healing is delayed and much time has passed, then know that a fistula has already formed. Therefore treat it according to the chapter on fistulas."
"And if the wound is caused by a cut from a sword or knife and is simple on the surface of the skin or flesh, then treat it with what has been previously mentioned about suturing if it is large, or with powder if it is small."
"But if the wound has already reached the bone and pieces of it have been cut off, then turn the wound over and try to extract those pieces if they are separate." "But if they are not separate, then leave them alone until the wound becomes putrid, for their extraction will be easier that way."
"And regarding other accidental wounds in the other members, the remedy in treatment is the same as what has been said."
"Regarding abdominal wounds:"
"The condition that occurs in the abdomen is either large, small, or medium-sized."
"When extraction is requested, it is difficult to achieve by other methods, and especially if the reduction of these is more difficult, unless you quickly remove the intrusion from its place, for if it opens and becomes enlarged because the entrance was difficult."
"The best extraction is through the middle, for in that case it is easy to reduce the intestines, unlike in the two species mentioned above."
"And you should know that there are four ways to suture the abdomen, but two of these sutures are common and applicable to other wounds on the body."
"And the other two sutures are more specific to the abdomen, although they can be applied to other wounds as well."
"I will now recount each one with its exposition and explanation."
"Therefore I say that when the wound is small and some cause of the intestines comes out through it, and it is difficult to reduce it, there are two ways: either because of the smallness of the disruption, as we have said, or when inflammation has come to the intestines due to the coldness of the air."
"And therefore, when this is the case, you should then scrape that until you immerse a sponge or cloth wet in hot water alone, or you take water with squinant, cyperus, and spice, and bandage it around that part of the intestines so that the inflammation may be resolved."
"And sometimes you will find this useful in cases where there is stricturing, and it is better that the water alone be used for resolving the inflammation."
"Therefore, once the inflammation has been resolved, you should then moisten the intestines with water in which common salt and mallows have been boiled, for this relieves the pain caused by it."
"But if the pain has not been relieved by this treatment, then carefully cut the disruption a little with an instrument with which it is incised, and remove theemorrhoids."
"And the primary treatment is better, when it is proper that it not be cut, and there is no need to cut except in case of necessity or deficiency."
"What is the shape of the instrument?"
"The one end of it is cut sharp, and the other not sharp, and the tip is subtle, but not as subtle as a spatula, rather it is somewhat obtuse."
"And therefore, once the wound has been enlarged and extends outside the intestines, it is necessary that its reduction be according to the shape of nature itself in its proper place, if this is possible. For this is better."
"But when the disruption is large and it is in the lower part of the belly, then you should make the sick person lie on his back, raise his buttocks as high as his head; but if it is in the upper part of the belly, then you should raise his head and raise his feet as high as the sides."
"And likewise if the disruption is in one of the two sides of the belly, then always pay attention and consideration to this, so that the side where there is the wound may be raised higher than the other."
"And this you should administer in both large wounds and medium-sized ones."
"And in small wounds, pay attention to what you have prepared, and especially that the person who ministers it be among your most skilled, who should hold the disruption entirely with his hand and adjust its lips together, and so that he may cover from this one to that which sews without any other cause."
"And this is the common manner of suturing: first take the needle, or count of needles according to the amount of the width of the wound; and then leave the end of the disruption on the finger, and thread the needle once, but do not put silk in both ends of the thread. With two ends of the silk, which is left outside the thread, enter it into that part until you have brought it out from there; and you already have four orders."
"And then thread with doubled silk around the needle, and sometimes from two parts together, and then join the two lips and the wound by proper joining; and then leave the thickness of the finger and insert another needle into it, and then tie that with silk in the same way as the first needle was tied. And do not cease doing this until you have completed all the contraction of the wound."
"And let the needles be medium between thickness and subtlety, for the thin needles easily cut into the flesh; but thick ones are difficult to insert into the thread. Therefore they should be medium in subtlety and thickness."
"And it is not necessary that the needle be inserted into both ends of the thread very close together, for fear that the flesh should be easily cut and that the wound may open before its consolidation."
"And do not make sutures too long so that the wound is not prevented from consolidation."
"And then cut the ends of the needles so that they do not bother the sick person while he is sleeping. And you will put powdered incense on the sutures from both sides, which should hold the ends of the needles; and leave them there until you know that the wound has already consolidated."
"And these kinds of sutures with needles in whatever manner are more convenient for small wounds, since it is enough to use one needle or two or around them."
"But the second suture is more common: and it is that you administer with sutures the four ends of the thread and both ends of the silk in one time, with a needle on which there is silk wrapped in subtlety and thickness."
"And then when the needle has penetrated these four ends, reduce the needle from that same part where you began, so that the silk may draw back from the uppermost part of the wound to the bottom, so that the suture may be like a seam on cloth with which the threads are tightened."
"And put between each suture the quantity of the thickness of the little finger."
"And this is what people know."
"And with this suture I sewed a wound which had been accidentally inflicted on a man in his belly, who had been wounded with a dagger, and the disruption of the wound was more than a palm; it had exited from the intestines around two palms from the middle of the intestine, and the disruption was in the middle of the member. And then I reduced that after the intestines had been forced out by the wound for twenty-four hours."
"And the wound was consolidated in the space of fifteen days or thereabouts, and he was cured. And he lived for many years after that, and is still alive in his usual condition."
"And the other doctors had judged that he would not be healed. And by miracle it was so, for I did not cure him with an ointment, because there was no ointment nor any medicine to be found in that place; but twice a day I put a cloth moistened with honey water on the wound until he was healed."
"But I say two kinds of sutures proper according to the narration of the Word."
"And it is that you begin with suturing the thread and insert the needle from without into within."
"And then when the needle penetrates into the thread and in that same part of the flesh according to its breadth and length throughout all the body, leave the end of the silk on which you have inserted the needle; and make the needle penetrate from within outwards in the other extremity of the member."
When you have caused it to penetrate once, then cause it to penetrate again in that same spot of the right side outside to inside; and leave the extremity of the spleen which is on this side, and cause the needle to penetrate into the other extremity of the inside from the outside.
And cause that penetration with which you cause it to penetrate in the spleen at the extremity of the mirror which is inside that everything may penetrate.
And start from this same side and count with the extremity which is of the spleen on the other side, and withdraw the needle from the channel which you have penetrated, and again insert it into that channel and pass through the extremity of the spleen which is on the other side with this extremity of the mirror; and withdraw it from the channel which is towards them.
And do this once or twice, and do this once again if you wish to do everything that is outside according to that example.
And the sum of this manner of suturing is that you should suture with a suturing of the skin in such a way that you should suture the spleen once from the side of the channel extremity, and leave the other side until it has been completed.
Moreover, the second species of suturing which Guilia describes explicitly, and this is about it and for its recommendation, is that you should suture it according to semilunar fashion with which some surgeons suture it, so that they join every part to its corresponding part according to nature; and they apply the extremity of one side and the extremity of the mirror to the other extremity of it, and this is done as you recommend.
Certainly you should leave the needle in the extremity of the mirror at your proximity to the outside part, and make it penetrate into the inside part in that same sun, and leave both extremities of the spleen; and again turn the needle and make it penetrate from outside to inside through both extremities of the spleen.
And again turn those shuttles, and make them penetrate from the inside part into the outside part through both extremities of the mirror except those which are on the opposite side.
And this manner of suturing is better than the common light suturing, and it is the suturing of which a preceding mention has been made.
This is the speech of Guilia
And some say that abdominal suturing is corrected with two needles, so that you should put in these shuttles a filet, and begin with the needle insertion of what is required by you, and make it penetrate into the other side according to the suturing of those who suture the hearts equally.
And know that when there is a disruption in the middle of the abdomen, at that time the suturing of it is more difficult than in other parts of the abdomen.
But the treatment of a wound is judged by other wounds.
"The cause is that when you constrain the wound recently with its own blood before the air alters it, and reduce the intestine, close it, and prepare it properly, then place powdered cinnabar on it."
"If the air has already altered the wound, then place this powder on it with great care using these cloths that are nearby to make sure it penetrates deep and sticks well."
"But if you are not present, then apply the powder immediately, because it begins to heal within three days and changes every two days, as you have taught, until it is healed. For you do not need other medications in many cases when wounds are simple."
"But if you fear that the wound may communicate with injury to the principal members, then you should submerge lion's wool in good quality olive oil or rose oil and apply it to the area between the joints and leave it on."
"And if there is pain or putrefaction in its bowels, which often happens, then crystallize this with black treacle wine and more so if the putrefaction has reached the bowel and cannot be expelled."
"And know that a wound in the large intestine is of lighter healing than one in the small intestines."
"And it is difficult to heal because the intestine called 'gegunu' does not receive healing of any wound that falls into it; and this is due to the great multitude of veins that are in it and the magnitude of its substance, and for the subtlety of its body and its proximity to the nature of nerves."
"But if what proceeds from the wound is tissue and you obtain that recent, then reduce it according to your discretion with which you also reduce intestines equally."
"But if it has passed into blackness and is becoming green or black, then strengthen it with faith over the area that has been discolored by it, so that fluxes of blood may come forth, for in the tissue are veins and arteries."
"And appropriately cut away that which is other than the membrane and leave two extremities of the thread hanging from the edge of the wound, so that over you there may be alleviated the attraction of it you must remove the scab of the tissue and emission of the branch of the wound."
"Remembrance of wounds when they occur in the intestine."
"When disruption occurs in the intestine and it is small, then it is possible that it may be restored in some people, for this reason: one man who was wounded in his belly with a lance blow and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old and had no fistula, and from it there was management and windiness."
"Then I followed the treatment of it although it was not certain in its healing, but I ceased to subtiliate that which was inside it and the area had consolidated."
"And I put that I saw the area already consolidated, so I placed on him a remedy for the pain that occurred over his belly wound; and no one else suffered from this accident, and they remained in their best condition eating and drinking, and appropriately entered into baths and were exercised in their deeds."
"And some experienced ones have said that when there is wound in the intestine and it is small, then it is necessary to ligate it in this manner: And take figs with large heads; and appropriately adjust both lips of the wound and place one of those which has its mouth open over both lips of the wound. Then when it adheres there and tightens its mouth, cut off its head for it adheres and is not dissolved."
"And appropriately place another fig near the first one, and do not cease doing this with figs until the quantity of the entire wound is filled."
"And appropriately reduce it and sew the wound shut; and those attached heads remain inside the intestine until the intestine is healed; and no one suffers from any harm."
"And it is possible that the intestine may be ligated with a subtle thread made from the gut of an animal attached to it because it is more like a needle; and take the extremity of these intestinal threads, and let them be well cleaned, and appropriately ligate the extremity of it with thread of it wrapped around it, and appropriately insert that thread into needles and sew it with that intestine, reducing it in the disruption."
"And this manner of suturing with figs is nothing but a way of trust and hope."
"But if the wound is large and broad, especially if it is in one of the subtle intestines, for then there is nothing but subtiliation, and not healing of it altogether."
"On the treatment of tumor and fistula."
"You should know that every wound and abscess when it becomes hollowed out and ancient, and is made into an ulcer, and does not consolidate and emits branch always without being cut off, then universally it is named fistula, and we call it that tumor."
"And truly, fistula is a hard, white, tough node without pain with which there is concavity just as there is concavity of the navel; and for this reason it is called that ulcerous boil, that is to say navel."
"And in some people it is humid, which emits branch; and sometimes the humidity is cut off in a few hours." "Sometimes this humidity is much, little, thick, and subtle."
"I have already shown all those causes and the signs of them and their cure with medicines in the division."
"And it is necessary that I make you know the treatment of fistula which is done by means of operation with a knife."
"And you should know that fistula occurs in all the members of the body; for some of them pertain to the great veins and arteries, or to the nerves, or to the bladder, or to the intestine, or to the urinary bladder, or to one of the ribs, or to some of the vertebrae of the back, or to one of the joints composed by composition such as those of the hand and foot; and some of them have relation to the principal member and similar ones."
"And therefore those of these fistulas that are in this manner are among the illnesses of difficult healing and they do not receive cure and care with them is work and ignorance."
"And if there is any fistula whose depth does not reach those places that I have mentioned and you hope for its cure but you want to know about it, then take a thread of wool or iron, and if the fistula goes straight, examine it with it."
"If the fistula is twisted, then examine it with a thin lead probe, for lead has the lightness of its body and curves towards the twist."
"And if the fistula is without any movement or horror, you will not be able to designate anything by means of it."
"Then crystallize the horrifics for their own sake, because the moisture with which you crystalize them will flow towards the other horrifics and run from them."
"And inquire meticulously in what manner you can recognize if here are the os or nerves, and whether the concavity of the fistula is distant or nearby, or if it is a fistula to which its movements are horrifics and situated above all with your utmost strength, your enteroquery, by which you enteroquery the illness, and discover the cause of pain under your compression with the hand on the location, and similar meanings and accidental causes of the apostema."
"And after having stood over all those causes with true steadfastness, then go to the cure according to your confidence: and it is that you consider now whether the fistula appears nearby or in a healthy place, distant from junction, nerves, arteries, veins, or any of the places which I have mentioned to you."
"Then dry the fistula according to what has been said about its narration earlier, and remove what is present in that filtration and of rotting flesh, and whatever is born from the horror of the flesh, or of theil and similar things, and cure it until it is healed."
"But if the fistula is of distant depth and is rectitudinary, then you should insert it into the pron at least as far as possible for you, and properly cleanse it from all its rotting flesh; and properly administer hot compresses wrapped in sharp medicines, and introduce them into the concavity of the fistula which you have comprehended with iron."
"And do this several times until the sharp medicine burns everything that is rough in the concavity of the fistula from corruption."
"And properly restore it with ointments which generate healthy flesh until it is healed."
"But if it is not healed by this, then cauterize it according to what we have recommended."
"But if the cause of the fistula is bone and you are certain about this, then examine it and dry it according to what we have recommended, provided that you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or main member as we have said."
"But if the bone is visible to you and there is some corruption and blackness in it, then scrape that until all corruption has been removed; and properly cure it with whatever makes flesh grow until it is healed."
"And if it does not heal and throws out matter as it did before, then know that you have not reached the complete eradication of corruption; therefore uncover it carefully and search its cause thoroughly and perform the last cleansing with your strongest forceps, and properly restore it."
"And therefore if it is healed, good. But if not, then know that that corruption is in the distant depth of the body, which has not been reached, and therefore in that case there is nothing else to do but leave it alone."
"And if the corrupted bone is small or can be removed by you, then remove it with subtle forceps which are suitable for that."
"And if there are many bones, then carefully perform the extraction of all of them, and do not leave any cause behind with your strength."
"But if there is any resistance caused by humidity and there is no fear or error in its incision, then incise those membranes or flesh if they are present, and deliver the bones."
"But if there is no preparation to remove the bones at that time, then place a plug over the wound and pack it with material which will preserve the wound. Leave this in place until the flesh and membranes have grown around the bones, and keep the plug from becoming consolidated, and strengthen the section which you have incised during your operation."
"Then if you fear that the wound may collapse, pack it underwater with olive oil or Egyptian pitch or one of the green ointments, for when those membranes and flesh have grown together, they separate from the bones and attraction is alleviated."
"But if it is a large bone like the thighbone or shinbone or similar ones, and only the surface of it is corrupted, then scrape that with a curette alone until that blackness and corruption has been removed, and properly restore the plug."
"But if a large part of it is corrupted and corruption has reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that wound and incise it entirely until the point where corruption has reached. Then cure it until consolidation occurs."
"And I recommend to you that which is necessary for a man in his thighbone so that you place that on it as an example and assistant during your operation."
"A young man about thirty years old happened to have pain in his thighbone, and the cause of the pain was inside the bone marrow where there was an abscess with a large amount of pus, and it was not caused by any external factor."
"And thus much time passed with that due to the error of doctors in that they suppressed the abscess until a great amount of matter accumulated. Then its treatment was properly begun when the thighbone had been fistulated, and many orifices were made in it which all discharged pus and humidity from the body."
"And then a multitude of doctors treated him for about two years, but they did not know more in that art than I was called."
"And when I saw the thighbone of him and the matter that flowed out of those orifices for a long distance, then his whole body was already weakened and his complexion was yellowish."
"And therefore I inserted my finger into one of those orifices and reached the bone."
"And then I examined all of the orifices thoroughly and found that they originated from all parts of the thighbone."
"And then I opened and incised over one of those orifices until I discovered a part of the bone, which was rotten and corrupted and black. And already a part of the thighbone had penetrated into the muscle."
"And then I showed what I had discovered and prepared from that exposed bone to others."
I believe that the sentence translates to: "And I knew it was not in the bone but rather that corruption which I had opened and closed, and I had already drained it."
"And accordingly, I paused the restoration of the disease through medicine, consolidated for a long time, and not yet consolidated."
"And likewise, I explored and discovered on the bone secondarily on the first discovery, and found continuous corruption with the bone."
"And I closed what appeared to me of that corruption, and accordingly I prepared to make the cure and restoration, but it was not restored."
"And then you discovered it again and did not cease incising the bone little by little particularly and prepared for its restoration, but it was not restored until you incised around a palm of it, and that extracted with its marrow, and accordingly restored it with medicines, and it is lightly consolidated and healed."
"And there is no need for iteration in the operation of it and section of it except for the disposition of its frivolity and for its poverty of tolerance and fear of its death, because it has sloth in all hours due to superfluous evacuation, fainting, and evil."
"And therefore, it is healed by whole healing, and nothing remains in place of hard flesh; its disposition is good in its body and returns its virtue to it; it has been converted into its dispositions and does not do anything contrary to it in motion nor any harm in any cause."
"But if it is prominent in place of the body already broken, then you should cut that according to this manner: and it is that you take linen and strengthen that at the extremity of that prominent bone, and command someone to extend that under them; and pause that first linen with a thicker second linen; and accordingly bind that over the flesh that is on the sides of the bone, and extend the extremity of it so that you draw the flesh towards the sides, and uncover the flesh upon the place which you wish to saw, so that the saw does not harm the flesh."
"And pause a board or table underneath the bone appropriately, because when you do this it is forbidden that the saw not cut corrupt flesh."
"And it is necessary that the sawing be upon the corrupt place little by little, because if it is in the concavity of the corruption and does not appear in its appearance to the touch, then it will be necessary to saw it again."
"And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, then it is one continuous part joined to another, and the corruption is in the middle place or in a part of it. Then uncover the flesh from all parts; pause wood underneath; saw that from the first part where the corruption is entered until the sawing continues into the other part."
"And let the sawing be according to the place of the corruption a little, as we have said."
"And if the corruption is at the joint, then cut that corrupt joint; saw the bone where it continues from the other part."
"But if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in its reason but accidental."
"And if the corruption is in the chest of the hand or foot, it is very difficult; however, you should inquire about the corruption in whatever way appears to you and cut that away and clean that according to every disposition which is possible for you, and with each device be corrected by you when it does not do any harm to vein or nerve."
"And know which are the cutting tools and saws to cut these bones are many according to the situation of the bones, and their preparation, their thickness, subtlety and grandeur and smallness, hardness and rarity; because you should prepare all kinds of appropriate instruments for that operation."
"And know that this operation signifies to you concerning the kind of instrument which you need; because if you have great study and long knowledge and experience in the methods of this art, and testimony of the methods of illnesses, then already you would know for yourself what is convenient for each instrument for every illness."
"And I give you here at the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you should prepare with which you will proceed to your prohibition which you will experience on others." "Form of saw:"
"Form of another saw:"
"Form of large saw:"
"Form of rasp:" "And let the head of this rasp be in the form of a star-shaped key head, and its points be in the shape of astragalus points."
"And it is not convenient that with this [instrument] are rubbed the heads of joints when they are corrupted or if the mouth is large and wide."
"Form of smaller razor:"
"Form of wide razor:"
"Form of another saw appropriately made: let it be made in the shape of a bow as high and sharp as iron, and its member made of soft wood well formed." "Form of it:"
"Form of razor with concavity:"
"Form of another fine razor:"
"Form of another razor with curved end:"
"Form of small knife similar to an awl:"
"Form of another smaller cutter:"
"Form of another cutter: this is similar to a rasp, and its end is like a saw, used in many places concerning the bones:"
"Form of rasp suitable for use on that which has been bored into the bones:"
"And its end is triangular and sharp-pointed."
"And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly all the forms that we have said concerning razors, cutters, and saws."
"Of cutting off extremities and sawing bones."
"Extremities can be removed either due to an intrinsic cause or extrinsic cause, or when you have treated that corruption with curative medicines and the cure does not confer, sometimes the corruption goes into a member which does not persecute any cause; therefore it is necessary for you to cut off that member within which the corruption has occurred, because the illness will disappear through that of death or malice which is greater damage to the member."
"And the sign of that which occurs is that member becomes black within which it was covered with corruption or burning, or putrefaction appears there within which it enters that member and takes all the body; therefore cut off that with cutting."
"And similarly if corruption is caused by percussion of some venomous causes such as that of the sea scorpion, viper or rattle snake and similar things."
"And if the corruption or percussion is at the extremity of the finger, then you cut off the finger and do not give space for the corruption to go into the hand."
"And similarly if it occurs in the hand, then you cut off that at the wrist joint and do not give space for corruption to take hold of the forearm."
"And if it happens instead, then cut off the arm just above the elbow at the joint."
"And if corruption passes beyond that and sometimes envelops the elbow, then in that case there is death from illness; and to administer another cause for cure besides this is just quantity of virtue."
"And similarly concerning the foot when corruption happens at the toe of the foot, then cut it off within one of the joints."
"And if it takes hold on the heel of the foot, then cut off all the foot." If it can enter the anus, then incise the skin at the junction of the anus.
And if corruption has already reached the rectum, then it is not removal but release, and let the patient die.
The method of incising the member or severing it is that you stretch the ligament at the part where you want to cut, and then stretch another ligament above the location. The minister should extend one ligament on each side of the place to be cut, and the other minister should extend another ligament above them. Then you separate the flesh between the two ligaments with a wide-bladed knife until all the flesh is exposed. Then it can be incised or severed.
It is necessary to bind the limbs on all sides so that they do not touch the location where it will be operated on, and that the patient suffers only just injury and a clean wound.
But if bleeding occurs while operating, then cauterize the location carefully, or apply some powder made from dry red roses to stop the bleeding. Then return to your treatment until it is completed.
And then bind the member gently with a bandage in whatever way seems convenient, and take care of it until it is healed.
And I advise you that once happened to a man on his foot, this accident which you and I are discussing, which is that it occurred due to the blackness of the skin on his foot caused by burning similar to fire combustion.
And that corruption first began in his toe and then spread throughout the entire foot.
Then that man prepared himself to apply pus every day since the treatment had not been effective in relieving the pain and burning sensation of the member. He incised the foot at its joint, and it healed with fire cauterization.
It has happened for a long time that that corruption comes into the tip of the finger.
And then it came to me, and I realized that that excess water had gathered on the hand with which I handled medications, precisely during the cleansing of the patient's body. And the excess water did not recede, but began to flow into another finger starting from the hand.
And he asked me to lance his hand, but I did not want to do so hoping that the excess water would recede. Indeed, I feared for the incision of his hand because the disease's strength was too great.
And after he parted from me, he returned to his land and it came to my knowledge that that man prepared himself and incised his own hand entirely, and was healed.
And I do not tell you this story except to aid those who may be afflicted with this disease, and that there may be meaning in it for the one to whom it is told and according to which it should be acted upon.
De cura sinusum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.
When an aposteme occurs on some fleshy member and the space of the aposteme is prolonged until it makes collection of pus, and then it breaks and perforates, and the pus comes out from it, and the place remains empty as if it were a vessel, and the cord that is over it appears thus like a subtly woven cloth, and there has not been any later corruption, and it does not impress on the bone or on nerve nor on ligament, it is called sinus, and it is not called fistula.
But if the space is prolonged until corruption impresses on some member, then it is called fistula and not sinus.
And the cure for it is to incise that cord entirely as it appears, and more so when it is thin like cloth, and you make sure that it does not adhere to the place by its corruption.
But if you wait for the cord to adhere and that corruption has not yet had its final course, and there has appeared a passage in the cord, then you treat it with a clyster.
And when you examine the sinus, if it is large and the arm that extends from it has a fetid odor, then you clysterize it with Egyptian medicine which is made of oil and sour wine and salt receipt in equal parts, ground fine and adjusted in a vessel, and cooked over the fire until the medicine becomes thick like honey.
And then you take from it the amount that is necessary and dissolve it with water and honey; and you clysterize with that the sinus, and strengthen the opening of it, and leave the medicine in it for the duration of two hours.
And then you extract that with a probe; and do this for so many days until the sinus is cleaned out and the pus is removed.
And sometimes it is clysterized with water of ash when this medicine is not present; and you take the ashes of oak wood, put them on the water, then boil them and clysterize that with it until you are sure that the sinus has been cleaned out.
And if the patient cannot tolerate the Egyptian medicine nor the water of ash, then you clysterize it with water and honey mixed together three times, and you also clysterize it with wine and honey mixed together, because honey has the property to cleanse and wash, and wine makes the sinus adhere more, especially when there is an excess of astringency and dryness in the wine.
And when you do this several times and you are sure that the sinus has been removed, then you clysterize it with something that makes flesh grow in it.
And you take of the powder called diafinicon and dissolve it with rose oil and astringent wine, or you clysterize it with other medicines and ointments that have the properties which I have already written about in the treatise on ointments.
And if the opening of the sinus is narrow and cannot receive the cannula of the clyster, then you dilate it with a small iron probe little by little, and pause in it with cotton wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it has been dilated.
And similarly if the opening is wide, then you close its lips with a suture and leave in it the amount that intervenes between the clyster without adding anything else.
And if the opening of that from which the arm extends is elevated above the parts around it, then you close it with a bitumen plaster in such a way that the arm runs within it, because when the arm is tightened by the pressure of the sinus flesh will be generated in it.
And if you cannot close the sinus with bitumen plaster as you wish, then you make an incision into the member after preparing it in such a way that the arm runs out of it lightly according to what seems appropriate to you and without anything inside it that could impede the movement of the arm.
But that which is on the opening of the sinus should be removed immediately in order to remove whatever may have adhered to it from the arm. And so that you know if what comes out of it from the arm is much or little, whether it is digested or undigested.
And also consider the location of that sinus, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and if it is an abscess.
And when your treatment has lasted for a while in this manner and you see that the matter that is poured onto the opening of the sinus has already adhered or almost adhered, then on the third day remove it by tearing it off gently; and when you tear it off, then change the cloth for another one and renew the ointment.
But if from the sinus a long distance virus subtile issues forth, then do not despair of its adhesion, because the healing of it will occur, because there are some people in whom the generation of flesh is late in their wounds, and among those who the opposite occurs.
And if for many days an undigested arm comes out of the sinus, then you know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and the cause is prolonged, then you should apply dry medicines, and if the medicines are moist in their substance and virtue, they will be dry like diafinicon ointment when there is an excess of addition of egg yolk.
And the last remedy that remains is to take diafinicon ointment and dissolve it in rose oil, then add old wine to it in its substance, and apply it on top of it, and use it.
And do likewise in that action when there is no arm coming out of it: apply diafinicon ointment, honey when it has been cooked until thickened, and use it; or take myrrh and aloe and frankincense, grind everything and powder it over the honey while it is on the fire, then mix this onto a cloth and apply it on top of the sinus; and also apply that honey which you have cooked until thickened, powder it onto a cloth and apply it.
"Sometimes a long-armed plaster made of celestial lily (and it is called celestial lily) and ground barley and centaurea is administered."
"If the pain persists and is not healed by this treatment, you should know that the corruption is in the patient's throat. Then, make an investigation into the bones or other hard members or the ligaments."
"For the treatment of pimples and scratched nails, and for adding an extra digit and cutting it off."
"A pimple is an aposteme that appears on the nail of the thumb or toe, and if it grows and its treatment is less cared for, it becomes an aposteme of cauterized aposteme, or corrupted. It emits a dark red liquid that corrode the root of the nail, and sometimes it corrupts the whole of it, and sometimes its corruption reaches the bone, causing foul odor, and the tip of the finger turns black and its color becomes dark."
"And therefore, when you have that with what we have said in the division and your treatment does not improve, then it is necessary for you to incise with iron all the superfluity that remains of the nail, and cauterize the wound immediately afterwards, because cautery is very helpful in this case."
"But if the bone is healthy and the nail is sound, but the additions of the nail begin to penetrate into the flesh inside, and start to sting and hurt it, then you should cut a thin ray from the angle of the nail that pierces the flesh, push it up, and incise that flesh easily, and apply onto what remains of the flesh remedies made of corrosive substances until it is completely removed; and immediately afterwards, cure it with ointment until it is healed."
"But if the corruption has already reached the bone, then you should incise the bone and remove it, because there is no time when something corrupt in the bone can be healed."
"And if sometimes the corrosion and corruption reach the finger, then you should incise it in one of its joints according to how far it has progressed, and immediately afterwards cure it until it is healed."
"But if the nail receives percussion or friction and there is sharp pain in it, then you should first apply a flebotomy to the affected area, and immediately afterwards dry the nail with a fine spatula made with a transverse section from top to bottom, making sure that the section does not reach the flesh underneath the nail, because you will cause sharp pain and cause the formation of excess flesh in that location; and immediately afterwards cure that location with something that relieves pain."
"But this (ailment), which is found in most men, is characterized by the fact that it is very fleshy and very bloody, either in the bones or in the nails."
"And some of them are born at the root of the joint, or their origin is in some joints of these fingers." "But those that are born in some joints of the finger are not painful, and those that are born at the joints are very painful."
"And those that are born fleshy have a thin section, and you should incise them at their root with a wide spatula."
"But those that are born at the root of the joint are difficult to cure; therefore beware of cutting them off."
"But those that are born in the finger above the joints should first have their flesh incised with a round incision down to the bone, and then sawed off with one of those suitable saws, and immediately afterwards cured until it is healed."
"But consolidation which occurs in these (fingers) between their joints that are turned outwards or by birth defect of the person born like this, or by scabbing over or burning with fire, or by being struck together, then you should cut away that consolidation until those fingers return to their natural shape."
"And afterwards apply between their wrappings of lint infused in rose oil to prevent them from sticking together lightly, and separate those that are stuck together or put a thin sheet of lead between them so that they may be consolidated as is necessary."
"And similarly if consolidation occurs in some of these fingers on the palm, then you should cut away that consolidation according to how it is prepared and what is convenient for the shape of the member."
"Of incisions of veins, there are two kinds."
"Veins are varicose, and there are also large veins that are convoluted and filled with melancholic superfluities, which appear on the surface of the limbs of the body, and their greatest occurrence is in the thighs, especially those of travelers, laborers, and porters."
"Therefore you should administer purgation of the body with black bile several times with strong evacuation, and also perform bloodletting from the patient's basilica vein."
"But the cure of these (varicose veins) with iron is done in two ways: one way is to incise and draw out that black blood, and the other way is to raise the vein and remove all of it."
"The section is done in this way: first wet the thigh with cold water to dissolve the thick blood that is like mud from the thigh. Then tie up the thigh from the affected area near its upper end down to below the knee joint with a bandage, and then incise the vein at one place or two places or three places with a wide incision, and then elevate the black blood from below the thigh upwards with the thumb of your left hand from above it downwards until you draw out as much blood as you want according to how much is enough, which relieves the power of the ailment."
"And then tie it up, and tell him to abstain from foods that generate black bile."
"And repeat the cure with phlebotomy when the veins are filled again, and let the patient know about this."
"But the elevation of these (varicose veins) is done in this way: first shave the thigh from below where they are swollen, and then put it in warm water and wet the thigh with cold water until it becomes hot and the veins are engorged; or have it exercised by vigorous exercise if warm water is not available, so that the member may be warmed up."
"And then cut across the cord at the right of the vein with an incision along its length or towards its end near below the knee joint, or on its lower side near the ankle."
"And then bind the cord with forceps and strip away the vein on all sides until it becomes apparent to touch, and it should appear very dark in color when incised."
"And then remove the cord and you will find a white thread that is like string."
"And then put your left hand under it so that it may be raised up and removed from the cord, and suspend it with one hook of gold."
"And then make another incision near that incision for three fingers' breadth and strip away the cord from above the vein until it becomes apparent."
"And then elevate it and make another incision near the ankle joint, and extract that through the previous section until it is extracted through the second section, and also extract it from the section that is above it."
"And do this until you extract it from the section that is above or altogether from all sections until all of it is extracted, and then close up the incision."
"And if you are unable to extract and elevate it, then insert a strong double-threaded needle with thread through the vein and tie it up and extract it, or put your hand inside and turn it around on all sides until it is removed." Be cautious that it does not slip; for if it breaks, it becomes difficult to raise that matter and it comes upon the patient through that injury.
Once all the air is expelled, then pause on the location of the wound submerged in wine and oil (both refined and unrefined), and care for that injury until it is healed.
If the vein is contracted and there are tortuous parts where there should be no bending, and it does not follow rectitude as we have said, then you must cut over that entire bent part of it and at the locations of those bends, and carefully suspend that with a hook until you raise that entire (vein).
And be careful with your section so as not to slip the vein and not injure it, for it will be difficult to raise that (vein); and use your discretion in this.
**Forma de l'incident amb la qual es talla la vena:**
"It is not like this with hooks, nor does it have an acute extremity so that it does not wound the vein; and it has rough flexibility, because if it were subtle, it would tear the vein due to its subtlety; indeed, it has excess thickness as we said."
"On extracting a vein from the leg."
"This vein is generated in the chambers of dry lands, such as those found in Arabic lands and the dry lands of India that are lacking in moisture and tenderness, where there is neither grass nor herbs."
"And this vein is also generated elsewhere in the body besides the chambers."
"And its generation is of putrefaction, which comes from leaving the spine like venom inside the body, producing serpents, worms, and crabs, as well as other vermin generated between the spine and the flesh."
"And the herald of the arrival of this vein is an inflammation that occurs in the chamber with violent swelling; and nearby, the skin becomes blistered; and near where it begins to come out from that blister, it seems like a root of a plant."
"And then, when the extremity appears, immediately you should wrap around it a lead weight of which the weight is that of one and a half drachmas, hanging that and leaving the lead suspended from the chamber."
"And whenever some cause makes it necessary to move the vein externally, wrap that in lead and fasten it." "And if it is prolonged too much, then you should incise a part of it and wrap the remainder; but do not incision that until it has come out completely outside, because if you incision it while it is still inside, it will be contracted and drawn into the flesh, causing inflammation and putrefaction in the place and a bad ulceration."
"Therefore, it must be treated gradually and extracted little by little until it is completely outside of the body, so that there remains no cause for it within the body."
"And this vein can be as much as two and twenty palms in length in some people, and I have heard of one that was thirty palms."
"And if it is incised at the time of its treatment, then introduce a probe into the track of it and pierce that with a long probe through the body until all that is in the matter is evacuated, and administer putrefaction to the place for several days with medicines; and also cure it by the treatment of apostemes."
"And sometimes this vein has many branches, especially when it appears at the junction of the foot or in the foot, and it comes to have many openings, each branch having its own opening."
"And then treat it as we have said in the division above, with what has been said about it."
"Regarding the cutting of worms that are generated under the skin and are called 'bovine sickness'."
"This sickness is called in some lands 'bovine sickness' because many times it occurs in oxen and it is a worm that is born between the skin and the flesh, and goes through the whole body pushing and pulling, making itself felt by its movement from member to member until it breaks the skin and comes out."
"And the generation of this [worm] is due to putrefaction of certain humors, just as worms, serpents, earthworms, and roundworms are generated in the belly."
"And it is feared because of the malice of this [worm], for when it goes through the body and rises to the head, reaching the eye, then it causes great inflammation there and enters into it, destroying the eye, which happens many times."
"And therefore when you want to treat this [worm] and extract it, then you must follow its movement and appearance by feeling it, and then grasp what is above it and below it with a ligature or a bandage, and dry that area and extract it."
"And if it is stuck in the flesh and cannot be grasped, then apply a cautery with fire to the place where it resides until it is destroyed, for the greatest danger is that it will corrupt there, as we have said."
"If you want to treat it when it has reached the head near the eye, then grasp above the eyebrow with a tight bandage and dry that area, and extract it; and the patient should also use medicines to purge his body of corrupt humors, and avoid foods that cause putrefaction."
"Regarding the cutting for the sickness called 'nafrid'."
"This sickness is called in our land 'nafrid', and it is a pain that comes to certain members, especially moving from member to member."
"And you have seen this before, as I will tell you." "I was called to visit a woman who was ill in a certain town, and when I uncovered her arm, I saw a small inflammation on the vein of the elbow, and after an hour had passed, I saw that inflammation move like a worm pushing towards that place, but more gently than if it were actually moving, as if it were living silver passing from place to place."
"And then the pain came to that place and settled in the muscle, and remained there for about an hour."
"And then it ran through the other body until it reached the other arm."
"And she told me that it had turned around in her whole body as I had seen, and she was greatly amazed by its changeability and speed from member to member." "And I had seen this before in my own eyes according to that manner, but I had rarely seen such pain moving from member to member." "But I have not seen anything like this with my own eyes as I did with the woman."
"And I do not think that it was anything other than this because the woman was elderly, with a dry body and visible veins, and in this appearance at the sensation there was that wandering windiness."
"And it is necessary that this [sickness] does not appear according to this retrogression in those who are delicate and have moist bodies with hidden veins."
"And when you want to treat this [sickness], if the patient feels that pain, then do not appear before him as we have said, but grasp upon it gently and leave it alone and dry over that place until that cooped-up windiness has been discharged, and cauterize the place."
"But if you do not see it with your own eyes, then treat it by evacuating the body and using whatever expels windiness, and apply pills made of foul-smelling substances and pills of saffron and similar things."
"Regarding the extraction of arrows."
Arrows are diverse according to their species and the parts of the body where they hit, for their diversity is such that those with large points, small ones, concave ones, and blunt ones are solid; and there are those with three corners and those with tongues; also those with stars.
When an arrow strikes the head and passes through the bone, it can cause symptoms such as dizziness, headache, ringing in the ears, vertigo, redness of the eyes, inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasm and confusion of understanding, vomiting bile, difficulty speaking or loss of voice, and there may be white, powdery moisture present at the wound site, with the surrounding skin appearing wet.
Therefore, if these signs appear, then you should abstain from treating and removing the arrow unless it is externally visible.
When an arrow strikes the heart near the left nipple and is embedded deeply in hard tissue, it may cause symptoms such as irregular heartbeat like the pulse, black blood flowing from the wound, coldness of the extremities, cold sweat, fainting, and sudden death. Therefore, you should know that death will occur immediately unless the patient receives prompt treatment.
When an arrow strikes the lung, there may be frothy blood sputum coming from the wound, and the vessels near the collarbone may become congested. The patient's complexion may change, they may exhale loudly or gasp for breath, and experience difficulty breathing due to pain.
If an arrow strikes the diaphragm (the veil of the ribs), there will be pain near the lower ribs. The patient may experience sudden, intense pain in the chest and back, accompanied by sighing and shortness of breath. All the muscles of the body may become rigid and tense.
If an arrow strikes the stomach, there will be vomiting of undigested food from the wound.
If an arrow strikes the abdomen and becomes lodged within it, there will be a visible wound or tear in the skin, tissue, or intestine, which may be ruptured. There is little hope for recovery if the arrow is removed in such cases.
If an arrow strikes the bladder and urine is excreted from the wound externally, with other bodily fluids flowing out as well, there will be severe pain in that area. You should know that such a wound is fatal.
"However, other members such as the face, neck, and back, shoulders and arms, spinal column, collarbone, thighs, legs, and their similar parts are saved according to major dispositions when the arrow does not strike a vein or artery and is not venomous."
"I will tell you what I have seen about this kind of arrows, so that you may understand about their treatment."
"The reason for this is that when an arrow entered the tear duct of a man's eye near his nose, and you removed it from another opening, leaving behind the point of the arrowhead in his ear, he was healed and there was no harm done to his eye."
"And another arrow was removed from a Jew who had it in his eye near the eyelid, leaving behind the eyelid afterwards. The arrowhead was already covered and could not be found except for a small extremity that adhered to its shaft, which was a large, sharp Turkish arrow with a lion's head made of iron without ears."
"And the Jew recovered, and there was no harm done to his eye."
"And another arrow was removed from a Christian man who had it in his buttock. It was an Arab arrow with ears and you cut into it between two guide rings where it was already submerged in his buttock; then you pulled on it carefully and finally extracted it. The Christian man recovered."
"And another arrow was removed from a man who had it in his belly, and he thought that he would die because of it. Therefore, since thirty days had passed and there was no change in his condition, you cut into the arrow and extracted it, and he recovered, and there was no harm done to him."
"And I saw another man in whom an arrow had become stuck in his back, and the wound had closed over it. Since it had been there for about thirty years, the arrow was extracted from the root of the matter."
"And I saw a woman in whom an arrow had become stuck in her belly and the wound had closed over it. Her condition did not change in any way, nor was there any harm done to any of her natural functions."
"I saw another man in whom an arrow had become stuck in his face and the wound had healed over it. When the arrow was removed, he felt almost no pain."
"And the arrow of the king's steward that was stuck in his middle nose and had already deviated slightly to the right, was completely hidden."
"And you were called to treat him because of the entry wound of the arrow within three days."
"And therefore you opened the wound of the arrow very carefully. Then you inquired about it with a delicate touch and did not feel it, but he felt a puncture behind his right ear; therefore you thought that that puncture was because of the extremity of the arrow."
"And you widened the area with an ointment that has attractive and digestive virtue, making sure that the area around it is dry so that the location of the arrow becomes apparent."
"And there was no significant harm in the place where the arrow had reached it. And I continued to apply the ointment to him for many days, and there was no harm done. And the wound healed during that time, and he recovered from the pain of the extraction after several days until one day he felt the arrow inside his nose and told me so."
"And then you applied a corrosive medicine to the wound for many days until it opened. And with your touch you felt that one end of the arrow adhered to its shaft."
"And approximately you adjusted the application of that corrosive medicine until I could see the extremity of the arrow very clearly. And I spent some time like this for about four months."
"And after the wound had become larger and it was possible for me to insert the forceps into it, I remained there and did not cease to devise and experiment with various methods until one day I began to extract it using various methods of traction with forceps made specifically for this purpose, as will be explained in detail later, until I finally extracted it; and then I restored that wound."
"And some physicians judged that the cartilage of the nose would not be restored, but I restored it and the wound healed completely, and the pain was entirely cured without any residue remaining."
"And I tell you about the extraction of some arrows because you can pause here and find meaning in what I have not said, since the parts of this art and its definitions are not understood through mere narration nor comprehended by this book."
"And the wise artisan compares little things with many; and what is present with what is absent. And he finds new operations and new instruments whenever foreign causes occur."
"And therefore I say that arrows are not forced out of the limbs in which they have been stuck except by two methods: either by attraction of the place where it has entered, or by the opposite direction of the other part."
"And that which is forced out by the place where it entered is either an arrow proceeding from a fleshy location and is attracted and pushed out."
"And if it does not obey extraction at the time when it is caught, then you must leave it for some days until the flesh around it has softened and its attraction and exit are facilitated."
"And similarly if it is stuck in bone and does not obey extraction, then leave it for some days and repeat the attraction and movement each day until it comes out."
"And if it does not obey extraction even after some days have passed, then you must drill around the arrow in that bone with a fine awl until the location of the arrow is widened and then extract it."
"But if the arrow has already disappeared in the location of the body and is beyond sensation, then you should search for it with your touch. And if you feel it there, then attract it using some instruments which are suitable for that attraction."
"And if you cannot reach it because of the contraction of the wound and the length of the arrow, and here there is neither bone nor nerve nor vein, then cut through the wound until it is widened and the arrow can be extracted."
"And if it is stuck in the ear with which it is held, then carefully cut away all the flesh around where it has entered using any device you can devise. And devise means to facilitate the exit of the flesh through the fracture of the ears and torsion of those until it comes out."
When you administer the extraction of the arrow in any place where it may be, then use a tweezers with your hand and forceps at all parts within that it may perform that operation; and subtly with extreme care that the arrow is not broken and that it is made to your difficult attraction of it and that extraction.
And if you cannot extract the arrow during your time of work, then leave it for a few days until the parts that are in the circuit around it have healed, and then operate when the swelling has decreased. But if there is a flow of blood during your operation, then administer that which we have said about cure in its chapter.
And guard your virtue of incision of vein or nerve, or tendon, and administer ingeniously in every possible manner the evacuation of the arrow; and do this with ease and calmness and slowness and steadfastness as you and it is recommended.
And then cause the arrow to contract so that the wound is according to the figure according to which the arrow was designed to enter it, for it is more useful. But if this is not possible for you, then administer what is possible for you according to the figures.
But arrows that are shot in contrary of the other wound, or those from which some other wound proceeds to the wounds outside, or cause swelling around the end of the arrow by feeling the wound above the nearby bone and raise that prominence; then cut over it; and let the section be according to the quantity in which the forceps take hold of it; and then pull it out, for it is easily extracted.
But if it is retained in the bone, then twist your saw according to the contrary direction in which the arrow enters the bone, and amplify at its middle part, and then extract it.
And if not, leave it there for some days, and then extract it when it is loose enough to be pulled out.
And if the shaft of the arrow is in that, then push it through with it.
But if the shaft is broken and you want to administer impulse, then insert this, if it is blunt, turn concave so that its concavity enters the cavity of the arrow and then push it through with it.
But if the arrow is concave, then push this with force entering into that, for the arrow is relieved by this.
And if the arrow is barbed, then it is necessary for you to cut away all the flesh in which the wound is, if that is possible for you, and then treat it with whatever is appropriate.
And if the arrow enters the bladder, or the belly, or the thigh, or the side, and is close so that you can touch it with your hand, and it is possible for you to cut over it, then cut over it and guard yourself from cutting any vein or nerve, and extract it, and then stitch it up if necessary, and treat it until it is healed.
Form of forceps with which arrows are extracted:
"Their extremities are like bird's beaks that are made with saw when they seize upon the arrow so that they do not let it go."
"Among these are made many species, large, few, and medium-sized, according to the quantity of the arrow's size and its thickness, and the width of the opening, and the tightness of it."
"Like this way so that it may ease the entrance of it into the concave arrow and is pushed with that."
"Venous phlebotomy."
"The veins that are usually phlebotomized are 30, of which 16 are in the head. These include two pulsating veins near the ears, called 'earlids', two veins visible on the temples, two veins located in the lacrimal canals of the eyes called 'tear ducts', one vein prepared at the middle of the forehead, and one vein located at the tip of the nose. There are also two veins on the neck and two veins on each lip. Additionally, there are two veins located behind the tongue." "The veins that are phlebotomized in the arms numbered five. These include one cephalic vein located on the outer side of the arm which is commonly called 'the vein of the head'. There is also a median vein formed by branches of the basilica and cephalic veins, known as 'the vein of the whole body' to the common people. The basilica vein is located on the inner side of the arm and is called 'citillar' or 'vena del ventre' in vulgar language. The radial vein lies over the forearm and is used for phlebotomy when it appears prominently at the pulse. The savatella vein lies between the auricular nerve and the little finger, consisting of two branches."
"And in the thigh and leg there are three veins: one is located on the outer side of the curvature of the knee joint on the outer thigh, another is the saphenous vein located on the inner side of the thigh near the knee joint, and the third is the sciatic vein located on the outer side of the thigh. There are also other veins in the leg similar to these."
"The benefit of phlebotomizing the veins near the ears is for treating ancient headaches, migraines, facial tics and ulcers on the face or head."
"And the method of phlebotomizing those veins is as follows: first, shave the patient's head. Then, rub the head with oil on both sides of the occiput using a large cloth and good friction. Next, make the patient bend their neck with a cloth tied around it so that two points near the ears appear at the front of the head. Use your index finger to find those veins and feel their pulse."
"Then take the lancet called 'cutellar', which is pointed, and introduce it into the vein on the elbow until blood comes out." "And raise your hand with the vein and elbow upwards, then make an incising cut into the vein with a pointed incision." "And make the length of the incision about two fingers' width or thereabouts, then let as much blood flow out as you wish."
"And afterwards, apply powder and a bandage to it so that it may heal."
"Before the start of this book, there was an incision made on them and their cauterization."
"More often than not, the two venous arteries that surround the temples serve as the location for phlebotomy in ancient times to treat migraine, headache, and frequent eye disorders. They also help to alleviate excess heat from the body."
"And the quality of performing phlebotomy on them is according to what you recommend to him: constraint the patient's illness with your hand firmly and visibly appearing on both veins, demonstrating the pulse of their vessels beneath your fingers. And then you will know how to proceed."
"And thus you raise the cord above the vein at its branches using your index finger, and insert the phlebotomy lancet beneath it, raising the vein up. Then cut it similarly as you did with the other two veins, allowing blood to flow according to your need."
"And thus release the pressure of the illness, and keep your finger on the vein for about an hour. Then apply a compress to that area with cotton and powder, strengthening it above with firm constraint, allowing it to heal within."
"And already at the beginning of this book, the memory of them (the veins) and their incision have been preceded."
"And therefore, phlebotomy of the frontal vein is appropriate for treating ancient facial diseases such as cephalic migraine and rigor (spasm), and also for fetid ulcers."
"And the quality of phlebotomy on him (the patient) is according to what I recommend to you: so that the illness strengthens its own vein with a bandage until the vein appears; and then take the instrument called 'fossor' whose form is as follows:"
"Press the prominent point that is at the head of the 'fossor' upon that vein and percuss it with your thumb or another cause in this manner, allowing blood to flow according to the quantity you desire. Then release the perforation of the illness and strengthen it within so that it may heal."
"And sometimes it is useful to use a blunt phlebotomy lancet, but it is not necessary that the phlebotomy lancet have an acute extremity like the others. Rather, its lateral extremity should be blunted so that the bone does not break it when it is thin."
"But the recommendation of these two veins (the angular and frontal veins) is for the lacrimal glands of both eyes for scabies of the eye with rigor and seborrhoea in the eyes, and for facial diseases."
"And the quality of phlebotomy is that you strengthen his vein with a bandage, and then perform phlebotomy on him, standing above his head."
"And let the phlebotomy be done obliquely along its length with a small phlebotomy lancet, because in that place there is not much flesh. And if the phlebotomy lancet is thin, it may break its point."
"And then let blood flow as much as you need, and pause on that spot, and strengthen it overnight with a bandage, and then release it."
"But phlebotomy of the nasal vein is beneficial for acute fever and violent headache, and also for facial diseases, migraine, rigor that occurs in the face, especially when it is chronic."
"And the quality of phlebotomy on him is that you strengthen his vein with your left hand and then take hold of his nose with your right hand. Then take the sharp phlebotomy lancet and place it in the middle of the head of the nose according to rectitude, because the vein does not appear to touch here, and because blood begins to flow immediately."
"It is necessary that you withdraw your hand gradually with the phlebotomy lancet and make blood flow according to your need. Then bind it overnight because that vein heals easily."
"But the benefit of phlebotomy on both saphenous veins is for constriction of the knee and for the beginning of leprosy, and for many diseases, itching, and corrupt ulcers like herpes zoster."
"And the quality of phlebotomy on those veins is that the patient should strengthen each vein with a bandage around his thigh. Then the operator should stand above the patient's head while the patient is seated on a chair."
"And then perform phlebotomy on the long saphenous vein with an ample phlebotomy lancet little by little. Then extract blood according to a moderate quantity or according to what seems necessary at that time. Then do the same for the other vein."
"And then untie the bandage and strengthen both veins with a middle ligature so that the patient is not fainted. Then leave him until morning because the swelling will be healed."
"And the benefit of phlebotomy on the veins of the arm is for small abscesses and pustules of the mouth, corruption of the gums, and corrupt ulcers and fissures. Also for ulcers that are in the nose and around it."
"And the quality of phlebotomy on those veins is that you make the patient sit before you and strengthen his vein with a bandage. Then turn back his lips and observe both veins, one of which is on the right side of the lip and the other on the left. The demonstration of each is by its blackness, and especially because there are small black veins around them. Then cut each one with an incising incision."
"But if there is doubt about which vein you should cut, then observe the incision of the larger one and the manifest pus from that one."
"And perform phlebotomy on both veins that are in the upper lips."
"Of the two veins that are on either side of the tongue, it is most appropriate for phlebotomy to be done at the level of the cephalic branches that are in the gulley, at the malady of the uvula, and at maladies of the mouth."
"And the quality of phlebotomizing this is that one follows the malady between their two largest veins, elevates their tongue, and regards both sides of it, observing the vein on one side and the vein on the other; and the color of each is inclining towards blackness."
"And then phlebotomize each one; but be careful not to pierce too deeply with your hand in phlebotomizing these ones, for there are arteries nearby."
"And the veins that are phlebotomized in the elbow are those which are commonly found in all men, and their phlebotomy is performed in two ways: either by putting a mirtilated or olivated flebotomy needle to subtly incline, or by cutting with a flebotomy scalpel, and calling it if necessary; and this is its form:"
"It should be like this: first, as often as possible, and adapt to opening the veins that are concave and full, proceeding with apparent large ones; and those that contain thick, turbid blood."
"And this phlebotomy has a smaller width and more subtle tip; it is suitable for phlebotomizing those veins that contain subtle, citrine-colored blood."
"But the main benefit of phlebotomy from the basilica vein (one of three veins) is that it extracts blood from those illnesses which are on the left side of the neck and collar, and from whatever affects the chest and belly."
"And it is appropriate for the phlebotomist, when performing a phlebotomy on that [vein], to carefully watch over it and be cautious in it, because there is an artery nearby; if he errs in the puncture of the phlebotomy needle, he will injure that artery and cause a flow of blood. Therefore, it should not be phlebotomized with a pointed phlebotomy needle, but rather cutting with a scalpel."
"And if the basilica is not apparent by manifest appearance, then you should leave it and move to another one of its branches; or phlebotomize at the end of the arm where that is manifest. And cut that with a scalpel needle as we have said."
"But if you want to phlebotomize the median vein, then first at the bend of the arm where you know the pulse location, and approach gently with your fingers. Then lift up the arm and cut the vein with a concave section using a scalpel needle as we have said; and be careful not to cut too deeply for some space from the artery."
"And when you press with strength, if it swells in the place where you have touched with your fingers, then that swelling is a swelling of the artery, and therefore avoid that."
"And if the blood flows in the phlebotomy like a child's urine, and the blood is red, then know that it is blood from the artery. Then quickly lift your finger off of it for some distance; remove your finger, and if the blood ceases, because often it does cease, then press on the arm and leave it."
"And guard against the disease of the wound and be careful with it for some days until it is healed so that it does not fester."
"But if the blood does not cease and you know that no medicine is present for this, then you have injured the artery. If it appears to you, because its extremity is contracted and the blood has ceased; or take a cloth of figs and press upon it, and then take one handbreadth of lint and press it on the place of the vein with pressure descending with a bandage and powder for another day."
"And then if the blood has ceased, that is good. But if not, then cure it with whatever was mentioned earlier at the recollection of the place where the powders cease the flow of blood."
"And the stopping of the blood from it is difficult in many dispositions due to the small size of the vein and the possibility of injury to the arm."
"But phlebotomy of the dark vein is useful because it removes blood from the rising part of the head and from the descending part of the trunk. For this reason, because it is composed of branches of the basilica and branches of the cephalica, as we have said."
"But it is necessary for the phlebotomist to be careful in phlebotomizing that one because nearby there is a nerve. And therefore if he errs in the puncture of the phlebotomy needle and touches the nerve, then stupor will occur, and its healing is difficult; often it does not heal completely. This nerve can appear to sensation; but sometimes it may be hidden at some people and is subtle and not visible. Then you should pause the phlebotomy with which you phlebotomize with a scalpel section, and avoid the nerve with your strength."
"And if the vein is between two nerves, then cut the vein lengthwise."
"The benefit of phlebotomizing the cephalic vein is that it draws blood from the head and alleviates diseases of the eyes."
"And in this particularly, if you want the phlebotomist to puncture with an olive-shaped needle or a myrtle-shaped needle; because it is safer than all other veins, for there are neither artery nor nerve nearby."
"But often an aposteme appears in some people when they are not phlebotomized at the first percussion; but do not touch that aposteme."
"The first one is that you should know that phlebotomy is administered only for the conservation of health and with hope of improvement and caution against the occurrence of diseases. And it should be done on one of the veins which are in the elbow: cephalic, dark, or basilica; and it should be done at the beginning of spring, fasting in spring and autumn, and after eating in winter when signs of repletion appear."
"And phlebotomy should be performed on the third day or at least three hours later than midday."
"But phlebotomy that is administered when convenience and necessity require it can be done at any time, day or night, at any hour and at any time."
"And children should not be phlebotomized until they are fourteen years old; and pregnant women should not be phlebotomized except in the fourth month and up to seven months. And elderly people who have already passed sixty years should not be phlebotomized."
"And when someone wants to be phlebotomized for any reason, they should cleanse their bowels beforehand with a lion's claw enema; especially if there is much retained feces in them. For if the veins absorb superfluities from the intestines during phlebotomy, which have been cleansed, it will not harm the principal members."
"Let not patients suffering from sacred and profane drunkenness nor those who flee from sickness or drunkenness be phlebotomized until this is removed from them; also let not patients with dropsy be phlebotomized. Rather, phlebotomy should be feared in cases of sudden passion, vomiting, windiness of the belly, multiplication of coitus and labor, excessive exercise during fasts or vigils, or any cause that dissolves virtue."
"And consider in the refinement of humors beforehand whether the blood is thick, from excessive foods and drinks, and if so, medicinally thin it if possible."
"And also enter into a bath, if no cause forbids it, or exercise somewhat for the blood to be subtilized."
"And pause the phlebotomy from there in the foot until about the hour of Terce, as we have said."
"And continue so that the foot of him who has been phlebotomized is guarded from all evil animal accidents, such as anxiety, anger, fear, and from all corporal accidents, such as excessive labor, pain, coitus, and like them."
"And let his seat be prepared with the causes in use by men with aromaticity and fragrance, and with balsams and like them according to their quantity of possibility."
"And follow the phlebotomist on a cushion that is softer than the cushion of him who is to be phlebotomized."
"And then extend his arm, and rub that of the phlebotomist with his own hand two or three times; and then strengthen the ligature with a rope and wrap it twice."
"And let the ligature be moderate, for if it is not equal, or there is superfluity in the ligature, then fluxes of blood are prohibited; or if it is with softening, then the course of the blood is impeded equally."
"And then, before making the ligature, let him who is to be phlebotomized rub his hands together until the veins are inflated and clearly felt."
"And then the phlebotomist should anoint his lancet with a little of proper old oil; and then place his index finger of his left hand over that vein where he wishes to perform the phlebotomy, so that the vein may flee a bit, and percuss the vein gently until one finds a vein that feels like a cord fleeing under the phlebotomy site. And those veins are full of windiness, and when one pauses the lancet on them, they contract under the lancet, and become visible to the phlebotomist; and if the lancet touches the vein, then it is narrow."
"And thus, let the phlebotomist be careful and attentive to all these causes."
"And then pause the lancet, but if the vein is not opened in one attempt, then it is good. And if not, repeat that attempt on another vein nearby, or press down with haste, if there is no aposteme."
"And if the site is apostemated or the patient becomes worse, then let him be left for a day or two, and do not strengthen the ligature, lest it draw out the aposteme too violently, nor introduce into baths."
"And then repeat the phlebotomy if necessary."
"And if the opening is small and blood flows subtly, and you fear that not enough blood will flow out, then repeat the lancet in that tract according to rectitude and adjust it a little at the opening, and do this with haste before the site becomes apostemated, for the site becomes apostemated in most men with but little opening."
"But if the site is already apostemated, then do not repeat upon it, lest you have cause for blame. And pause upon some part of the oil groove, for it alleviates the course of the blood." "And it is better in this location that oil, and other oils."
"And similarly administer an oil groove in all phlebotomies where veins are opened against the prohibition of blood flow, and do this with treacle, almonds, and saffron when pausing from one of these upon the site, for blood is subtilized and circulated when it is thick."
"And if a large aposteme is generated at the site of phlebotomy, which often happens, and especially to those who are not bled until that attempt, or where the vein opens but little, then apply a poultice, and pause upon the site with a sponge infused in water and salt, a little scraped, and press it for an hour, for it dissolves."
"And he should do this also at the time of stopping the flow of blood from that vein with a ligature or another vein."
"And if there remains in the site for some days a little blackness or greenness, do not notice it. And if you wish, pause upon that with some cause of aloe and myrrh dissolved, or some cause of mint juice or chamomile, or similar."
"And many times apostemes and elevations occur due to phlebotomy at the basilica [i.e., temple of the head]."
"And then pause your hand upon that, and if you find softness under your compression on it, then that elevation is evil and bad. And therefore be careful to pause upon it with some cause of what we have said, lest blood flow violently from the artery."
"And make an emplaster with that in which there is astringency, so that the site may be endured. And then treat it with another cure until it is healed."
"And each person should have blood extracted from him according to the quantity of his virtue and according to the color prevailing over his blood as it appears."
"For if the blood is black, then let it flow out until it becomes red. And similarly if you find it thick, then let it flow out until it becomes subtilized. And likewise if it is acute, until its sharpness is abated."
"And he should amplify the phlebotomy of the vein and make the lancet broad for that person who is full and strong and has need of bloodletting in one attempt."
"And in the thin person, let the opposite be done, and let that person have blood extracted from him in several attempts, and let the tract be narrow."
"And the best that is administered in phlebotomy of veins is a transverse section, not puncture."
"And this manner of phlebotomy is saved from flux of blood and incision of nerves. And it is more praiseworthy and safer than phlebotomy according to latitude and longitude."
"And to that one upon whom syncope is accustomed to occur during phlebotomy, you should take care of him before phlebotomy with a little bread infused in verjuice or simple syrup scraped. And extract blood from him in three or four attempts."
"And if there is coldness of temperament, then take before phlebotomy bread infused in syrup of myrrh or in aromatic syrup sweetened with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and the like, or in syrup that is aromatic and very fragrant."
"And if syncope occurs during phlebotomy and it is due to much blood loss, then let him drink water of flesh and very fragrant syrup. And use aromatics with aloe, and let him rub his forehead with that."
"And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division in the chapter on syncope from evacuation."
"To swell the patient's arm and dissolve their blood according to their constitution, apply to them that which is suitable for much evacuation, whose power is frog, which expels blood gradually, as per the quantity of its power in continuous days."
"He who wants to swell his arm and draw his blood again, and whose body is robust, let him do this about seven or nine hours after the first phlebotomy."
"He who wants to draw blood from his body against the part that declines, let it be done on the second or third day after swelling."
"He who has little blood already shed in his body and feels weak and experiences fever, let a lot of blood be drawn from him at once, and increase the aperture gradually until he faints; but you must keep all the conditions of phlebotomy; and place your hand on his pulse while letting the blood out, so that death does not occur instead of fainting, for many times this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent."
"And when you want to release the arm and evacuate the blood again, after the opening of the vein has already closed and it is difficult to draw blood, do not press hard under that arm with a curved hand, for that is too rough."
"After performing phlebotomy again, let him rest until he is phlebotomized a second time; or remove the acuteness of the phlebotomy that has coagulated blood in the opening of the vein; or place upon it some tyriaca alfarach, or sagzeneia, and compress it with light compression until the blood is completely expelled."
"And if the vein is inflamed, leave that one alone and do not touch it until the inflammation has subsided."
"And if there is a need to evacuate blood again and there is no excuse, then do it on the same spot or in another vein of the other arm."
"And the vein called 'funis of the arm' is phlebotomized instead of the cephalic or basilic veins when they are not visible or are hidden, for it consists of those."
"And the quality of performing phlebotomy on him is that the patient immerses his hand in cold water until the vein becomes engorged and appears clearly."
"And approach should be made with a bandage with moderate tension over that with a median strap; and phlebotomy should be performed according to the transverse line, not latitudinally nor longitudinally."
"And let the opening be wide, and perform your phlebotomy with the same vein that you phlebotomize above the junction of the hand a little."
"And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then immerse your hand in cold water again and let the blood run into the water until your need is satisfied."
"But if you are in the days of summer, then you are excused from immersing your hand in cold water, and in winter, it is prohibited to cool the body with cold water."
"And phlebotomy of this vein is safer than that of all other veins, for it does not have a pulsating vein or nerves."
"And phlebotomy of the saphenous vein on the right hand is beneficial for diseases of the liver."
"And the quality of performing phlebotomy on him is that you bind the hand with a bandage or your hand, after having placed it in cold water, until the vein becomes inflamed and clearly visible to view; and approach and phlebotomize it transversely; and if you hit upon something else, do not remove that from there."
"And be careful not to finish the phlebotomy with your hand, for beneath it are the nerves of those denuded of flesh."
"And approach again immerses the hand in cold water and let the blood run into that, for if you do not immerse it again in the cold water, the blood will coagulate in the opening of the vein, and it is prohibited to flow."
"And when blood has been extracted according to the quantity needed, then place upon the vein oil and salt so that it does not become consolidated suddenly; and do likewise in all veins that are straight."
"But the benefit of phlebotomy on this vein of the left hand is that it is beneficial for diseases of the spleen."
"And do likewise in performing phlebotomy on him as you have done in the other."
"And the benefit of phlebotomy of the saphenous vein is for diseases that are in the lower parts of the body, such as diseases of the womb, and retention of menses, and for diseases of the thighs and ulcers of old sores, and similar diseases."
"And the quality of performing phlebotomy on him is that the patient immerses his foot in cold water and makes friction until the veins appear clearly; and he places a bandage over the junction of the foot; and the point of the vein appears below the said projection, and from there it branches into many small ramifications on the surface of the foot."
"And then phlebotomize the most prominent branch or that which is below the heel below the aggregation of it, for it is better and safer."
"And if you phlebotomize it on the surface of the foot, then be careful of the nerves that are beneath it on the surface of the foot, and finish your phlebotomy with the one with which you phlebotomize transversely, as if you wanted to incise it."
"And let the phlebotomy be sufficient."
"But if it is prohibited to let blood, then immerse his foot again in cold water and let the blood run into that until it is evacuated."
"And if the phlebotomist errs on the first attempt, then approach again with the phlebotomy tool and remove a little more, for the location is safe; and do not fear hurting him, but be careful of the nerves as we have said."
"And do likewise with the saphenous vein of the other foot."
"And of the sciatic vein, its location is as we have said beneath the heel below the head of the fibula on the outer side."
"And the benefit of phlebotomy on it is for pain in the hip when it is due to hot blood."
"And the quality of performing phlebotomy on him is that the patient enters into a bath and makes haste and strengthens his thigh on the side of the hip above the heel and binds it with a long thin bandage so that nothing else appears there."
"And then when it appears, then phlebotomize it according to each vein that you can and according to the transverse direction, which is better; or incise it with incision or cut it with sectioning, for its location is safe."
"And it is found in many men with difficulty; and if you do not find it at all by touch, then phlebotomize some branch of it, which appears on the back of the foot near the said auricular and annular bones."
"And be careful of the nerves, and let flow the quantity of blood that you wish."
"And then loosen the bandage and place over the location of the phlebotomy a cotton wick soaked in honey or olive oil to strengthen the location, for it is healed easily."
"Of cupping (ventosization) and of the qualities of using those instruments."
"Cupping is done with horns, or earthenware, or glass."
"And cupping is done in two ways: one with scarification and bloodletting, the other without scarification."
"And this wound-cleansing is done in two ways, either by fire or without fire."
"And the thirteen locations on the body where wounds are administered with scarification and bloodletting are as follows: the first is placed on the forehead, which is the final part of the head; the middle one between the two parts of the neck; those under the chin near the jawbone but below the mouth; those on both spatulas; those on either shoulder, located at the end of the upper arm; those on each elbow, which are at the bend of the arm; and finally, those on both thighs."
"And bloodletting does not extract blood from the large veins, but only from the small ones scattered throughout the flesh. Therefore, it does not draw out the humor in that way, just as phlebotomy does; nor is it necessary to perform bloodletting with fire or without fire in any disease caused by excess, until the entire body has been purged."
"But if bloodletting is necessary due to illness or continuity, it should be administered at the beginning, middle, and end of each month, as well as at any other appropriate time."
"And thus, whenever any of these causes occur, and especially if it is on the third or middle day of the month, we command bloodletting to be performed after two or three days have passed from that day."
"And the benefit of bloodletting from the neck is that it helps to alleviate heaviness in the head and prevent fainting spells. However, it is necessary that this be an appropriate evacuation of the entire body."
"And this bloodletting takes place at the location for phlebotomy on the cephalic vein."
"It is not recommended to perform bloodletting on someone with plethoric constitution or a catarrhal condition, as this can cause great harm."
"And therefore, it is not necessary to perform bloodletting on the elderly, nor on those whose illnesses are caused by heat."
"But whoever persists in bloodletting will forget this practice. Therefore, it is necessary that you command the phlebotomist to pause his hand slightly before removing the cupping vessel at the end of the session, so as to prevent the generation of forgetfulness."
"But bloodletting for asthmatics takes place at the locations for phlebotomy of the dark vein and basilica vein. For this reason, it helps to relieve asthma, constriction of the throat, splitting of the windpipe, coughs, and congestion."
"And it is necessary to withdraw the cupping vessel for asthmatics slightly, because if it is paused too long, it can generate weakness in the body and stomach."
"And bloodletting for headaches helps to relieve accidental pains in the head and ophthalmia, migraine, and inflammation, as well as pains in the roots of teeth. It takes place at the location for phlebotomy of the basilica vein."
"And it is necessary that you command the phlebotomist not to press his hand during scarification, so that he does not pierce the artery and cause bleeding."
"And bloodletting from the chin helps to relieve bad breath in the mouth, gum disease, and other oral conditions. It takes place at the location for phlebotomy of the artery that is on both lips."
"But bloodletting performed between the two spatulas helps to relieve heatstroke, which occurs due to an excess of heat."
"And bloodletting performed between the two divisions of the cheeks helps to relieve flebotomy of three veins: the basilica, dark, and cephalic veins. This is because it attracts blood from all those small veins that are in the flesh, as well as from the other small veins connected to the larger veins, so that the attraction reaches these three veins."
"And command the phlebotomist not to proceed with scarification because that location is devoid of flesh and therefore has nerves and arteries close beneath the surface."
"And it is bloodletting performed on the shanks that helps to relieve hemorrhoids of the anus and ulcers of the perineum."
"And it is necessary that you command the phlebotomist to perform a large bloodletting with a sharp cup because this location requires strong extraction, and subtle cups do not draw much blood when used alone; therefore it should be scarified."
"But bloodletting performed on the fleshy part of the forearm helps to relieve chronic pains in the kidneys and womb, as well as the bladder. It stimulates menstruation and relieves both dropsy and obesity. It takes place at the location for phlebotomy of two saphenous veins, and the horizontal vein, as well as two small veins."
"But it can also greatly weaken the entire body and cause fainting in many men."
"And bloodletting performed on the horizontal vein offers relief similar to that of bloodletting performed on both arms."
"The quality of the position of bloodletting is that at the beginning, the cup should be placed vertically and followed by gentle suction, without prolonging the position of bloodletting too much. Instead, pause it lightly and remove it carefully so that the humors come to the location naturally." "And do not cease repeating this until you see that the location has become reddened and swollen, and that the blood begins to appear."
"And then scarify and repeat suction little by little, taking care to consider the disposition of the patient's constitution."
"For that person who has tender skin with many pores, it is necessary for you to scarify him only once and not more than that, so that the location does not become ulcerated."
"And command the phlebotomist to widen the scarification slightly and press down a little, while gently applying suction."
"If the blood is thick and coarse, then it is necessary to scarify twice. For in the first scarification, the path for the subtle exit of blood and water is opened." "But in the second one, the extraction of thick blood is acquired through scrutiny."
"If the blood is very fetid, then it is necessary to perform a third scarification in order to achieve the desired result."
"Finally, when we want to extract blood little by little or just a small amount, one scarification suffices."
"And if we want to extract a lot of blood, we should perform many scarifications. But if we know that the blood is thick, then it is necessary to perform scarifications with a deep cut."
"The term 'scarification' refers only to the depth of the wound made by the lancet."
"And if the person has thick, hard, dark skin with narrow pores, then it is necessary to anoint the locations of bloodletting with gentle, opening, resolvent oils. If it is summer time, use oils such as aloe oil, violet oil, or double-dosed melilot oil, or cumin seed oil. But if it is winter time, then use narcissus oil, lily oil, chamomile oil, or blood oil for those of a similar nature."
"If excess fluid is thick, then use oil of marjoram, or oil of balm, or oil of aloe, or oil of nettle, and their like."
"If the wound is of large pores with tender flesh, then oil should be prohibited, and the places near the wound should have their bandages washed with warm water or hot water of salt, or cold water of sage, or cold water of borago, etc., according to those."
"And for one whose blood has great humidity, wash their wounds with sour wine, or water of myrtle and sumac, etc., like those."
"And for one whose fluids are thick, wash their wounds with old wine, or water of hyssop (marjoram), or decoction of fennel, or chamomile, etc., like those."
"And it is necessary that the bandage be kept before washing; having to be administered near the bath for one or two hours, and having to sleep near the wound."
"What is necessary for regulating the bandage of a patient who has been bled before washing."
"At the beginning, if the patient or one who needs phlebotomy is choleric and vents over his hot blood and inflammation, then he should take causes of cooling, such as sour apples, endive with vinegar and lettuce, and secanabin, and julep, etc., like those."
"And pause in their foods such as poles, fowl meat, cooked foods with sour sauces, etc., like those."
"And for one whose complexion is phlegmatic, it is necessary that he drink hyssop syrup with honey, or hyssop syrup of sesame seeds and sumac, and a middle-aged wine between old and new; and that he be advised to use moderation in drinking and eating, and avoid foods such as poultry, rabbit, partridge, and pigeon."
"And it is necessary that on the day of washing and phlebotomy, drinking be greater than eating."
"And it is necessary to give some people triaca syrup or musk medicine (musk), or alcelita before washing or phlebotomy or during, so that their main members are comforted and their blood is subtilized; but those with a scrofula should not take it."
"But the washings that are not scars are those paused on the liver, and on the spleen and podagra, and on the navel, in the locations of the joints, and the armpit of the arm, for these members do not suffer scarification upon them."
"And it is not desired for those except the attraction of blood from a member, such as pausing a wash on the nipple in illness of bleeding of blood from the nose; and they use it so that cold and thickened humors of the member may be dissolved, such as pausing on the belly and navel; for it rarifies the member, scalds it, and relieves pain because it resolves humors."
"And it is paused on the temples when accidents occur in their oppression or apoplexy, for by virtue of strong attraction it draws away oppression and expels apoplexy from its place."
"And similarly, it does when paused on the liver and spleen to resolve humors enclosed therein."
"And these washings are administered solely with suction; some times they are administered with fire."
"And sometimes they are administered filled with warm water in illnesses of the spleen."
"And this is so that the washing may be full and larger, it should be cold water alone or water in which convenient herbs have been cooked."
"Form of washing administered with fire: Let the circumference of its mouth be that of two fingers, as we have formed it; and let the quantity of coals be the most of one handful; and let them be on the side of it, in the place that is in the circle, the most of it, and let the traction be small according to the quantity that enters it like a needle."
"Let them be made of red hot coals or citrus, with thick edges, lion's teeth, and smooth for that they not wound the member because of its position upon it."
"And let there be in its midst a transverse tongue of iron or of brass, on which is placed a candle with fire."
"And let this washing be much larger than that which we have recommended, and the smaller one according to the illnesses and state of he who uses it."
"And washings for children and weak ones are different from those for young people and strong ones."
"And the quality of pausing this washing with fire on a member is that it extends the hand with fire from decently dried wood before a small candle of wax, and pauses it on the midst of the transverse tongue in the middle place of the washing, so that the fire be kindled around the edge thereof so that not burn the body of the sick person."
"And then it is paused on the member of the sick person, and let the thread be upon the traction that we have said, until when we have the washings and do not desire to stretch the thread and that smoke issue forth upon that traction, then the washing will soon dissolve."
"And then remove the hand according to its manner, and repeat it if necessary."
"But in washing that is administered for the illness of pleurisy with water, there being neither transverse tongue nor traction, and it is not administered until it is filled with water, and is paused on the member alone."
"And this is its form: And this washing, the larger it is, the better, for that it can receive a large quantity of water."
"Chapter .xcvii."
"Bloodlettings are not administered on most members except those where it is impossible to apply washings because of their smallness, such as the eye and gum and like them; or on member denuded of flesh, such as the finger and nose and their like."
"And the quality of using those bloodlettings is if found sanguissuguas that are in the waters of ditches free from putrefaction."
"And then they are laid the day and night in water ditch until they be hungry, and that there remain none in the belly of those, and then let the body be evacuated at the beginning by phlebotomy and washings, and then rub the member of the sick person until it becomes reddened; and then pause them on it."
"And when they are full and sated."
"And if it is possible to suck the place with a washing, it is more expedient in healing."
"But if not, then wash the place with vinegar and afterwards with much water; and let it be rubbed and pressed."
"And if the body of blood is prolonged near the closing of the sanguissuguas, and it is this that issues forth, then you should insert a cloth moistened in hot water, and pause it on it until the issue be stopped."
"And if the blood is multiplied, then sprinkle upon it powdered vitriol or gallstones and like them of the causes stiptical until the blood be cut off; or pause on the place many of roasted broad beans, and lay them there until the beans adhere to the place, and the blood is cut off."
"And it is necessary, if necessary, iteration of sanguissuguas when it is possible to change those."
"And if sanguissuguas are prohibited from suspension, then rub the place with fresh blood or put a needle in the places until it issues forth blood; and also pause them there, for those when they feel any blood soon adhere."
"When you wish it to stop bleeding, sprinkle on it a bit of powdered aloe, or salt, or ashes."
Here begins the second part: of restoration. This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine; it concerns the reduction and repositioning of fractured or dislocated bones.
But know, my son, that only fools and commoners boast about this chapter, those who have never regarded the books of the Ancients nor read even one letter from them.
And this is why this method is not practiced among the learned in our land. And yet I have not forgotten it during all these years of my life; and I have not included what follows except for the long study of the books of the Ancients and understanding of them, from which I extracted this science.
And now I direct you to experiments and studies during the length of my life.
And I have already described in this chapter everything that my science contains and on which I have experimented, since I have summarized it for you here and freed you from the occupation of lengthening it. And I have summarized it at the end of summarizing; and I have demonstrated it at the end of explaining; and I have formed many shapes of instruments that are administered in it, as is done by addition to explanation, just as I have done in two preceding chapters.
Chapter one
Summary and collections of cases of bone fractures, from which a preliminary explanation is necessary before we begin the reminder of broken limbs and their varieties in each case. Therefore, I will say in the prologue of this chapter the summaries of my speech; and the chapters for understanding which at the beginning it is necessary to force the artisans and to stay on the truth of them; that is you and those who are prompt that know or learn this noble art other than you.
And therefore I say that when there occurs fracture or dislocation or torsion or casing, it is necessary for you to begin immediately with phlebotomy on him or to let him bleed, or sometimes both, if there are no prohibitions such as debility of virtue, or he is an infant, or very old, or it is a time of intense heat or cold.
And it should be content with his usual diet of fresh herbs and meats of birds and crabs; and prohibit thick meats and filling foods and all foods that fill the veins with blood until you are certain of an abscess cut and if you do not fear effusion of matter in the limb.
And immediately return the sick to his usual first regimen with which he is accustomed to live.
And therefore when the bone begins to be restored, then it is necessary for the sick to be nourished with nutritious foods that are rich and heavy and viscous, such as foods made from wheat cooked with water, rice, heads, feet, bellies of cows, oil, fresh cheese, thick wine and similar ones. And with this regimen coagulation of fracture occurs more easily and quickly.
And know that the bones of young people when they are in their first growth and old men do not have the ability to be united and consolidated according to their nature because of the dryness of their limbs.
But nevertheless nature is able and accustomed to unite over the broken bone of any part without any similar cause such as glutinousness that adheres and strengthens it until they are completely united and fixed together until the end of solidity and firmness, just like fire at the beginning, provided that no cause prohibits this from its works.
And for this reason it is necessary to pause the foods of the sick, foods that are heavy and viscous and thick, as we have said.
And know that the species of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of the members, for a fracture of the bone of the leg is different from that of the head; and the fracture of the bone of the foot is different from that of the arm; and similarly all the other members are diverse among themselves.
And I come with remembrance of every species of fracture, explained in its own chapter separately from the others.
Great diversity even within itself. And the species of bone fractures are diversified within themselves; for there is an arch fracture which occurs in stars, and sometimes fractures occur according to the length of the bone: these are called spiral fractures and zigzag fractures and additional ones that do not proceed, such as those that occur when a pen is prepared to write. And there is a fracture with swelling and disruption at the head, and a small fissure fracture.
And for each species there is a specific pain or torment in its restoration according to what will come later in its own chapter in their places.
Many signs of bone fracture. And for this reason a bone fracture is recognized by its tortuosity, and the prominence and depression of it to the touch, and that when you grasp it with your hand.
And therefore when there is no apparent tortuosity in the place and it is not done with your touch when you shake the bone and the sick does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture here.
It is possible that there may be tortuosity or a small fissure, so you should not move it with your hand and squeeze it too much. Rather pause on it with the medications of which mention will be made at that moment which are appropriate for the place; and rather apply traction by subtle restriction.
And know that the place where it is arched and not split into two or other than spiral fractures, since all parts of its comparison are removed, then you should begin immediately with the correction of it provided that it suffers from cauterizing abscess.
And if it suffers from cauterizing abscess, then leave it alone for a few days until the abscess ceases. And afterwards move it in whatever way you can of elevation and exercise.
And know that the restoration and union of it is more easy than for the bone in which a spiral fracture occurs.
And therefore strengthen it according to what will come later about it.
But if the bone has spiral fractures, then it is necessary to extend this broken member from two parts if it is the hand or foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two strings or with one string and your hand.
And be in such a position that you hold the member at the place where it is moved according to its natural figure while the parts of the broken member are extended, then persevere in returning those additions with exercise and movement according to what you can do in their places.
And guard yourself according to your ability that the sick does not suffer because of your operation of them or injury. And persevere according to your ability in applying one bone to its companion according to their best forms.
And it is necessary that you touch it at that opportune moment with your hand and if there is any different cause here, correct it and move it according to the quantity of your virtue.
And avoid vehement extension and compression, as do many foolish doctors who often cause cauterizing abscess because of their operation or cause contraction in the member as we have seen from the operations of many.
"And the quality of the tightening of the broken limb is what I recommend. For you should know that broken limbs are diverse in their smallness and greatness, and in their form."
"And for those that are small, such as the arm, hand, and foot, and similar ones, then the wrapping should be made of very soft cloth."
"But those that are large, such as the thigh or calf, require a strong and firm wrapping, because the tight wrapping connects the member strongly on all sides with equal tightening, so that there is no crease in it."
"And begin thus: carefully start your wrapping of the limb conveniently over the site of that fracture with three or four wrappings according to what the member requires, and tighten your hand a little with the bandage."
"And then continue down to that limb beyond the highest point of the fracture site, and tighten it even more than you did with the wrapping with which you tightened the fracture site." "And then extend your wrapping beyond the fracture site somewhat, and gradually loosen the tightening until you reach a considerable distance from it."
"And then take another bandage and wrap it again over the broken site with wrapping, and continue down beyond the fracture site with wrappings; and your operation should be the same in the tightening of the wrapping and loosening of that according to what we have said concerning the first wrapping above."
"And then pause between the wrappings with a piece of wool or cloth with which to straighten out the crookedness of the fracture if there is any crookedness in it; and if not, do not pause in it for any reason."
"And then wrap another bandage over it, and also wrap stars decently made of pitch-plaster around these wrappings if there is no inflammation or cauterized ulcer in the site, and otherwise wrap around that which covers the ulcer or inflamed area; and leave it like that for a few days; and then tighten over those star plasters."
"And let the stars be made of soft white linen cloth, skillfully formed; or they may be made of pine wood; or branches of palm; and let each star be of this size and shape:"
"However, the plaster that is placed over that fracture should be thicker and wider than the other plasters, and its length should be according to what the limb is in size and smallness. And then tighten over the plasters with another bandage according to your first tightening; and then tie it above with thread skillfully as we have said concerning tightening, and let your tightening be according to the extent of the fracture site, and the further away from the fracture, the less the tightening."
"And the threads should be medium in thickness and fineness, and made of wool; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen some foolish people doing when they use threads of twisted thread for tying, it is a great error, because the tightening will not be even."
"Also very fine threads are not convenient, because you will not be able to tighten with those what you want, and it is not necessary that there should be less than a finger's breadth between plaster and plaster."
"And if the patient feels pain in the extremities of the plasters near the tightening in those places, then remove them with soft wool or carded wool until it no longer hurts him."
"Sometimes fracture occurs with luxation, and dislocation occurs in the elbow, as I have mentioned in that chapter concerning singularities."
"And know that not every broken limb should be plastered on the first day; the reason for this is that when a limb is large, it does not require plasters to be placed upon it until about five or seven days have passed, according to your certainty of the advent of an inflamed ulcer."
"And this is the manner of plasters with which the Ancients used to treat fractures, luxations, and deformities."
"Manner of plaster commonly used for the treatment of fractures, convenient for many complexities and especially for women and children, because it does not cause heat or friction: take flour powder, which is the bran that remains after grinding grain in a mill."
"And sieve it thus as it is with albumin of egg white, and use it without making it too thick or fine."
"Another manner of plaster for treating fracture, luxation, and deformity: take asafetida, laudanum, acacia, enula, and mustard seed which is the residue of wild mustard, all of these in equal parts, five drachmas each; myrrh and aloe also five drachmas each; aloes wood twenty drachmas; all are ground and sieved and mixed with aloetic water or egg white if the patient's condition is scabbed. And use this plaster, because it has a good composition and restores lightly broken bones, beneficial for many people."
"Another manner of plaster which is beneficial for fracture and deformity: take mustard seed and white wax fifteen drachmas each, myrrh and aloe five drachmas each, acacia six drachmas, pitch twenty drachmas."
"All are ground in a mortar with much effort and sieved, and mixed with water or egg white and applied."
"Manner of plaster for joints and separated bones in their places, and when pain occurs accidentally in those and for fissures and fractures: take clean wool and submerge it in sour wine and cooked oil, and place it on the location."
"But in this plaster there is no virtue of restoration, of inflamed ulcer, nor does it properly expel pains."
"Another manner of plaster that restores broken bone: take leaves from a fig tree and leaves from wild poppy, count them all together and make plaster of them."
"A brief manner of plaster administered for the restoration of broken bone and when you want resolution of the remnant of ulcer: take residues of white wax, chamomile flowers, violet flowers, barley flour, all in equal parts by weight; grind them all together and mix with wine if the limb is not scabbed."
"But if it is scabbed, then use it mixed with wet coriander water or plain water."
"Another manner of plaster more powerful in resolution than the first, when a hard ulcer occurs during bone restoration: take residues of white wax and its seed, and of balm, melilot, marjoram, violet flowers, chamomile flowers, all in equal parts by weight; grind them together and mix with willow water or sweet water or wine, all according to the quality of the limb and the appearance of its color."
"Hippocrates does not specify in his book that anything should be placed on the member during its restoration, but rather that a cerote of wax and oil should be made and no other cause recommended; he suggests it should be between thickness and subtlety."
"However, in the case of Galen it is seen that something should be placed on the broken member during its restoration and the causes in which there is heat exhaustion with small heat are such as myrrh, frankincense and similar ones to those we have recommended."
"Method of plaster that relieves injury and pain: take ground mastic, of cypress, of human hairs shaved or feathers of birds, and of althea, and salt, powdered equally; they should be sifted and sieved and are made into a plaster."
"But the quantity according to which the bandage should remain and especially be loosened is that you should consider if there is no pain or pressure nor the bone broken has not moved from its place, then you should not loosen it for many days." "And if there is great pain or pressure or inflammation at that place, then you should cut or loosen it immediately, and remove the plaster from it."
"And take a cloth of linen and a marine sponge dampened, and submerge that in warm water, and with it wash the place within until that pressure and pain are relieved; then let the member rest for an hour; then apply over it clean wool immersed in vinegar and oil or rose oil, and tie it on for one night so that you are sure of a cauterized abscess, and that the inflammation of the member is eased, and the pain from it is removed."
"And then continue that subtle strapping and small plaster until you have healed completely with your first strapping, subtly."
"And if often times the abscess and the heat and the pain and the inflammation and all accidents have been removed from everything, then you should continue that as you did at the beginning, equally."
"But if no cause of those that we have mentioned occurs to the member, then you should not loosen it except after three or four days or five or seven; and sometimes all this is left for twenty days according to what appears to you by the loosening of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres and joins together with the coagulation of the flesh over it."
"And then tighten the strapping more than your first strapping all around, and adjust according to the thickness of the flesh of the sick person, as it has preceded."
"But if you see that the place of the fracture is already dry and exhausted more than it should be, then you know that nourishment is prohibited from reaching it. Therefore, moisten it with warm water every time you loosen it; do this for all three days; and slightly loosen the strapping, and by this operation, bring nourishment to the member, and it will heal easily."
"But what foolish restorers of the fracture of the member do sometimes when it is not restored at the beginning as it should be, and is restored crookedly, is an error according to their operation, great fear, and if it were right, this would have been enlarged by the Ancients in their books and written with that done."
"And I have not seen any of them do that, so it is more reasonable that they should not do it."
Chapter according to: On fracture when it occurs in the head.
"There are many species of fractures, and their figures are diverse, and their causes are distinct. For some fractures happen by percussion of a blow, which crushes all the bone inside the head, leaving the bone bare, just as it happens in wood; this species is called depressed. Or the blow cuts into some part of the bone and cuts the flesh of it but does not pass through to the inner side of it; this species of fracture is called elevating absolute."
"And the plague of these two fractures is great or small, and of fracture that is contusion or abrasion; and the cause of it is percussion with powder or cement on stone, and similar things."
"And this fracture is penetrating, which approaches the pericranium that leaves the bone bare; or it is on the face of the bone, and the plague of these two fractures is great or small."
"And this fracture is hidden in the bone, in the small subtlety of the hair, and therefore it is called capillary fracture."
"And this fracture happens either by cement or percussion of stone and similar things, which causes some laminas of bone to enter into the inner parts, and it happens in the concavity of the location as it happens with wrenches when they are struck and their entrance enters into the inner parts."
"And this mostly happens in moist bone courses, such as those of infants' heads."
"And so with all these species of fractures, their parts are separated like stars scattered." "And I have brought this in remembrance of all this in its place."
"And you should know all these species of fracture by detection on them and by inquiry about them with tests and odor of rotting flesh that is above them."
"And capillary fracture is recognized by this: it is discovered on the bone and wiped off, and then touched with a finger because the fracture appears black."
"But in the treatment of fracture, consider at the beginning the accidents of the sick person. And then if you see by those accidents that it signifies by manifest sign for fear, such as vomiting from cholera, extension, loss of understanding, syncope, acute fever, and swelling of the eyes with redness of them, similar to them in great dispositions, without doubt it will not be healed."
"And if you see that accidents are not current, then you hope for health. Then begin the treatment of it."
"The reason for this is that if the plague has come to you as it was at first and this happens in the days of winter, then you should study the structure of the bone before the fourteenth day according to every disposition."
"And if it is in the days of summer, then you should remove the bone on the seventh day, having to ensure that what is left of the bone is corrupted by the pericranium and that the accidents that we have mentioned happen."
"And if the fracture has already reached the pericranium covering the brain and is with small parts and abrasion, then you should cut into the comminuted and abraded part, as I will teach you."
"And then shave the head of the sick person according to custom and manner as you can according to the figure of the plague, and let it be light on the sick person."
"And if it happens to you that you must make the detection of the bone, fluxes of blood or hot abscess, then you should pause on it with what is necessary and use cloths infused in wine and rose oil to make the plague rest until the abscess is sedated and you are sure of the flux of blood. And then begin in the circumcision of the bone and in the ablation of it."
"And this should be done according to one of two operative methods."
"And the first method is that you should cut into the bone with an incision of such a shape. And then administer another incision knife a little wider than the first one."
"And then use the incision knife even more wide than the second one."
"You must take various cutting tools with you, among which some are sharper than others. Some are shorter than others and they have sharp points at their ends; they should be made of iron or steel."
"And use them with ease in percussion on the cutting tools, so that you do not cut the head and harm him."
"And if the bone is hard and tough, then you must perforate around it beforehand before you administer the cutting tools with the non-depth saws."
"And these are not called thus but because those do not reach the term of the bone of the testicle near where it is approached by the saw, for at the end of that which is left sharp resembles a small margin or circle, which prevents being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone."
"And it is convenient that you take many of these saws with you, each one suitable for the thickness of each bone. Thus, you will have at hand all kinds of saws for all types of bones in the brain whose ends are sharp and whose length and width vary according to the thickness of this bone."
"And this is the method of three kinds of saws: The quality for piercing around the broken bone is that you place the saw on the bone and turn it with your fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then move the saw to another location, pause where there is between all tracks equal to the thickness of a hair or about that."
"And then incise with the cutting tools between each track of the bone, and make it as subtle as possible at the end of the incision, as we have said before, until you radiate the bone, or with your hand, or with any other cause for some instruments which you will have prepared for that purpose, such as tweezers and fine forceps."
"And it is necessary that you guard with all caution that the cutting tools do not touch any part of the brain."
"And then when you have pierced the bone and separated it from the brain if it is connected to it, remove it carefully, scraping and smoothing its roughness with some tool similar to a cutting tool but more blunt and subtle than others."
"And if some small bone fragments remain scattered, then remove them easily with whichever tool seems appropriate to you; and afterwards clean the wound with linens and dressings which we have mentioned."
"And the other method of operation is easier and farther from fear, which Galen describes as worthy of great praise; and this is his saying: It is necessary for you at the beginning to begin discovering the broken bone from the place where the fracture is most violent and evident, until when you have discovered that part and paused there, you gently place the end of this soft saw on it whose form is as follows:"
"And the lenticular part is long and does not cut any tissue, and the sharp part is on both sides in length like this: that the lenticular part fits the brain with its face facing the sharp part of the bone."
"And then strike the saw with a small hammer until you have cut all the bone easily as it is turned, and make sure that no panic occurs suddenly in any way, and if the patient was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of them, certainly he would be asleep."
"Then if any tissue attached to the bone of the skin remains in some places of the bone, cut it off with the end of that lenticular saw and remove it easily, because it is removed without harm or fear."
"And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the skin, and what is cut off or remains on the bone is its rough surface, then it is necessary to scrape that roughness with fine razors which you have prepared in advance in different quantities so that it will be possible for you to apply them in every place where they are most convenient and most suitable according to how you have proceeded in your operation of the broken bone and its shape."
"And you should administer in your scraping operation at the beginning the broadest of those razors, and then use progressively the more subtle ones, and do not stop doing so until you have administered the most suitable and the most subtle of all."
"But in each of those other small capillary fractures and subtle fractures, you should use caution according to how you proceed with their correction."
"And this is what has not been written by any of those who have studied that art." "Now we have shown in great fractures what others have written."
"And if the skin is torn when you smooth out the bone, then you should take cloth according to the size of the wound and submerge it in rose oil, and place it on the opening of the wound; and also take another piece of cloth folded or tripled and submerge it in wine and rose oil, and place it gently on the first piece without pressing too hard so as not to compress the brain; and then apply a broad bandage and do not wrap it tightly but only according to the size of the wound alone."
"And leave it with this dressing for one or two days until you are sure of cauterization of the wound; and then remove it and apply medications that cause excessive dryness, such as linseed oil and bran flour, powder of frankincense and of aloe, and similar substances."
"And you should make these medications into powders that are sprinkled on the wound while they are dry; and generally speaking, apply to it any medication whose property is to cleanse without biting."
"And make sure that the wound in your treatment is clean and not foul with grease or other dirt, nor do you allow it to become inflamed; because when it settles on the skin of the brain, it corrupts it and poisons it, and causes a serious illness."
"And it happens in the brain of the head when the bone is exposed and even more so when carelessness of it occurs, and blackness appears on its surface; therefore consider now if you have caused any of those accidents that we have mentioned, you would know that they are harmful without doubt."
"And if blackness appears only from the medication that has been applied on top, and it is because of the virtue of that medication that causes that blackness, then you should take a portion of honey and three portions of rose oil, and with them moisten a cloth and place it on the head; and then treat it with whatever remedies are appropriate until it heals."
"Chapter III."
"On the restoration of the nose when it is broken."
"You should know that the nose is not broken except for two parts that are usually elevated together, or one of those sometimes viewed alone, because in it there are two bones; therefore only one of them is cartilaginous and not broken, but you can cause it to become bruised and twisted."
"But if one of the two parts of it is broken, then you should insert your little finger into its socket and use your index finger inside to reduce that fracture, using your thumb outside until the nose returns to its natural shape." "And may you do this with ease, but make sure that you do not cause pain for the patient during your operation."
"If the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and it cannot be reached directly, then it should be treated with a probe having a small thickness at its tip."
"And if the fracture is on both sides, you must perform this operation."
"And if it is not possible to restore him on the first day of the fracture, you should wait for 7 or 8 days until the swelling subsides."
"And then insert a strip of cloth into the tip of the nose if the fracture is on one side, or use two gauze pads if it is on both sides, with enough thickness to fill the hollow of the nose."
"And some of the old restorers said that gauze should be inserted folded in its edges and changed every day, but this is not visible to me. However, it is necessary that the strip be inserted into a bandage of wool combed with powdered mallow; and then insert the gauze so that the bone is fixed and the cartilage is strengthened."
"Sometimes, in place of gauze, a piece of linen cloth soaked in warm water is inserted into the nose. This should be done when there is abundant pus and it is wrapped in a linen cloth. It can also be done even if the fracture of the nose is severe, provided that inspiration is not prohibited."
"This procedure may not be necessary for you; if you wish, do this, and if you wish, use gauze instead."
"And if another time a boil appears on the nose, plaster it with cerote or cotton soaked in vinegar and rose oil, or with diachylon."
"But if no boil appears on the outside, then you should plaster it with flour of mustard and powdered fenugreek mixed with albumen of egg; and press it gently with a linen cloth, without touching the nose in any way."
"But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or comminuted, then you should bind those places and extract them using appropriate instruments; and then stitch up the wound and treat it with something that adheres and consolidates, and use plasters that are appropriate for it."
"And if plague occurs inside the nose, then you should treat it with gauze and insert lead cannulae until it is completely healed."
Chapter IV
"On the restoration of the jaw when it is dislocated."
When the lower jaw is broken and the fracture does not heal well, observe whether the fracture is merely displaced and not broken into two pieces, curved inward at the edges. Then its treatment is lighter.
Then, if the fracture is on the right side, insert your left index finger into the patient's mouth. Similarly, if the fracture is on the left jawbone, then insert the said index finger of the right hand and push gently with it inward at the edges of the fracture using the other hand to keep it from slipping outward.
And if the jawbone fracture is already separated into two pieces, then you must apply traction to both parts according to the proper line until it is possible to achieve reduction.
And if there is displacement of teeth due to fracture, then strengthen those that you expect will break with gold, silver or thread wire. Then place a pad over the broken jawbone and another pad over the folded cloth, and place a large steel plate made especially for this purpose, or a wooden wedge along the length of the jawbone. And tie it on top according to how you have prepared the ligature and what is appropriate for the application, so that it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to rest quietly, and instruct them not to use suction when eating their food.
And if you estimate that the figure is already altered in some way, then on the third day, remove and untie it. And then correct what has been altered of it, and apply plaster with powder of chalk, albumen of egg, or flour of wheat, having first removed the cerate from it, and cover it with linen cloth.
And then when the plaster is dry and well-adjusted on it, and if the position of the bone has not been altered, leave it in place until the fracture has healed and strengthened. For often this fracture heals in three weeks.
And if another time an abscess occurs, then administer whatever has been said many times in the treatment of it until it is healed and the abscess is removed.
And if the fracture is accompanied by inflammation, then consider whether it is due to separation of bone fragments or foreign bodies. If there are foreign bodies, then carefully remove them using whatever is appropriate for removing those instruments.
And if the opening of the inflammation is narrow, then dilate it with the flebotomy probe according to the amount needed.
And then when you have removed those foreign bodies and there remains no trace of them, then close the opening of the inflammation if it is wide. And if not, cover it with one of the plasters that are appropriate for this purpose and bandage it until it has healed.
Chapter Five
On the restoration of the clavicle when it is broken
Very often the clavicle is fractured at its junction in front of the muscle, and this fracture occurs in one of three ways:
Either it is broken, or separated, or separated into two parts without accident; and it is easy to restore it; or it is such that the accident happened in it, and it is difficult to restore it; or it is such that the fracture is with plague.
And the operation in that case, when the fracture is without plague, is to have two ministers present: one should hold the assistant and follow the broken collarbone, while the other extends the neck towards that part.
And then grasp the fracture with your fingers so that it follows the shape of the second one mentioned earlier, and there is neither prominence nor concavity in it.
And if you need more extension, then pause by placing a pillow of wool or cloth under the affected shoulder, its size according to your needs. Then extend and elevate the collarbone and press the pillow with your hand while grasping the fracture as needed.
And if you cannot pull the end of the collarbone out to its original position, then have the patient lie on their back and place a folded towel or cloth under their shoulder that is as thick as needed.
And the minister should press on the muscles of the shoulder from outside until the bone of the collarbone is elevated to its original position. Then you can reduce the fracture and grasp it with your fingers as mentioned earlier.
But if you feel sharp pains in the collarbone that are disturbing, then press on it and remove those sharp points with ease.
And if it is retained in the bone, then make an incision on it with one of the scalpels that you have brought for this purpose. You had placed the scalpel on a table or other suitable surface earlier. The scalpel should be made of wood or iron and its shape is as follows:
And it should resemble a spoon with this concavity. Its width should be according to your needs, depending on the size of the bone or the prominence of it.
But its length should be as short as possible for the operation; it should have two ends like this: one end is wide and the other is narrow.
And if the disruption of the skin that you incised when removing the sharp point from the bone is wide and there is a risk of abscess, then close the two lips of the wound with suture.
And if the disruption is small or you suspect an abscess, then cover the wound with dressings and powders according to the size of the wound.
And if an abscess occurs, then soak a cloth in sour wine and rose oil and apply it to the affected area.
And all of this should be done without applying too much pressure on the broken bone. And every day you should examine the patient to see if the bandage has softened or if the board has shifted. If so, then you should correct this and tighten the dressing accordingly.
And also make the patient sleep with their head elevated and place a small cushion on the side of the bed away from them at night. This way, the patient's shoulder will be elevated above the rest of their body and thus the fracture of the collarbone will be lifted by the muscle, or the arm will lie close to the neck.
And do not remove the dressing until around twelve days have passed without any sign of inflammation or abscess at the location.
And also renew the plaster if you see that it is becoming loose, and adjust it according to the tightening and restore it. Leave it in place until it has been restored and the fracture of the collarbone has healed.
And the bone is strengthened and healed around twenty-eight days, although in some cases it can take less time than this, especially in strong men.
Chapter VI
On the restoration of shoulder fractures.
The blade of the scapula is broken at its lateral end and it is not just the blade that is broken but also its margins.
"And when the place is broken - and it is broken in the middle of him - and it is only known by touch, then according to what is the shape of the fracture so should be the preparation of him and reduce that according to its natural figure in every manner that you are able."
"And also pause over the powder millstone with albumen of egg and stop the lion; and also pause with powdered linen doubled; and also pause over him on the left side of the table subtly according to the quantity of the whole spatula or a little more."
"But if the left side is concave in some of the places of the spatula, then you should fill that concavity with egg stopple, and then place the left side according to equality."
"And also stretch above it with a humid cloth with proper constriction and firmness of the left side within that it may not be removed from its place."
"And consider the ligature every day; and always whenever it is softened, then on another day stretch it and make the left side equal if it has been removed from its place."
"And dress the wound upon its own side."
"And the bandage is renewed every 20 days or at most 25."
"And then when this number is completed, then you should dissolve the ligature, and be sure that that is of the bones whose union was not impeded nor their dissolution."
"And if you proceed from the place of the weight and leave the artery there, then cut upon it, and stay it, and do according to what we have said in the fracture of the clavicle concerning the drainage of an abscess if it happens here."
"Chapter VII"
"On the restoration of a broken foot."
"The foot sometimes breaks in the middle of it and this is quite serious, but its ends usually remain intact."
"And when the middle of the foot breaks, it happens that it sinks into its parts, causing great pain and difficulty in walking, coughing, and sometimes vomiting blood. And this is evident inside the broken bone and cannot be hidden from sensation."
"And the restoration of it is that the patient should lie on their back and place between the palms of their hands a cushion; they should press lightly on the muscles of the foot, align its bones with those of two other toes, perform the operation carefully and correctly according to every possible manner and what is appropriate for this, until the bone returns to its normal shape."
"And then apply a plaster and lint and then place it on a thin board of linen or calico, which you should wrap in cloth. And carefully wrap that around the broken bone so that it is not moved; and sometimes bind it to the back with bandages according to its shape, and tighten it with proper strapping. And check the binding every hour, tightening it when it becomes loose."
"And if it becomes necessary to remove that, you must do so with care or pressure, pain, or abscess occurring in the place. Then you should cut and untie that, remove the plaster, and correct whatever happened there according to its manner of cure; and then reapply the plaster, sometimes changing its face; and adjust the strapping until it is healed."
Capítol viii
"Chapter VIII: Restoration of the spine when broken."
You know that fracture of the ribs occurs only in large spaces that are located on the back, and at the extremities of their ends near the point where it happens it does not cause such injury except by that which is cartilage-like. And its discovery is not hidden from feeling through its examination with these [tools].
And the restoration should be done in such a way that it aligns the fracture using these tools according to the most possible method, ensuring that it is well aligned where necessary, and then apply plaster and strengthen the broken bone with steel if needed.
And if the fracture of the ribs is leaning towards its interior ends, then intense pain and piercing occur to the sick person, similar to the piercing that occurs to one who has coughed, and because the bone pierces the pleura; and it causes difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting a lot of blood; and this is difficult to treat.
And already the Ancients knew about that with many tools.
"And they say this: whenever pauses are made in the feeding of the sick that causes inflation and windiness, so that the belly is inflated and extended, and the fracture is pushed outwards."
"May we avoid this, so that it does not lightly cause an abscess to form, if it has not already happened; but if it has already happened, then it will help with that."
"And some of them say that the wind should be paused and pressed down so that it comes out strongly; but this is similar to reasoning, yet it is feared that the wind will drive the superfluities to the place due to weakness."
"And some of them say: the place should be covered with wool that has already been submerged in hot oil, and powders should be paused between the ribs until it is filled up so that the bandage fits well when wrapped around it according to its roundness; and the illness should be treated with food and medicinal pleurisy cure."
"And if the illness causes violent constriction which cannot be endured, and the bone pierces the membrane with a piercing blow, then they fear for the illness. Therefore, it is necessary to open up over the place, uncover the broken rib, and immediately place upon that instrument which preserves the hip joint, the remembrance of which has been preceded, and insert the bone with ease, and remove it."
"And also, if the wound is large, we should bring its two lips together with stitches, and treat it with poultices until it is healed."
"And if an abscess forms, then quickly take fine powders and mix them with rose oil, place them on the spot, and treat the illness with what is appropriate for the internal abscess."
"And let him be propped up on pillows while he sleeps, until he is healed."
"Chapter ix."
"On the restoration of fractures of the spine and neck."
"Sometimes fractures occur in the bones of the neck, and it is difficult to reduce them; similarly with the vertebrae of the spine." "And when this happens to someone and you want to know if they will be healed or not, then consider this: for if the sinews are already softened, stunned, and deadened, and he cannot move those limbs nor extend nor stretch them nor contract them at all; and when you compress those parts with your fingers or prick them with a needle and there is no pain felt in those parts, then you will know that it will not be healed, and this condition is mortal."
"And if those parts are moved and there is felt in them compression with the fingers or pricking with a needle, then you will know that the nape of the bone is saved, and that the illness will recover with treatment."
"And if you see a similar condition in the vertebrae of the neck and want to know if it will be healed or not, then consider his pulse."
"Then if you find that the sinews are already softened, it is as was said concerning the limbs; and also when he lies on his back, there is shortness of breath and involuntary evacuation of excrement, and sometimes he becomes prostrate on his back and wants to urinate but cannot. Then you will know that it is mortal, and do not bother with treating him."
"But if none of these causes occur, then the case is better and easier to treat."
"And the treatment for this is to make an incision over the hard abscess which has formed on the displaced vertebra, using rose oil alone or with honey; place some of this mixture upon it several times a day until the hard abscess is softened."
"And then apply one of the soothing and stimulating poultices, and compress it with a bandage. And order the patient to rest quietly and not sleep on the painful part until he is healed."
"And if a fracture of the bone is suspected or there is some separation from it, then it must be exposed at the neck and that bone reset. And also approximate the two lips of the wound with sutures if it is large; and treat it with some ointment of honey until it is healed."
"But if the end of the bone is broken off, and this is the end of the coccyx, then you must insert the little finger of your left hand into the anus, and grasp the broken bone with your other hand according to what is possible by means of traction. And then apply a poultice and bandage, if necessary, and compress it."
"And if you suspect broken sinews within it, then open that part and extract those bones, and treat the wound with the treatment mentioned until it is healed."
"Chapter 10"
"On the Reduction of Dislocations"
The bones of the broad hips are broken and if they break then their fracture is nothing but a communion in the extremities of those which are inserted into length and decline towards the inside parts; and it happens to the patient pain in that place and punctuation, and the thigh becomes stunned when it breaks.
And its restoration is that you stretch your hand over that entrance which is above the fracture which is its shape.
And if the fracture is only at the end of it then you will shape that according to what appears equal in shape by shaping an entrance that is assembled to its natural figure.
But if the fracture is long or already declines towards the left parts then you will make the patient lie on their stomach entrance that has been prepared for you to restore that fracture. And when you have shaped that then pause on the plaster and also pause on that stick of wood or bone, and stretch by tightening over that which you should not fear punctuation of fracture nor movement of the splint.
And shape the concavity with that which fills that entrance where that took the tightening according to equality, and command the patient to sleep on their back or on their side.
But if an abscess occurs then you will cease the extension of it and its restoration until the abscess is sedated, and pause on that which subdues it according to what has been said above; and also return to the restoration of it, and stretch it thus as is necessary.
And if this happens in the bone that is broken or crushed then you will leave them alone.
Chapter xi
Of the restoration of the fracture of the jawbone.
The jawbone is that which is between the cheek and to the head of the shoulder.
"If it is broken, then its restoration is by one of two methods: the first being that you take a piece of flat board with moderate thickness in this shape:"
"And there are two pieces at both ends, and it is suspended from an elevated place."
"And the patient should sit on a chair, and then place their broken arm on the board so that it reaches the middle of its curvature."
"And then suspend some weight on top of that, or the assistant stretches it towards its parts, and the doctor sets the fracture with his hands together, so that the fracture returns to its proper position."
"And the other method is that the patient lies on their back and suspends their broken arm with a sling, then commands two assistants to each hold one end of the fracture with their hands, and each stretches towards their part."
"And if you want to stretch it further, then place another rope over the fracture and another one on top of that, and each assistant stretches towards their part."
"And if the fracture is near the end of the muscle, then place half of the rope on the curvature and the other half below the fracture towards the elbow."
"And similarly if the fracture is near the elbow, then place the rope on that location and over the elbow."
"And then apply it gently and without difficulty, and as soon as it is applied properly according to what is needed and with good application, then bind it tightly so that it does not happen to have an abscess."
"But if an abscess forms afterwards, then leave the bandage loose for about seven days, and place a compress of clean lint moistened with hot water and rose oil on it until the abscess subsides, and then bind it tightly."
"And the method of binding it is to place a plaster over the fracture, and then wrap it with a layer of clean cloth over that; and then adjust the arm in that position, and place his hand covered over the affected muscle."
"And then wrap it with cloth and bind it tightly around that support for the arm so that the arm remains in place until some cause prevents the bone from breaking."
"And then use splints."
"And then place over the fracture that splint which is broader and stronger than the others, and place it between each splint the width of a finger, and let the length of the splints be according to the fracture with an addition of three fingers on each side."
"And then bind it tightly over the splints with the bandage which was mentioned at the beginning of this chapter."
"And ensure that your bandage is as tight as possible around the location of the fracture." "And when the fracture has healed, then make the bandage looser."
"And therefore if you change the situation of the splints and the bandage as we have said at the time when you restore the limb to its normal position, then do so."
"And if you fear an abscess forming, then leave the bandage and splints loose for seven days as we have said."
"And also consider the bandage in all cases for three days to ensure that it does not press too hard or cause inflammation, and therefore adjust the bandage accordingly so that food does not reach the limb due to an excess of tightness, and therefore correct everything as we have said."
"But if you are in doubt about this, then do not untie the bandage for three days or more."
"And let his sleep be on his back and let his hands be on his stomach."
"And place a bolster full of wool under the elbow and ensure at all times that neither day nor night the figure of the broken limb is dislocated or the bandage becomes loose or moistened, and therefore adjust everything with your own skill."
"And provide the patient's food according to the order which we have mentioned earlier, ensuring that the food is softened at first until he begins to recover his strength, and then make it thicker for him."
"As to the custom of the splints and the bedding, they should be tightly bound for forty days, and then they should be untied and bathing should be administered and they should be treated with ointments which will correct them."
"And if the fracture is completely healed, then do not untie the bandage and splints for seven days or until two months have passed."
Chapter XII
On the restoration of fractures of the arm.
The arm is composed of two bones called the two "focils"; one of which is small and it lies on the side of the thumb, and the other is large and lies next to the little finger on its outer side.
And sometimes only the larger "focil" is broken, or sometimes only the smaller one, but most often they are both broken at the same time.
And when the small "focil" is broken above, then its restoration will be easier and its healing will also be quicker.
And when it is broken below, the fracture is bad and difficult to heal.
And worse still is when both bones are broken at the same time.
Therefore if the bone which is broken is the small "focil" above, then it is advisable for the physician to perform a simple extension with ease until that part becomes swollen.
But if the large "focil" is broken, then strong extension should be used.
And if both "focils" are broken at the same time, then you must use strong traction with care.
And it is necessary that you place the figure of the hand in its proper position during restoration and extension, with the wrist stretched out on a bolster, and let the thumb be on top of all the other fingers, and let the little finger be lower than the others, and let the patient sit on a chair covered with a blanket.
And place a bolster before him at his height or towards his right side so that the patient does not stretch out too much.
And moreover let one assistant extend the arm from below with his hand or with a bandage, and another assistant extend it from above in the same way.
And then let the physician swell the bone until he reduces it to the best possible position.
And if during the fracture reduction you are unsuccessful, then use all your skill to reduce everything back into its proper place.
And if during the reduction you find that the elbow is separated and not reduced properly, then use force on it and reset it according to the method which we have mentioned above.
But if the fracture is with dislocation, I have already dealt with this in another chapter, and therefore take care of it according to that method.
And if an abscess forms at the beginning of your restoration, then take a cloth smeared with cerate made from rose oil and white wax, which is between specificity and subtlety, and place it on the area with slight pressure until the abscess bursts. Then remove the cerate and apply a plaster prepared from powdered mallow with clear honey, and also apply splints; and let the splint which is placed over that fracture be wide and strong.
And know that in the case of fractures of the arm there are usually six splints used, or seven if the fracture is in both bones at once.
And then apply your traction with force and vehemence over the area of the fracture, and especially if there is strong tension above or below the fracture site, apply gentle traction beforehand according to what was mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
"Let the cloths wrapped around the fracture be soft moistened ones, neither hard nor rough, and let the oil with which it is strained be purely middle-ground between fine and coarse, as we have advised."
"And consider the limb and the wound after a few days." "And if any cause arises that necessitates correction, such as swelling in the limb, then you should immerse the limb in cold water until the swelling ceases."
"Leave the limb to rest without constraint, and then gradually increase the strapping."
"And if the strapping has been softened and the bone has set well enough, then correct everything with your own skill."
"Also consider whether nourishment is being hindered from reaching the limb due to excess strapping. If so, you should loosen it slightly and leave it for a few days until nourishment can reach it again, then tighten it."
"But if the illness is not affected by any of the causes mentioned above, then it should not be loosened for about twenty days or thereabouts."
"And then have the patient hang their arm by its own strength of movement and make them sleep on their back."
"Know that this fracture is typically restored in thirty or thirty-two days, but it may also be restored in twenty-eight days. This depends on the disposition of complexions and the dispositions of strength."
Chapter XIII
"On the restoration of fractures of the thumb and fingers."
"Know that in the palm of the hand and toes of these people there is often fracture, not just bruising many times seen."
"And when the hand has fracture or bruising, it is necessary that the patient lie on their back and have their head hang down level with their chest, and near pause the hand over that extended one."
"And then the assistant extends the broken bones, and the physician aligns them together in good alignment."
"And then it is necessary to apply plaster and gauze, if there is no cauterization; and then place a splint on top according to the quantity of the location, and you have already wrapped that in linen cloth."
"But if the fracture is in the palms of the hands inside the belly of the palm, then make a similar splint of cloth, and command the patient to hold that with their hand clenched; then it should be wrapped with long cloth."
"And let the splint be of leather, with cloth laced onto it, so that the leather is applied to the palm; and hold it according to what is necessary."
"But if the fracture is on the outside of the hand, then place splints above and below the affected part of the palm, so that the hand is straight and upright; and then apply the dressing, just as it would be wrapped around the wrist between those parts."
"And if there is a fracture of any of the joints of those fingers, then if it is the thumb, align it as necessary and then hold it with the palm; and if you wish, place a small splint on top to elevate the fracture and prevent it from moving."
"But if the fracture is in other fingers, such as that of the middle joint, or the index finger, or the ring finger, then align and bind them with the finger that is adjacent to it; or let them all be bound continuously, which is better; or place a small splint on top, just as we said for the thumb."
"And consider, in your setting and application of the dressing, the position of the abscess, cauterization and counterpressure - according to what is necessary when such a cause occurs, following the narrative described above."
"Chapter XIV."
"On the reduction of fractures of the bone of the leg."
"The bone of the leg is often fractured, and it becomes evident to the touch as it turns towards the front of the joint and the pus forms above it."
"And its reduction is done as follows: a bandage is applied above the fracture and another below it, and the patient lies on their stomach and face."
"And then the practitioner extends all the ligaments to their proper place when the fracture is in the middle part of the bone."
"But if it is displaced towards the knee joint, then pull the ligament attached to the tendon of the calf muscle upwards, so that its extension goes upwards and the other bandage below the fracture."
"And similarly if the fracture is displaced towards the ankle joint, then pull the ligament attached to the tendo
"And then the physician aligns the bone with both hands until it reduces according to its natural shape and the bone is joined by good union. Then it is necessary to apply a plaster cast and splint if there is no abscess in the limb." "But if there is an abscess present, then wait for a few days until the abscess is resolved by cauterization, and then return to your treatment."
"The splinting of it is done as follows: wrap a hard bandage around the fracture and fold it two or three times, removing any excess from it. Then wrap the leg so that it reaches the ankle and knee joint."
"And insert a long pin between the leg and the bandage near the ankle joint on both sides, and bring the ends of the pin from above the two parts. Then wrap the excess of the bandage around the leg and foot."
"And then place a splint on the leg at the location of that fracture, and also place one on the bone of the shin."
"And then fill any spaces between the leg and bandage with soft cloths, so that the structure is stabilized."
"And then begin with strong binding in the middle above the location of the fracture with three or four wrappings, and the more you stretch the bandage at the location of the fracture, the less tight your binding will be and the lighter and softer it will become."
"And then extend both ends of the pin outwards on both sides until it reaches the heel of the foot. Then tie both ends of the splints tightly on the other side to ensure that the bandage does not shift from its position."
"And then leave the splint on for about three weeks, provided that there is no gangrene, cauterization of the abscess, inflammation or anything similar. But if any such cause occurs, then be careful and remove it immediately, and correct whatever happens right away, as we have said many times."
"But if there is a bone spur that presses on the bone and causes pain, then align it as much as possible. And if you cannot do this, then file down the spur and remove it, and treat it with whatever preceded the removal until it heals."
"And sometimes this fracture of the leg is strengthened with splints other than those mentioned earlier, as we have described in the case of the arm."
"But nevertheless, in the restoration of it in this way, it does not happen that the patient limps. And if it is restored alone, without applying the other leg, then it is necessary for the patient to limp all the time."
"And know that the leg is strengthened in about forty days or a little more or less, and all this depends on the diversity of complexions and other dispositions."
Capítulo XV.
About the restoration of fractures of the ankle joint.
"Know that fractures of the ankle joint are rare, but they happen frequently with twisting."
"But if it happens that there is a fracture of the ankle joint, then it is only a crack or tear in its parts, and this is with much or little pain, and everything is judged by sensation."
"And the restoration of it is such that what is broken in its parts should be aligned with these so that it is joined and united as much as possible by means of traction, ease and manufacture."
"And then apply a plaster cast and apply a round splint if necessary, and strengthen it above with bandages as needed."
"And also consider all the dispositions that we have recommended for other fractures, such as abscesses and similar things so that it is prevented from any accident with whatever is appropriate until it heals."
Capítulo XVI.
About the restoration of fractures of the leg bone
"Know that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is thick and is called by name the shinbone, and the other is thin and is called the fibula."
"And it happens to each of the species of fractures what happens to the two bones of the arm, and for that reason the restoration of it is done in the same way as the restoration of the arm by alignment, and the operation of it is one."
"And if both bones are broken at the same time, then the shinbone is crushed at all its parts."
"And if only the thinner bone is broken, then the leg is affected anteriorly in its parts."
"If the bone is too thick, bypass it and search for other causes that are not immediately apparent."
"And apply traction, extension, and ligation of the bones according to that arrangement."
"However, cover it if the fracture of the leg has many settings; then traction should be milder and lighter, and you should proceed with caution."
"And if there is any cause for operation on the arm, and this happens when you are arranging the bones and completing your entire operation, then you will take pieces of wood from a pile that has been placed nearby, made from palm branches; choose those that are not too thick nor too thin, and their length should be equal to the length of the leg, with one end entering inside the other."
"And then wrap it around each bone with two wrappings according to its length, and place one on the lower end of the leg on one side and the other on the other side, so that they are inside the bones."
"And then tie the two bones together in three places on both sides and in the middle, because with this structure, the leg is prevented from bending to the left or right side, and thus it remains in good position."
"And then place a splint made of wood according to the length of the leg, and place it there so that the bone may preserve its mobility."
"This is especially necessary when dealing with fractures, particularly those that are displaced."
"And then examine the leg every day and study it carefully to ensure that there is no inflammation or swelling or other similar causes; if any such cause occurs, then you should apply whatever treatment is necessary for its healing."
"Chapter xvii."
"On fractures of the heel bone and the bones of the foot."
"A fracture of the heel bone does not occur frequently; however, fractures of the bones of the foot do occur sometimes; and those of the toes rarely happen, except for dislocations in their joints."
"If a fracture occurs in the bones of the foot and sometimes those bones become elevated above each other, then the person will limp with their heel on the ground prepared in this way."
"And then place one foot on what is elevated among those bones, press down on them, compress and dislocate them until they return to their proper places."
"And then apply an emplaster and bandage it, and place under the belly of the foot a small table with two flat heads on which to rest."
"And then stretch that [the leg] downwards with the foot, because you have wrapped it with cloth and other means which are necessary."
"And when three or four days have passed, then untie the bandages, because you will find the bones set, either joined together, compressed or dislocated, and the operation on them is as follows."
"But if some of those bones are compressed, then restore them and dislocate them as I have taught you in the restoration of the fingers." "And then place the compressed bone on a splint according to the length of the bone, and leave it there for a few days; and then place that foot on this table which I have taught you about, and stretch it downwards."
"But if what is compressed among the bones are two or three or more, then place on each finger a splint according to its quantity wrapped in linen cloth, and stretch the table towards the lower part of the foot, with one of the flat heads of the table being under the belly of the foot so that it has good retention."
"And you should remember not to neglect considering all the causes which I have mentioned to you regarding the other fractures of accidents that we have discussed; and it is necessary for you to attend to each accident according to what is appropriate."
"Chapter xviii."
"On fractures of the pubic bone, penis bone and clitoris of women and the penile bone of men."
"When the pubic bone of a woman is compressed, then perform a cesarean section on her, incline her slightly backwards at the hips, and hold her there."
"And then the midwife should push the pubic bone with her hand, and it should be done on the bone as if she were feeling for something; and then the woman should be shaken, and slowly elevate her hips upwards, because all that is forgotten until the front of the pubic bone is before the opening and the compressed bone returns."
"And then apply dust on her back, and when she wants to urinate, remove the cloth gently and let her urinate, reduce and return that [the bone] according to the manner in which it was placed at the beginning, and then return her to her first position."
"And do this for seven or eight days until it is restored."
"And if you wish, take a bladder of sheep and stretch it over the wound with a reed cannula; insert all of the bladder into the pubic bone and then insufflate through the cannula with strength until the bladder is inflated inside the pubic bone, because the fracture will return."
"And then fill it with cotton and let it rest for some days as we have recommended until it is healed."
"And when the penile bone of a man or woman is compressed, then administer in its restoration and stitching that which we have recommended for the hipbone."
"And that which is right is not concealed in these fractures nor is it difficult to find, especially for those who have some study and use this my book; because that fracture means to you the greatest arrangement of a straight line in the restoration and stretching of it."
"But in the clitoris of a man when it is compressed, take a gourd of squash and place the clitoris inside; then apply over it wrapping with cloth and wrap it up, and let it rest for three or four days until it is healed."
"Chapter xix."
"On restoration of fractures of the bones when they are with swelling."
"It is convenient for those who suffer fractures with swelling, especially if the bone is large such as the thighbone or shinbone, or similar to that one which you should lance and perform phlebotomy on immediately if the conditions for phlebotomy are present according to what we have said above."
"And if the swelling flows with blood, then it is necessary for you to cauterize its retention in that way that you powder over it with hot wax if there is no other cause present."
"And then begin restoring the fracture on that same day, and do not delay except in case of an aposteme (abscess)."
"But if an abscess forms, then you should delay the restoration of it until the ninth day until the abscess is softened, and do not approach it in the third or fourth day of all because you will cause bad accidents."
"But if the broken bone is prominent above the skin openly, then it is necessary for you to reduce that and align it with your hands gently and with little extension."
"But if extension is not prepared for you and the reduction of it with your hands and cloths, then reduce it with this instrument; and it is an instrument made of iron, seven or eight digits long and its width according to the quantity of swelling; and for that reason it is necessary for the physician to take three or four according to the quantity that is needed for that in the treatment of all kinds of fractures."
"Let him be returned, and let there be little force used lest he be doubled under the pressure at that time of operation."
"The tip should be sharp and well-shaped; it should rise above its base with the greatest thickness and strength entering into the divisions."
"This is how it looks:"
"It is called 'labre volentz atelarem' in Greek, meaning a small plate."
"Why should the extremity of the hand be elevated above the prominence of the bone?"
"And press it back into place with some force."
"And then force the ends of the fracture together, and if the broken end is thin and does not fit well with the instrument, insert the tip of that bone into the instrument so it has better grip."
"But if you cannot reduce the bone with what has been recommended, then cut it using the appropriate scissors which we have mentioned earlier; or saw it with one of the saws in whichever manner is possible for you."
"And finally, rasp away any rough edges and small splinters from the bone that remain."
"And when the bone is reduced and the fracture has been properly aligned with minimal pain to the patient, you will know that the bone has returned to its natural position. And then proceed to what you would do for the great benefit of the patient."
"When your reduction of the bone is complete, and then immerse a bandage in black stiptic wine, and especially if it is summer time, do not allow any grease or other substance containing oil to remain on the skin, so that no infection may occur afterward."
"And also apply bandages at the time of completion of the bone setting, and leave the skin uncovered long enough to insert splints with forceps and use wrappings according to the amount of the dressing."
"And be careful that you do not stretch the skin over the fracture, for many times this has been done by foolish physicians, and it has caused great harm to their patients, even death or gangrene or other serious diseases. Therefore, beware of this." "And if your bandage is light and soft, different from the usual bandages used for fractures."
"If the dressing is large or bad, and you fear that one of those unfortunate accidents might occur which we have mentioned earlier, and if there is pain in the area, then it is not necessary to use splints. Instead, apply a wrapping of strong cloths in place of bandages and stretch it tightly with them."
"And when after one or two days the dressing begins to get wet, and there is some discharge from it, then remove the bandage that you had placed on it with wine, and apply compresses as usual for dressings, such as tetrafarmacon or similar ones."
"And it is advisable for you to remove the splints and examine the dressing every morning and evening until the bone has consolidated and healed properly. And also prepare the limb in such a way that the gangrene may flow from it towards its lower parts easily."
"If many days have passed and the dressing is not consolidated nor separated from the bone, then you should know that there are some small arteries at work here, for which you must examine the dressing with a probe." "And of those small arteries which are separated and removed, those which cannot be separated nor cause pain or swelling in the limb, pierce them with a needle according to what is possible for you."
"And if you find something hot or cold in the dressing, such as gangrene or other kinds of corruption and putrefaction, then you should pause for one day with that which is described in its chapter concerning the cure of this matter."
"And in this matter, my speech must be brief and you must perform your task: when the bone is crushed, do not elevate it above the limb like the bones of the foot and hand or those of large limbs. Do not attempt to reduce it nor extract it because many times death has occurred due to this. Leave that alone until it decays naturally, as it will spontaneously in about twenty or thirty days. Then treat the dressing if you can see it, otherwise leave it alone."
"Chapter 20."
"Of the treatment of inflammation that occurs in the vicinity of some fracture."
Broken bones often heal poorly with scarring, especially near joints, affecting the limb's function.
If the fracture is fresh, apply medicines that have astringent properties like aloe and senna. Then examine it, seek its cause, observe its appearance, and apply some or all of these remedies with wine as an adhesive, albumen of egg whites, or vinegar. Apply them on linen over the fracture and bind them tightly.
"Leave the bandage untouched for several days; then remove it and replace with another until swelling is gone; or apply a lead sheet descendant on it, as lead has property to reduce all that is inflamed in the limbs."
"If the swelling has already turned into hard tissue and it is necessary to remove it carefully, then cut through it along the upper part of it and incise the excess and prominence. Then dress it with some compresses until healed."
Here is the guessed translation:
"When a fracture is restored and then the member remains subtle and weak not following its natural course."
"When a bone fracture is restored, and then the member remains subtle and weak, not following its natural course, it may happen for several reasons: one of which is the multitude of solution of the ligaments and tissues not being formed correctly; or due to excess tightening of ligaments preventing nourishment from reaching the member; or because of excessive broaching; or due to excessive movement out of its usual time; or due to lack of blood in the patient's body, and weakness."
"To treat this, one should feed the patient and make their heart tender so that blood may multiply within them; administer baths; and apply warmth, joy, and comfort to them."
"Furthermore, pause should be made upon the member, so that the flesh draws to it much nourishment, or continuous broaching of it with warm water until nourishment returns and the member regains its natural form."
Capítulo XXII
"Regarding the treatment of bones that have healed crookedly and prohibit their correction."
"When an injury occurs to a previously restored member during its healing process due to crookedness and prominence of the bone broken and knotted, and it becomes inflamed in that form, but still retains its natural operation, you should not accept the claim that the member has been recently re-broken."
"And yet there are many foolish physicians and healers who have done this in our land, and this operation is greatly to be condemned, leading to great fear of the signal which proves fatal."
"But if limpness and knotting are recent, then they should be fomented with hot water containing herbs which have a softening effect, such as mallows, rose hips, marshmallow root, and similar ones; and poultices should be applied using mollifying plasters made in this way or using mucilage of mallow root mixed with grease of goose or oil of camomile, and plastered on; or else figs fried in fat should be trussed with feathers of pigeons, and such like medications which are named 'softeners'."
"And sometimes they are dissolved with continuous gentle friction using the most humid ones, and motion of the member should be administered in all parts at all hours."
"But if the tortuosity has already appeared and is strong and hardened into bone, and there is a need for cure of it with iron, then it is necessary to cut as much of the excess as possible and dissolve the continuity of the bone, and what is superfluous in the nodosity of that member should be excised with fine scissors, and ease should be given to that with solicitude and care."
Chapter XXIII
Of speech in dislocation.
Dislocation is the displacement of some of the joints of the limb, causing prohibition of movement and distortion of the figure of the member, and bringing about great pain and injuries.
Therefore when dislocation occurs, it is necessary to promptly endeavor that it be reduced, and not delay its reduction, for if it is delayed, the joint becomes inflamed and hardened, making the reduction of dislocation difficult.
And for this reason it is not necessary to move or stretch the joint at the time of inflammation, for often this brings about spasm and severe pains.
But when this happens, it is necessary that you apply the phlebotomy of the disease, and immediately let the inflammation subside; and then the member should be embrocated with hot water and oil, and then reduced gently.
And every limb should be treated with that which brought about its dislocation in the first place.
And I have already arranged the chapters on dislocation according to what was said earlier about fracture, from the most superior part of the body down to the most inferior.
Chapter XXIV.
"Regarding the treatment of dislocation of the jaw."
"If both jaws are dislocated and not aligned; the dislocation of both occurs in one of two ways: either they are slightly displaced from their positions due to minor movement and become softened somewhat; or they are completely dislocated, with the joint being relaxed at the point of separation such that saliva flows from the patient's mouth and they cannot close it or speak, with their tongue wrapped inside their cheek."
"However, when the dislocation is slight, he returns to his usual position on his own without any cause."
"But if the dislocation is complete and full, it must be gently reduced immediately, and not delayed at all."
"And the physician should hold the patient's head, and insert his index finger into the depression of the dislocation on one side inside the mouth if it is only on that side; or he should insert both his thumbs together if it is on both sides, with the other fingers placed outside to steady him; and he commands the patient to close their jaws and keep them still; and the physician gently replaces the jaw and presses it until it returns to its proper position."
"And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated together, then evaporation with hot water and oil should be administered until it becomes easy to reduce them both without delay."
"And once they have returned and are engaged, if the patient's mouth remains closed and not softened, then apply a plaster with powdered lint mixed with wax and rose oil; let it be made of wax and beaten egg white; and apply it with ease using linen cloths."
"And let the patient sleep on their back with their head supported between two pillows so that they do not move their head to the right or left; and do not force them to eat anything until after the pain has subsided and the jaws are healed, then let them eat what they want."
"And this should be administered with ease, and not force the opening of the mouth for eating and drinking until the jaw is healed."
"And if the reduction of two jaws is difficult when they are dislocated and not returned to their proper places at any time, then often bloodletting and frequent sudorifics are administered, and sometimes vomiting is induced by drinking a purgative."
"And when you do this, know that it is harmful; and often the person to whom this happens dies within ten days."
"Chapter .25"
Of the reduction of dislocation of the clavicle and the extremity of the muscle.
"The clavicle is not dislocated inward because it is connected to the chest bone; however, sometimes it can be dislocated outward, which can be felt."
"And the reduction of this is that the patient should lie on their back and extend their arms." Then compress the area with your palm using strong pressure, for it will return.
Then pause on that plaster and powders and strengthen it.
If the end of that which seizes the cord continues with it without being dislocated on any day, then it is necessary to reduce and wrap it according to what we have said and according to what appears to you.
Then pause on that plaster, powders, and bandage, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until they are healed.
And with this same treatment, the end of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Chapter XXVI
Of the reduction of dislocation of the muscle.
Know that the muscle can be dislocated in three ways, one of which is when it is dislocated at the parting of the chest and the parting of the joints.
And the second is when it is dislocated at the upper part of the muscle, and that is rarely done; and it is not dislocated at the parts behind by the shoulder blade; and it is not dislocated at the parts in front by the nerves.
And more often it is dislocated and exits outwards at the parts of the joints near the chest, especially in those whose flesh is scarce, it is easily dislocated; but in those with much flesh, it exits outwards with difficulty.
And sometimes a severe blow or fall happens to some men, and the muscle becomes inflamed with an incurable inflammation, and it is injured in such a way that it has already become dislocated.
Therefore you should first examine him thoroughly about it, and then proceed with its treatment.
And the dislocation of it is known when it is at the parts near the chest. Therefore you should distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the intact one, because you will find a clear difference between them. And you will find concavity in the head of the muscle towards the chest, like a hollow, and in the sick person, they cannot bring their hand to their ear, nor can they move it with any movement.
If it is dislocated towards the foot or upwards, you should then find a clear touch and not hidden.
When this dislocation occurs, it can be easily reduced if it's fresh and the patient is a child.
To reduce it, the minister raises the patient's hand above their head; then quickly pushes down on their shoulders to bring them back into place, using force if necessary. The minister then raises their own hand and extends it over theirs as they return gently to their original position.
But if it does not return with this method, and several days have passed since the dislocation occurred, then the patient should be bathed in hot water and given a plaster to soften and smooth the area, made from ingredients such as boiled comfrey leaves, flaxseed, and milk of almonds.
Then the patient should be propped up on their back and held firmly in place with their arms elevated slightly higher than their head. The doctor places their foot on the patient's sternum, lifts the detached muscle head with force, and pulls the patient's arm towards them to prevent it from being pulled out of place again. Another assistant should hold the patient's head to keep it steady while this is done.
Alternatively, you can reduce the dislocation using this method: Have someone present who is taller than the patient and stand on the same side as the dislocated shoulder. Insert their muscle behind the patient's clavicle and lift it up to its proper position while the patient is suspended in mid-air. Another assistant should pull the patient's arm away from their stomach to prevent it from moving out of place again. But if the patient is lighter, then another cause should be suspended alongside them, so that they may be weighted down, as this helps to prevent the dislocation from returning.
And it can also be reduced in this way: Have a long pole with a round, mortar-like head placed on the ground. Have the patient sit on top of it with their back to the pole, then have them lean forward and extend their arms out to the side, using their healthy arm for support. Then, with force, they should straighten up and extend their torso towards the other side. The joint will quickly return to its proper place.
And if reduction of the dislocation proves difficult despite all the methods mentioned, then use this treatment: Take a pole that is two spans long and four fingers wide. Hollow out its thickness according to this pattern:
"Then also place lion's head cloths on top of the patient to prevent them from moving."
"Then place your hand on the patient's chest, extend it over their body towards their sides, and lie the body down on the helper and your arm and hand."
"Then place the arm on a step stool according to its width, extend your hand towards the patient's sides, and hang the other side from the other side because the joint is close."
"And when the patient's treatment is complete according to your best ability, then place on their chest a lanolin compress of equal quantity; also apply a plaster prepared from ground millet and egg whites over all the muscles, such that it covers them completely; and then bind the compress in place with a suitable bandage. The limb should be wrapped around the plaster, and the patient's hand should be attached to their neck, and left in this position for nine days without moving."
"And it is necessary that the patient's diet be restricted while the limb is being cared for, because it is easier for healing to occur when the member is lighter."
"And then increase the patient's diet after seven or eight days and encourage movement; but if it is still not firm and flexible, then it has not yet healed."
"But if the joint is often dislocated due to excessive moisture or for some other reason, then cauterization must be performed on that spot with three incisions, as previously described in the chapter on cautery."
"And even if all of this is done and after seven days the limb is released but the joint is still not firm, and the plaster and bandage are reduced several times without it becoming firm or being able to raise that arm above its proper position, then know that the nerves of that muscle which extend to its head have been cut, stretched or softened. And know that the joint will never be properly fixed in place."
"For reducing the dislocation of that shoulder which occurs at the pit or nipple or behind the back, reduction is performed by pushing and stretching with the hands until it returns to its proper position."
"And then apply the other bandage there and treat it until it is healed."
"If the condition worsens and there is delay in limb movement, then the patient should use many warm baths until that heaviness is relieved and returns to its initial state."
Here's the translation of Chapter XXVII from "The Decameron" by Giovanni Boccaccio:
"On the treatment of dislocation of the hip."
"You should know that the joint of the hip is dislocated with difficulty and returns to its place with difficulty; and that one which has been dislocated in all directions is more difficultly reduced than one which has only been dislocated forwards or backwards, and the dislocation is not hidden from your view when it is either prominent or depressed according to whatever figure it may be dislocated in, but when you have replaced the dislocated hip joint into its place, this is clearly indicated to you, for the joint is concave and cannot bend the thigh nor touch with that muscle."
"And if you do not reduce it and the dislocation comes to be followed by suppuration, then reduction becomes difficult and cure is altogether uncertain; and especially when it has been displaced backwards, for this is the worst of all species of dislocation and causes the greatest pain, and many times death ensues from it."
"And the method of reducing it when possible is to extend the limb with two persons and expand the arm, place one's hands on the joint and push it back into its place with the palms of both hands together or with the edge of the palm turned inwards."
"But if it is dislocated forwards, then the limb should be brought back in this way: bending the arm at the elbow with the hand on the chest, strike the joint with the edge of the palm."
"And if reduction is not accomplished by gentle pressure, then apply violent traction and much force."
"And two persons should extend the arm, and hold it firmly in that position with both hands so that it is not removed during traction."
"And then rotate the arm outwards entirely, for a length of folded bandage or linen is wrapped about its hand."
"And when the physician touches the joint with his hand, anoint it with some oil that may facilitate its lubrication and aid in reduction; and then press the joint violently with both hands until it returns."
"And after the reduction has been made, it should be kept in place by strapping it up with adhesive plaster and bandages, with a suspension sling made of soft cloth attached to the neck, and it should be allowed to rest for several days."
"And then if the joint is formed in its proper place, untie the bandages from it and let it rest."
"But if the joint is not strong enough, renew the adhesive plaster and bandages, and let them remain for a few days until strength returns; then remove them."
"But if severe pain occurs during the reduction of the joint and the limb is in motion, then apply a warm bath and gentle friction and compression until relieved. Or place over the joint an alleviating poultice, especially one composed of linseed oil; and then bind it up gently and leave it on overnight and during the day." "And then remove the poultice and put the limb in a bath; and when it is warm, gently rub the joint with friction and apply the alleviating poultice again, which is a linseed oil plaster, once on the first day, twice on the second day, and three times on the third day." "and repeat this process while bathing until it is healed."
"And if desired, apply to the joint a wet poultice made from crushed cabbage leaves bordered with soft cloth and compress it gently. Do this several times until the poultice is dry and the inflammation has subsided."
"Chapter XXVIII."
"Of the treatment of dislocation of the malleolus, that is of the joint between the wrist and the hand."
"Dislocation of the malleolus occurs sometimes when the hand is injured; and its reduction is easy, unlike that of other joints. But care should be taken to reduce it promptly before inflammation develops or an abscess forms."
"And the reduction of this dislocation is accomplished by placing the patient's hand on a table with the palm facing down, and then the assistant extends the fingers while the physician places his hand or palm over the prominence of the joint and presses it until it returns to its proper position."
"But it is important to note that if the palm of the hand is already on the stomach side of the hand, then the patient should place the back of their hand on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is on the ulnar side, then the position of the hand should be with the palm facing downwards on the table, so that the physician's hand can cover the prominence of the joint."
"And then if it returns quickly, well and good. But if not, compress the joint with adhesive plaster to prevent inflammation and let it rest. And do not repeat this procedure more than necessary, because if it is not reduced promptly within several days, it will become difficult to treat."
"But the joint may remain stiff due to its tortuosity; and do not inform the patient of this, but tell him that his hand is paralyzed and he cannot move it for some reason. Then you should know that the nerves are compressed or cut, and then you should treat it by cauterizing around the opening of the joint and applying heat afterwards."
"So when dislocation has been reduced, then apply the plaster which we have recommended, and let it remain for five days. Then remove it and let the hand rest for several more days before beginning to exercise it."
"But if there is still some restriction of motion and pain occurs in the joint, then apply a cold compress and gentle friction several times until it is relieved."
"Chapter XXIX."
"Of the treatment of dislocation of the fingers."
"Sometimes the fingers are completely dislocated at their bases."
"And when one of the fingers is dislocated on its dorsal or palmar side, then extend the finger and press the dislocation back into place with your thumbs until it returns."
"And then support the head of the finger, suspend that finger downwards at the side where it is dislocated, and let it remain for two days."
"And then suspend it and extend it until the finger is straight on its own accord within that day."
"And when night comes, bind the finger according to this description and do not cease stretching it during the day and exercising with motion. And bind it at night for several days until it is straight."
"And do the same if a finger is dislocated on its palmar side. Bind it to that position and perform your first operation until it is healed."
"And do likewise when it is dislocated at other joints."
"Chapter XXX."
"Of the treatment of dislocation of the spinal vertebrae."
"When complete dislocation occurs at one of the vertebrae of the spine or neck, and several vertebrae are displaced from their proper places, then there is no treatment for it, because death usually ensues in such cases."
"And the sign of this is that the evacuation of the patient's bowels is involuntary and he cannot retain it. And many times some of his limbs or both sides of his body or both arms are paralyzed, or one of them; or one vertebra is displaced from its proper place, because many times displacement occurs in four directions."
"Therefore, this condition is already displaced towards the back and is called 'gelbozitat' [spasmodic torticollis]."
"But the treatment of it is that you should first consider whether the condition occurs in childhood. For if it does, there can be neither cure nor recovery from it."
"Yet in that which comes through sneezing or percussion or similar to those, the Ancients already spoke of various ways of cure with prolonged speech; yet this has been abbreviated from that which excuses little for its excess, due to my proximity to my intended exposition, with which I have explained and formed diverse instruments to show and explain this."
"And only that which happens properly on the back is cured by it, which I count."
"And that the illness be extended over its face, over the cheek near to the wall, and be extended far from the wet instrument so that the chest is not struck by it."
"And properly a straight staff should be placed, fixed in the earth at the end of the elbow around the head of him, and another staff should be placed in front of his feet at the other end of the elbow."
"And let the minister hold the staff, and not be fixed in a hole; and another minister hold the other according to that form."
"And properly wrap around the head of the sick person and remove from his temples the linen bandages and tie it; and extend the end of the bandage to the staff which is above the head of him, and tie that to it; and properly stretch the other bandage over his buttocks on both sides of him, and above his calves; and properly adjust all the bandages and tie them to the other staff which is above his feet."
"And properly each minister extend the bandage at the beginning of the staff, and let not the two staffs and the bandages be removed from their places where they are fixed, but nevertheless not tied as we have said."
"And the physician place his palms on the spine with strength between that it returns, or that he places upon that one table, and properly adjust his feet upon the table between that it returns."
"But if it does not return by this method, then take a table whose width or length is about three brassas, and dig in the wall which we have said is near to the sick person a place in which the end of the table can be inserted." "And properly place the middle of the table on the spine, and the physician place his feet on the other end, and stretch well between that the spine is compressed and returns to its place."
"And if you wish, turn the twist which is revolved with the hand; and if you lie on the ground near the head of the sick person behind the elbow of two staffs, the length of which is one bras, and behind the head of him in the same way two staffs; and let the distance between each staff be a palm, and already it is made in each staff drawn in which turn turns, and each be well fixed on the ground so that it is not moved."
"And let there also be one round staff upon which the twist is made, and let it be revolved in the two holes of the two staffs."
"And at the end of it there is a hole in which the staff is formed, the length of which is a palm with that which is revolved; and in the two other staffs there is the same as that."
"And properly stretch the bandages which you have stretched on the feet of the sick person in the hole which is above his head, and the bandages which you have stretched on his sides in the turn which is above his feet."
"And properly over each turn let there be one minister who turns the turn with his hand, and the physician compresses the spine as we have said."
"And after the spine has returned, and the place is covered, then it is necessary to apply an empyastic plaster with egg white, and then cotton; and then place a table over the plaster whose width is about three fingers or environ these, and its length is as much as the place of the swelling, and on the parting of the spine so."
"And then let it be bound with linen which we have spoken about, and use the subtle nourishing medicine within until it is healed."
"And if there is some prominence in the place at the end of the healing process, then it is necessary to administer medicines that soften and cleanse with administration of the table for a long time, which we have recommended; and already a lead plate has been administered in that place."
"And sometimes prominence occurs in the last of the spines of the back, and it is caused by that dislocation; and that bone which already protrudes does not need to be pushed with this medicine, for otherwise you will cause your own death."
"Chapter XXXI."
"Of the treatment of a dislocated hip."
"You should know that the junction of the hip and the junction of the muscle do not ordinarily endure except in dislocation, and it does not occur at those parts which occur at other joints with small movement and concavity."
"And the junction of the hip is dislocated in four ways, for it is dislocated either inwardly or outwardly, or anteriorly or posteriorly."
"More often it is dislocated inwardly, and less so anteriorly or posteriorly."
"And the sign of dislocation towards the inside is that when you press the healthy hip against the diseased one, it feels longer and its prominence increases more than on the healthy side, and the diseased leg cannot be bent at the knee, and this is the place where one usually expects an abscess to form after cautery, because the head of the matter has already come here."
"And the sign of that one who experiences dislocation outwardly is that his symptoms are opposite to those of this condition."
"And the sign of that one who experiences dislocation anteriorly is that he stretches his leg completely but cannot bend it without pain at the prominence, and if he tries to walk, he cannot move forward at all; and his urine is retained and his swelling is abscess-like, and he walks with a limp on his heel."
"And the sign of that one who experiences dislocation posteriorly is that he cannot extend his leg nor can he bend it anteriorly any more than he can bend his knee, and his leg feels shorter than the other one, and his swelling is softened, and the head of the matter is towards that place."
"However, the reduction of the types of this dislocation is that you should consider at first whether the dislocation is old and ancient, which has already happened long ago before your arrival. Then you should perform reduction according to his condition, but not in such a way as to be complete; for there is no need for great effort in this kind of treatment."
"However, in that one whose dislocation is recent and belongs to the four types of dislocation, then you should have recourse to this: return the junction and stretch it towards the inside and towards the outside, bringing the leg back to the right and left sides, for strong pressure will suffice and there is no need for further treatment."
"But if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare strong leverage and stretch the leg as far outwards as possible, or use his hands to do so, or use a rope which is tied above the prominence of the thigh; and another assistant should extend one hand over the diseased side so that he places his fingers behind the buttocks. Then press strongly with a linen cloth on the head of the matter and have another assistant hold the end of the cloth."
"And let the extension be to the angle between the thigh and the shinbone, or from the inner side of the thigh to the angle of the shoulder-blade, or from behind to the hip."
"And let all these be done at once while the patient is elevated with his body lying on the ground and remains suspended."
"This type of extension applies to all four types."
"And therefore, if the dislocation returns with what we have said, that is good. But if not, then it is necessary for each type to perform its own specific treatment."
"In the reduction of this proper dislocation, when it occurs on the inner side, let the patient be propped up on his left side. Then wrap cloths around the head of the matter at that place which lies between the head and the area behind the knee. Then extend the cloth upwards from the angle of the thigh to the highest point of the shoulder-blade."
"And then let another assistant strongly grasp the patient's arms and gently move the large part of the diseased matter towards the outside with violent extension, for it will return to its place."
"This type is easier to treat than the other types in reducing this member."
"But if it is excruciating for you and does not obey this type of treatment, then both feet of the patient should be tied together with a strong, light linen cloth around the ankles and knees."
"And let each foot be tied with a rope about four spans in length, and let the diseased leg be stretched out more than the other by two fingers' breadth."
"And then let the patient be suspended head-downwards from the top of a pillar so that he is in the middle; and let his length from the ground be about two cubits."
"And then command a strong youth to press the head of the matter and another youth to suspend himself along with the patient. Then let the other youth pull the matter forcefully with his hands, for the junction will return to its place quickly."
"But in the proper reduction when it is a dislocation on the outside, let the patient lie on his back according to what we have recommended previously in cases of stiffness. Then press the cloth on the diseased leg properly and on its foot."
"And then two pillars should be placed, one at the foot of the leg and the other at its head. Then another pillar should be placed in the middle on which damp cloths are wrapped so that the patient is not harmed by the friction between his thighs."
"And then each assistant should extend to their respective sides, and the physician with his hand shall guide the reduction according to the art."
"And when the dislocation is on the front side of the thigh, then let it be extended gently. And this method applies particularly to cases on the hip. Then the physician places his right palm over the diseased knee and holds it with his other hand and with that grip extends it from the inside towards the buttock."
"And if the dislocation is on the back side of the thigh, then it should not be extended from the inside outwards. Rather, let it be elevated off the ground and placed on a hard surface, just as we have described for setting the ankle bone when the ankle joint is dislocated externally."
"There should be administered compression with a board over the location where the joint is."
"And once the reduction is completed as needed, you know that the sign of having successfully reduced it is when you extend the patient's legs and when they raise their leg, the limb should return to its place without any difficulty. Then you apply two compresses and bind them with a bandage so that the limb is not moved in any way; and keep the patient at rest for three or four days."
"Remove the bandages and compresses, then compare one leg to the other."
"Now, if you see those symptoms in their entirety, you will know that the dislocation is fixed, and then let the patient go."
"If you see any signs of inflammation, then return and compress that again, extending it according to your first traction method, and leave it for three days."
"And then remove the bandage, and have the patient walk around slowly for a few days until they are comfortable."
"Chapter .xxxii."
"On the treatment of dislocation of the jaw."
The dislocation is of three kinds: for it is displaced at the outer parts, and at the inner parts, and at the parts above more than at the parts behind; but it is not displaced at the front parts.
The sign of dislocation is that when you tell the patient to press their leg against the couch, they know that their hip is dislocated.
And the reduction of all kinds is done thus: Make the patient lie on their right side so that they can extend their leg if possible; bring your left foot forward and place it between theirs; press your left hand onto the front of their hip bone, grasping it firmly with both hands, then lift up sharply while another servant presses down on the patient's leg behind you to help return it to its proper position.
The sign of reduction is that their leg adheres to the couch without pain or difficulty when they lift it up.
Then plaster is applied and the leg is immobilized against the couch; then it should be bound up with a bandage for three or four days, and then unbound.
And the patient should not use their limb for walking for some days until they are healed and strengthened.
But if the reduction of it is impossible for you, then apply strong extension with ligatures as in the previous narration on the treatment of hip dislocation.
Chapter XXXIII
Of the Treatment of Ankle Dislocation
The ankle sometimes gets dislocated by a slight sprain, and sometimes it becomes completely dislocated; the dislocation may occur either on the inner or outer side.
The sign of ankle dislocation is that the area around the displaced talus appears swollen and inflamed.
But the treatment for a sprained ankle is easy reduction; it should be extended gently with the hands and pressed inwards until it returns to its normal position.
But in the treatment of a completely dislocated ankle, it is necessary that you make the patient lie down on their back; then have another strong and brave servant hold firmly behind them at the middle of the ankle.
Then you should place your right hand under the upper part of their foot and your left hand on the outer side of the foot at the location of the heel.
Then pull the foot towards you with your right hand and push it two times with your left hand, then extend it with your left hand; then press firmly downwards on the heel of the foot with your right hand without shaking.
And repeat this process twice as we have described.
Then press the heel of the foot down to the ankle for the third time and you will be at the heel.
Therefore if it returns again or twice after this manner, and if the foot swells, it is good; otherwise, then the operation is repeated, for that returns.
If it is forbidden for you to reduce the hernia with what we have recommended, then make the patient lie on their side on the ground, and stretch a rope firmly tied to the ground between their thighs, and you have wrapped around them a cloth so that the patient does not slip.
And then the minister of the testicles holds his own parts, and another minister extends the patient's leg with their hands or with some device placed on the knee; and each minister stretches out their part as much as they can, so that the body of the patient is not pulled towards the sides due to their extension.
And then the physician reduces the dislocation with his hands, and another minister holds the healthy side on the outside, for the dislocation returns easily.
And therefore when the dislocation returns and it is declared to you that the reduction has failed, then apply an emollient plaster and bind it firmly with bandages, and tie the leg with bandages to the bed.
And be careful or guard yourself from the nerves which are behind the heel, for the bandage over it should not be tight and harm them.
And then leave him like that for two days or three; and if the bandage becomes moistened, remove it.
And then untie him on the third day or the fourth, and forbid the patient from walking for forty days. But if it is necessary for him to walk during that period, it is not certain that the dislocation will not dissolve and be corrupted, and therefore he would not receive any cure.
And if an abscess appears from the wound, then you should apply in the cavity of it what is mentioned above in another place regarding cure and dressing, until it is removed.
Chapter XXXIV
Of the treatment of dislocation of the said feet.
It is necessary that he who has been dislocated be reduced with little extension without struggle; and what is not difficult, let it be done gently.
But if the dislocation is in some of the toes of the foot, then you should have the patient place his foot on the ground or on a table and stand up like he is walking.
And then you stand on one foot, and place your foot over what you imagine is the prominence of the joints, and press it down with your foot with force until it returns, and see that it has been reduced and that there is no prominence appearing in the location.
And then place below the belly of the foot of him a table that takes all the foot, with two ends, and press it down with proper and firm strapping for three days; and then untie it and let him rest from walking for more days until it is strengthened and the reduction is ensured.
Chapter XXXV.
"Of the types of dislocation that occur with plague or fracture or in combination."
"When some cause of those occurs, and you attempt the cure of it and the restoration of that, many times death ensues."
"And therefore it is not necessary to presume about the cure of that, but only he who is skilled in the art, with long experience, merciful and compassionate, slow, not hasty nor presumptuous; and let him use remedies at the beginning that are limited to drawing out the apostumes alone, leaving the patient to divine judgment, rather than hoping for health from destruction, with alleviation of the illness, and where there is some hope." "And therefore strive immediately to reduce it at the beginning of the cause before an abscess forms."
"And then if the limb returns according to our desire, we should immediately administer treatment that draws out the abscess and heals the plague with what is appropriate for it of the drying medicines."
"And if dislocation occurs with fracture and the bones are separated, then you should attempt the reduction of them, and do in that what we have said concerning the simple diseases of those parts that preceded."
"And guard and avoid according to your ability that which enters through the paths of fear according to what has been preceded by my instruction; for this is better for you, as you owe it to your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and healthier for your true body in your time." "So endeth the words of Albucasis, from which God grant blessing." "Amen."
