"O sons, since I have completed for you this book, which is the last of the science of medicine, through its completion it has reached its end, and through its explanations and declarations, it seems to me that I complete that for you with this treatise, which concerns manual operation, that is surgery."
For the manual operation is proscribed in our region and in our time completely prohibited, so that very few people know its science, and its traces are obliterated; and nothing remains of it but some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which have been altered by their hands and rendered obscure those intentions and elongated its strength and art."
"It seems to me that I should revive this with an arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and also to include the forms of the instruments of cautery and other tools for the work, both by addition to the declaration and for preparation thereof, which is necessary."
"But the reason why there is not found a good artisan with his hands in our time is because the art of medicine is long, and its practitioner must beforehand be exercised in the science of anatomy, which Galen held to be necessary so that he might know the uses of the members and their forms, their conjunctions and separations; and have knowledge of bones, nerves and sinews, their number and arrangement; and of the pulsating veins and quiet ones, and their places of exit."
"And for this reason Hippocrates said that with few words, but greater effect, especially in the art of manual operation."
"But we have already said in the introduction of this book that whoever is not skilled in what we have said about anatomy will surely fall into error and cause the death of many people, as I have seen too many do. For some are formed in this science but cast themselves from it without its knowledge and experience."
"For I saw a foolish and inexperienced doctor cut an escrophulous boil on the neck of a woman, and cut some arteries in her neck so that much blood flowed out, causing the woman to die suddenly."
"And I saw another doctor who took it upon himself to remove a stone from a man who was in that condition, and the stone was large. He came to him and removed that stone with a piece of the bladder, causing that man to die on the third day."
"And I had already predicted that he would die, and I saw that because of the size of the stone and the disposition of the illness, I knew beforehand that he would die."
"And I saw another doctor who took payment of two gold coins from our land to perform surgery. He undertook the case of a blacksmith whose thighbone was fractured. The doctor, through his ignorance, extracted the fracture above the wound with pillows and splints with great force, not allowing the wound any breathing space."
"And he bound it according to his desires and bound it tightly and left it like that for some days. Then he commanded that the bandages be loosened, and thus he caused the thighbone and the bone of the leg to become infected, resulting in ruin."
"And I was called to him, and I prepared to loosen the bandages, and thus tranquility ensued and he felt less pain."
"But nevertheless the corruption was already confirmed in the limb, so that I could not stop it, and the corruption continued to spread throughout the limb until the patient perished."
"And I saw another doctor who perforated a cancerous boil. It became ulcerated after so many days that the evil of it was magnified with its lord."
"The reason for this is that the cancerous boil is caused by black bile. Therefore it should not be cauterized with iron throughout, but only on the member which suffers from it."
"And therefore, my children, it is necessary for you that the operation with the hand be divided into two parts: one part is the operation which is associated with health, and another part is the operation in which there is danger in most dispositions."
"And I have already explained this in every place of this book where operation is mentioned that there is error and fear. Therefore it is necessary for you to guard this and let go of that, so that foolish people do not find a way to speak against you."
"And therefore take your weapons with diligence and protection of God, and your illnesses with patience and constancy."
"And use the best way through the grace of God to obtain health and successful outcome, and leave behind terrible illnesses that are difficult to cure. Cast aside your weapons from what causes you fear, so that your faith in yourself and in your name may not fail: for more remains to your glory, both here and thereafter in your sanctity."
"Because he had already said in some of his commentaries:" "No doctorize evil illnesses, lest you be named bad doctors."
"And I have already divided this book according to three chapters."
"The division of the book begins, and first of the first part:" "The first chapter ordered concerning the head, about the forms of instruments and the irons for cauterization, and what is necessary in surgery."
"The division of the second part:" "The second chapter, about setting and perforation, and bloodletting, and wounds, and extraction of arrows and similar objects, all ordered with the forms of instruments."
"The third chapter, about reduction and dislocation, and the cure of wryneck and similar ailments; chapter ordered concerning the head, with the forms of instruments."
"It is necessary for me to say what kind of wounds are suitable for that cauterization and what kinds are unsuitable, and in which condition cauterization is prohibited."
"Therefore I say that the discourse on the quality of wounds suitable for cauterization and those unsuitable is long and prolix, subtle in science and secret, and many wise men have spoken about it and they are not agreed among themselves, and it suffices me to mention a little bit of their discourses due to length."
"And therefore I say that cauterization is beneficial universally in all conditions, whether with matter or without matter, except for two conditions which are conditions of the head without matter."
"The disease of the tail and skin with dry matter is disordered; some said that cauterization is helpful for this, while others said the opposite, that cauterization is not suitable for a condition caused by heat and dryness, as fire's nature is heat and dryness, thus it is inconvenient for such a condition to be treated with something hot and dry."
"And the one who said the opposite of that stated that cauterization brings benefit to all dry and hot conditions found in men's bodies, for when you compare the body of man and its humidity with the nature of fire, they are very similar."
"I say according to that person's words, I have experienced this myself on several occasions."
"But it is not necessary for him to come back to this topic, since it has already been discussed and practiced in the chapter on cauterization, after considering the diversity of human complexions, the dispositions of diseases according to their mixtures, their causes, accidents, and duration."
"But in other complexions, there is no fear for you, especially in hot and humid diseases, since all physicians agree about those and are not discordant regarding the benefit of cauterization in those."
"And know, my sons, that regarding the secret of curing with cauterization using fire and its goodness, it is about cauterization with burning medicine, because fire is simple, and its action does not reach any member other than the one being cauterized unless through a small injury."
"But the action of burning medicine reaches those members which are near it, and often it brings difficult-to-cure diseases to them, and also easily causes them."
"But because of its sublimity and the goodness of its substance, fire does not do this but only superfluously. And we are already acquainted with this through experiment and the length of service in studying this art according to the truth of causes; therefore, I am excused from speaking at length about it. And if it were not that my book has not yet been read in this place, I would hide from you this secret concerning fire and the quality of its operation on bodies and its expulsion through which it expels diseases, demonstrated philosophically, which would sharpen your intellects."
"And know, my sons, that they disagree about the time when it is appropriate to perform cauterization, and most of them consider the best time to be in spring."
"And I say that cauterization is appropriate at all times, because the harm that occurs accidentally from time is submerged in the benefit of what is attracted by cauterization, and especially if the cauterization is for pains or necessary purposes, strong and persistent ones which cannot tolerate delay because it is feared that some evil may come upon them, which is greater than a little accidental harm."
"And do not think this in your minds, my sons, because only the common people and foolish physicians estimate that regarding that disease which is cured by cauterization there is recovery at all times, and they place it second."
"And the cause is not as they think because of this, for cauterization is only a substitute for medicine which alters the complexion and dries up the humidity which is the cause of pains."
"But nevertheless, cauterization is superfluous beyond medicine because of the vehemence of its power and virtue in its operation, and the greatness of its lord."
"And it is possible that the disease returns at some time during life, depending on the complexion of the patient and the location of the disease, the power of cauterization, and what has been prepared in the body from the aggregation of superfluities in it, and what has been received by it in its acquisition through foods and similar causes; but the disease to which cauterization is administered will be a subtle one in a member with few superfluities and humidities, such as cauterization for toothache or similar ones, it is possible that the pain does not return again, except perhaps in small ways."
"And the common saying is that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, and this saying is more true than they understand it because they believe that there is no cure that profits by medicine nor by any other cause before cauterization."
"And the cause is contrary to this; and the intention that cauterization is the last resort of medicine is only when the methods of cure in certain diseases are administered and those medicines do not confer anything useful, and then cauterization is administered at the end of the disease, and it profits from that." "And from here on, know that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention which the vulgar and most foolish physicians understand."
"And they said that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the sublimity of its substance."
"And they said that the place of cauterization does not make a scar, which is absolutely false because I have proved and found out that this does not happen except in some bodies without others, and cauterization with it is good and better than with iron as they said; but when you cauterize with fire using gold, it is not declared to you because the gold melts according to the quantity that you want due to the heat of the gold, and prepares itself to receive rubbing; and if you adjust it onto the ignition, the gold will melt in the fire, and some sheets are burned in the fire by the occupation of that."
"And for this reason, cauterization with iron must be done more gently and more prudently than cauterization with gold in order to maintain its operation."
"And I have already ordered this chapter on cauterization according to chapters, and have placed those concerning the head within the chapter on the feet, for later reference if you want something from it."
"First Chapter."
"This cauterization confers upon the moist and cold nature of the servant, whose two causes are soddenness and excess of phlegm flowing downwards from the head to the parts of the eyes and ears, causing copious discharge, drowsiness, toothache, and pain in the throat. Universally, it is beneficial for all diseases that arise from coldness, such as paralysis, apoplexy, and similar conditions."
"The procedure for this cauterization is as follows: First, order the patient to evacuate the head using a laxative medicine for three or four nights, depending on the severity of their condition, age, and usual habits."
"Then order him to shave his head with a razor. Then have him sit on a well-prepared bench and place his feet upon a stone."
"And then place the blade of your palm upon the bridge of his nose between his eyebrows." "Yet, once your finger has reached the middle point, mark that spot with ink, and immediately light the olive-oil cautery of which this is the form:"
"And then place that (cautery) upon the marked spot in such a manner that it descends slowly, thus pressing your hand down little by little, and you turn it."
"And then raise your hand lightly and look at the spot, and if you see that some amount of bone has already been exposed, like the size of a grain of millet, then raise your hand, but if not, turn your hand with another iron one until you can see what I said."
"And then take some salt and dissolve it over the spot and leave it for three days."
"Then place (the cautery) on the edge of the wound and leave it until the burn scar has healed." "And then dress the wound with Tetrafarmakon until it is healed."
"And as they said, when the plague has broken out, so much better it casts forth the arm, for that is preferable and more beneficial."
"And some of them said that the tendon should be cauterized up to the bone and that the cautery should be held until some part of the bone's substance is adherent."
"And then scrape away what has adhered to the bone, and then dress it."
"And others say that with the cautery it reaches the bone, before pressing upon it strongly until the bone crackles, and this is the form of small Alphabetic." "It is believed that in that place the vapors of the head expire."
"And let the wound be kept open for a long time until it is consolidated and properly cured."
"However, I have not seen these two kinds of cauteries done on everyone, but only on some men out of fear; and that one, indeed, it seems to me better with health, if they are so; for the head is divelled by dissolution of continuity like other members, especially when the patient's head is naturally frail."
"And the first kind of cautery is safer and better in my opinion; with that one, indeed, it is healthful for that wound."
"Chapter two."
"Of the cautery of the head."
"When there is chronic and prolonged pain in the whole head and this is prolonged in the illness, and there are used ointments and poultices and bandages and plasters and gum and cadals and guanins and similar things, and especially if it has already been cauterized with one cautery which does not help because of those causes, then consider whether the head of the patient is strong by nature; and it is not frail nor much weakened, then that cauterize him with another cautery near to that one a little." "And properly he cauterizes him over the horn of his head with an entrance cautery where the vein is parted." "Cut the vein and uncover it from the bone the quantity which we have mentioned and cauterize him with a cautery in the last part of the head where it is called 'vaz' — and that place where the cupping glass is placed." "And lift up your hand here, and do not uncover the bone, for the illness through this causes much greater pain than all other cauteries of the head."
"And I say this cautery in its place, for it is necessary to cauterize with the cautery with which you cauterize the horns of the head and the occupit more subtly than that with which you cauterize the middle part of the head; and this is its form."
"Chapter three."
"Of cautery for non-ancient migraine."
"When sudden pain is felt in the part of the head or a prolonged pain within the ear, let it be evacuated with medicines that clarify the head, and let the other treatment which I have mentioned in the previous sections be administered; and if this does not help, then cautery in it can be done in two ways: either cauterization with an acute burning medicine or with iron."
"More properly cautery with a burning medicine is that you take a dose of aloe and heat it up and remove the ends from both its heads." "And properly you incise the place of the pain in the temple with a sharp lancet where it is near the vein but hidden."
"And properly you press on it with a tight bandage due to continuous constriction and leave it for the space of three hours; and properly remove the bandage and take out the aloe, and leave the wound open for two or three days, and properly apply wet compresses around the wound until the place becomes suppurated."
"And properly cure him with an ointment until he is healed."
"And if you wish, do this with some burning medicines which I have written about in the second treatise on burning medicines."
"But the cautery with iron is done in this way: heat up a cautery of the following shape:"
"The condition is called closed nails because its head appears like the shape of a nail with some curvature, and in the middle there is an elevation."
"And then place your hand over the painful area, keeping it still so that the bowels are not disturbed, and gently and gradually pull out the small arrow."
"And if the amount of it that is attached by the stickiness of the flesh is so great that most of it cannot be removed, raise your hand for fear that the artery which is nearby may also be torn, so that blood does not flow."
"And then soak cotton in salt water and place it over the area, leaving it there for three days. Then change the cotton with fresh one daily until it is healed."
"And if you wish to cauterize, cauterize the extremity of the wound according to your method of cautery, taking care not to incision an artery in this migraine-like but non-migraine condition."
Chapter Four
Of the cauterization of ancient migraine.
When you are treating migraine according to what has been said about the previous cure and the divisions of illnesses, but the treatment is not effective, and sometimes because the illness does not respond to what has been said about the first cautery with medicine or fire cautery, then it becomes necessary for you to burn the cautery knife on that spot until it glows red, marking the location of the pain with a line of length equal to the greatest width of the said spot or crossing that; and then wait for a while before pressing it down firmly so as to incise the artery and cause blood to flow into the mouth.
Nevertheless, it is necessary for you to guard against damaging the continuity of the jawbone, which is moved by chewing, and that the cartilage is not adhered and that the nerves which move it are not affected, and that no spasm occurs.
And if it is about the care and caution of blood flow from the artery that is being cauterized, for there is fear in its cautery, especially for those who do not know what they are doing and are not studied or practiced, then leave the operation at the beginning.
And I come with remembrance of the regimen for accidental blood flow from the artery according to its manner, in its place in this book.
And if you see this illness not abating with this cautery and see the patient's condition tolerable, then cauterize that spot in the middle of the head as we have told, and cure the wound until it is healed.
And if you wish, administer the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter on the division of artery with cautery having two edges, for this is better cautery and more effective.
Chapter Five
Of the cauterization of ear pains.
When pain in the ear occurs due to heat and is treated with laxatives and other remedies mentioned earlier, but the pain persists, then apply cautery, which is called "puncta," and this is how it is done
And puncture around the ignition, moving it around the entire ear like a wheel turning, or in circles around each point if the pain is localized. Gradually apply the cautery to the root of the ear, pressing gently until you sense that it has reached the painful area
And if cauterization is applied at multiple points around the entire ear, then cover it and apply treatment to any affected areas until they heal
Chapter VI
On cautery for quinsy (peritonsillar abscess).
Quinsy that is treated with cautery is only of the type that comes from a swelling (abscess), as we have mentioned in our divisions of diseases.
Cautery should be avoided in cases where quinsy occurs due to dryness or spasm of the nerve.
When treating that type of quinsy with herbs and other remedies without success, then you must cauterize the disease with three applications: one at the root of the ear, another a little below the cheekbone, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
And apply your cautery according to the opposite of the affected part, because softening occurs only in the area that appears healed.
And the method of cautery is to cauterize that area with the cautery on the right side of the tip of the ear, just above the horn of the head, and on the cheekbone below it, whose length should be according to the length of a finger. Then press your hand with the cautery until the quantity of heat sufficient for the thickness of the swelling has burned through
And this is the method of cautery, and it is a specific treatment for quinsy, as described previously. But more subtly, this can also be seen in the following way: remove any excess roughness with scissors.
And then treat the affected area with the appropriate medicine until it is healed.
Capítulo VII
"On cautery of ancient stroke."
"When the stroke is ancient and cured with what we have said, and your medication does not help, and the illness has no fever, then cauterize that with four cauteries: on all the horns of his head; and one cautery in the middle of the head, as we have said; and one cautery in the throat." "And the manner of cauterization is done according to what has been said above."
"Then it should be cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and it is worse if delayed; and therefore, let it be treated with what proceeds."
Chapter VIII
"On cautery for oblivation caused by inflammation."
"Give the patient at the beginning large jars and pills of servile earth clarifying."
"And then shave the entire head of the patient and place on the throat this plaster of centaury described in the treatise of plasters."
"And leave that on for a few days, because that is the manner of cautery." "And do this according to the order I have already described."
If these remedies heal him well, and if not, then make three cauteries on the last part of his head, descending from the highest part of the head to the lowest part of the neck. And pause between each cautery the size of your finger, and quickly cure the burn with whatever is at hand.
If you add more, and the patient can tolerate it, then apply cautery in the middle area; if you wish to cause greater addition, then cauterize that upon both corners.
Once cured, close up that which was opened; and the cautery should be olive-shaped according to the form given beforehand.
Chapter IX
On cauterization of paralysis and softening of the whole body.
First, proceed with the softening of the head as we have said; then shave the patient's head and apply a cautery in the middle of their head, another on all four corners of the head, another at the back part of it, and three cauteries on the spinal column of the neck.
And if it is necessary to soften the body in cases of excess and the patients can tolerate it, and the disease is strong, then apply four cauteries on the spinal column of the back, and afterwards apply a cautery at the point where the nape of the neck meets the spine, raising the patient's head up. And once cured, close up that which was opened with an olive-shaped cautery.
Chapter X
On cauterization for epilepsy
One does not cauterize the epileptic person unless the epilepsy is due to a phlegm.
And therefore, one should soften the brain of that person at the beginning with herbs and with the other cure which we have mentioned in the division when the patient is great and can tolerate the exception of medicines.
And if it is a child who does not tolerate medicines, then administer purgatives and chewing herbs to soften the brain, beforehand for several days, with moderation in food.
And then shave the head of the patient and apply a cautery in the middle of the head according to the manner previously mentioned, and another cautery on the back of the head, and cauterize each corner of the head. And if the patient is strong and can tolerate it, then apply the cauteries which have been mentioned, having first paralyzed and softened the body on the spinal column of the neck and the spinal column of the back.
And let an olive-shaped cautery be applied as has been previously described.
But if the patient is a child, then apply a subtle cautery in this manner:
"Chapter XI."
"On cauterizing melancholy."
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humidity and thick phlegm, then cauterize that area with those cauteries which we have mentioned previously for paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is declining superfetation leading to melancholy and the patient's body is humid, then they should drink water that cleanses the brain according to what has been stated earlier in this division.
Also shave the patient's head and make a poultice of dill, applied decently around the circumference, and also apply another on the middle of the head.
And let the patient be seated, and let them be held from all parts.
Also apply a liniment; afterwards it is fitting to bind on a lamb's wool belly-band. And warm that (i.e., the poultice) over the fire with gentle heat for measure, which said patient should suffer while it is in place. And then remove that from the middle of the head and lay it on the circumference, allowing it to cool within until it becomes cold.
And do this for the patient once every week until the boil is healed; or if you wish, cauterize that area with small punctures according to the most of the boil, taking care not to burn yourself while holding a cautery arranged in such a way: this is called "cautery that moistens the brain evenly."
And then apply that cloth dipped in either border or egg white.
**Chapter XII.**
On the cauterization of descending water in the head
When it is declared to you that water has begun to descend into the head through the signs which I have stated earlier in this division, then begin and give the patient to drink that which cleanses the head of him, and protect him from all humidity.
And make him suck on a sponge dipped in warm water for several days.
And then command him to raise his head, and cauterize that with a cautery in the middle of the head; and then cauterize it with two cauteries on both temples if it is the beginning of descent of water into both heads, or on one side if it is the beginning of the descent of water into one head.
Incise with a cautery all the veins and arteries which are below the nape; and let the cauteries be at that distance in the latitude of the temples.
And take care of fluxes of blood when cauterizing; and if you see any flux of blood, stop it with some medicine which is within your power.
And I will come with skill in the extraction of arteries and in the ablation of those and in the care of fluxes of blood.
And sometimes it is cauterized in the nape below two bones with two cauteries inserted deeply.
**Chapter XIII.**
"On cauterization of old tears."
"When tears of the eyes are old and abundant due to veins and arteries in the area near the head being visible and it is confirmed that this is a superfluous fluid discharge, then cauterize with cautery as described at the beginning concerning hot water pouring into the eyes, and cauterize in the middle of the head and on both temples, and cauterize on both sides of the neck bones." "And if necessary, cauterize also on all sides of the eye socket at the end of the eyebrow with a small cautery."
"Chapter XIV."
"On cauterization of nose odor."
"When you treat this with what we have said in the division and it does not improve, then prepare and give the patient cochlearia to drink for three nights. Then scrape the head clean, and cauterize him with a mixture of cautery oil." "And also cauterize him with clove cautery on both eyebrows above the hair, each one small."
"And be careful not to burn it with the cautery."
"And this is how you make the clove cautery:"
"Chapter XV."
"On cautery for softening of eyelids."
"If the eyelid is softened due to illness or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery made of this composition:"
"And if you do, cauterize the same over both eyebrows a little with two cauteries on each side, extending them towards the temples." "And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the eyebrow."
"Don't press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but just enough to make the third part of the eyelid adhere."
"Chapter XVI."
"On cauterizing the eyelid when the hairs turn towards the inside and hurt the eye:"
"When the hairs of the eyelid turn inward so that they hurt the eye, cauterize them in one of two ways: either with fire or with a burning medicine."
"If you cauterize with fire, tell the patient beforehand to pluck out his hairs like those that are plucked for depilation, before they become long and curly. And if it hurts him at their origin, then cover his eyes with a bandage so that he is not annoyed until the hairs have grown."
"Then, when they have grown and become long and curly, pause the head of the patient in its place, and carefully place a cautery on the eyelid of his eye, shaped like a withered leaf. Let the beginning of the cautery be close to the hairs."
"And also pause cotton dipped in alum or pitch-plaster over the eye."
"Then ignite the cautery, of which this is the form:"
"And then cauterize along the figure that you have marked out little by little with many glances, until the surface of the ridge which is like a myrtle leaf is entirely apparent."
"And the sign of a good cautery is that you see the eyelid contract and its hairs raised above the puncture of the eye."
"Then lift your hand up and leave it for three days. Afterwards place cotton with border on it until the scar is healed." "And then treat it with ointment until it is healed."
"But if the hairs return for some reason at their origin and the eyelid is softened again, then perform the cautery again on that same spot just as you had done initially."
"But if the hairs grow on the eyelid again, then cauterize that until they are raised to their natural place and become long and curly, so that they do not hurt the eye."
"But when using a burning medicine for cauterizing, this is what you should do: tell the patient to pluck out his hairs until they are long and curly. Then make a paper form like a myrtle leaf from thin cloth."
"And then take some known soap and live sulphur, one dram of each. Mix them well together, and quickly make a paste so that it does not cool down. Then spread this paste over the paper which has been made in the shape of a myrtle leaf, and place it on the eye or both eyes. Place cotton dipped in alum on the eye, and keep the head of the patient steady."
"And then place your finger on the medicine and press it gently without hurting until the patient feels the bite of the medicine, because its bite is like that of fire."
"And then when the patient feels that he has been bitten, remove the medicine and wipe it with your finger; then, when the bite ceases, remove the medicine and wash the eye with water. Then observe if sometimes the eyelid is raised like it is washed by the contraction of fire or by cutting, because now would be a good time to do so. And if not, place the medicine again on the spot where the medicine has not previously been applied, without staining until the hairs are burned and the eye contracts."
"And then place cotton with border on it until the ridge of the adhesion is healed. Then treat it with ointment made from definitio or with another one until it is healed."
"And in your operation you must guard with constant vigilance that nothing from the medicine falls into the eye. And if the eyelid becomes softened after several days and some hairs hurt the eye again, then repeat your medicine on that spot where the eyelid is softened, and especially do it just as you did at the beginning, until it is healed."
"And this is the form of a myrtle leaf:"
"And know that the eyes of men are diversified according to their size and smallness, therefore you must make your contraction accordingly."
"And do not hide the way of rectitude from those who study this art."
"Chapter XVII"
Of cauterizing fistula that is in the lachrymal canal of the eye.
When you treat a fistula according to what was said in the divisions of illnesses and your treatment does not succeed, then you should cauterize it in this manner: Command the patient to place their head on their right side, and hold their head firmly with some minister's hands between yours, so that it is neither moved nor agitated by their head.
And appropriately place a bandage of wool or gauze on the wound on their buttocks.
And thus it is cauterized, the form of which is:
It should be heated like this, like a pipe or a vulture's feather at one end with which the cautery is made.
And if you wish, it may penetrate somewhat into the other extremity. And if you wish, let it come out like this, like a tent.
But nevertheless, that which is heated is better for your work.
And then press the fistula if it is open, and draw out and dry it with spongy material And if it is not open, then cut it open and draw out the pus from there.
And then apply the cautery which has been well heated to it, and you must have your hand near that place but a little way away from the opening of the anus, so that neither your hand nor the patient is burned, and then apply the cautery on the edge of the wound and burn it there.
And therefore if at the beginning of your cautery it goes into the bone, that is good. But if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice if necessary; and leave it like that for three days, and then apply it again with a bandage and surround it with dry ointment until it is healed.
But if after eleven days it has not healed, then apply a sharp corrosive medicine there until the bone is exposed and it may be scraped according to what is appropriate in that chapter.
And there is another method of cauterizing a fistula which some first said: enter the opening of the fistula and make it wider and then insert into that fissure a thin rod like this one, which has the shape of it. And on to that put as much melted lead as you wish; and with your hand press it gently on to the wound so that the patient is not harmed, lest the melted lead should reach the anus of the patient; and cover the wound with a cloth dipped in albumen of egg or water, because the lead adheres to the place of the fistula and heals it by wonderful healing.
And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cauterizing and curing it, that is good. But if not, then it is necessary to administer a trepanation of the nose and reduce the fistula into the cavity of the nose according to what will be coming in its proper place.
Chapter XVIII
**On cauterizing the fissure of the buttocks.**
Fissures occur quite frequently in the buttocks, but more commonly in infants' buttocks.
When you treat those fissures with what we have said in the sections and it does not profit your treatment, then heat the small knife-like cautery according to this method that is shown.
And let its concavity be made according to the subtlety of a needle.
Approach gently with that knife into those fissures until the cautery reaches the bottom of the fissures
And then cure it with cerate until it is healed
Chapter XIX
Of the cauterization of a fistula in the mouth
When an abscess forms on the uvula or on the palate or on the roots of teeth, and it bursts open, and becomes old, and much fluid comes out, and a fistula is formed, and if you treat that and it does not improve, then you should heat cautery according to the size that has been received in the fistula, and put that heated iron into the opening of the fistula, and insert your hand until the hot iron reaches the bottom of it, and do this once or twice; and then cure it with what we have said about treatment until it is healed
And if the healing is severed and it heals, that is good. And if not, then it is necessary to discover the place and remove the rotted bone according to what will come in its chapter
De cauterizacio de fistola en la carca o en las naris.
"Cauterization of teeth and softening of veins."
"When veins are softened by moisture and teeth are painful, and treatments with medications do not confer, then you place the patient's head in your lap, and immediately bring the cautery iron here, so that you place the coal on the tooth and quickly insert it, taking care to keep your hand a little away so that the patient feels the heat of the fire reaching the root of the tooth."
"And then remove your hand, and repeat the cautery several times according to what you wish."
"And then the patient rinses their mouth with salt water and holds it for an hour, and afterwards spits it out, because the painful tooth is cauterized and the softened gum is strengthened and the moisture corrupted is dried."
"Chapter XXII."
"On the cautery of toothache."
"When toothache is due to coldness, or there is rot or worm inside it, or if the cure with medicine does not confer, then cautery in that one is performed in two ways: either by cauterizing with a red-hot iron rod, or by cauterizing with fire."
"Cautery with an iron rod is done by taking a red-hot iron rod and quickly placing it on the tooth that hurts, making sure not to burn the tongue or lips."
"And repeat this several times until the heat reaches the root of the teeth."
"And if you wish, you can also dip wool or cotton into the iron rod mentioned above and place it on the painful tooth, then place the hot iron onto the wool until the heat reaches the hollow of the tooth."
"But if you choose to perform the cautery with fire, you must wait until the coal or iron is red-hot and has reached its full heat without burning the patient's mouth."
"And then you ignite the coal or iron and place it on the tooth according to its shape, holding it there with your hand until it has cooled down; do this several times in a row until the pain disappears, either that day or the next."
"And it is necessary that after this cautery, the patient should fill their mouth with good salt water and hold it for an hour, then spit it out. And this is how the cautery is done."
"And cauterize whichever tooth you wish according to what is possible for you."
"And this is how the cautery is performed:"
"Chapter XXII."
"On the cauterization of external hernias."
"When hernias are caused by mucus and humors and are not obedient to digestion despite medications and you want to promote digestion of those gently, then you ignite the cautery in this way: having two ends opened so that smoke can exit through one end, place that ignited cautery on that lump once or more times until it reaches the center of the lump."
"And if the lump is small, then apply the cautery according to its size, and leave it for three days, applying it on the border of the wound until what the fire has burned is removed."
"Then cleanse that wound with bandages and dressings until it heals."
Chapter XXII.
"Concerning the cauterization of vocal cords and the correction of hoarseness."
"When humidity affects the canal of the lung, especially when it is accompanied by coldness of complexion, then at the beginning, medicinal laxatives should be used to evacuate the illness. Then apply a cautery on both sides of the larynx in the depressed area."
"And be careful not to reach the larynx with the cautery nor burn too much of the cord, but only a little bit."
"And apply another cautery on both sides at the junction of the neck and the last cervical vertebra." "And apply the cautery as described above."
"Then cleanse it with what was prescribed earlier until it heals."
Chapter XXIV.
"On cauterization of disease of the lung and cough."
"When cough and lung disease are due to dampness and heat, and there is no fever or sputum, the cauterization is performed with two cauteries on the furcula in the hollow of the throat and upper chest; and another cautery in the middle of the chest between the two breasts; and the cauteries should be made according to the previous shape."
"And if you wish, let your cautery be punctate with the cautery called a puncture, of which the shape is shown in the punctuation for earache."
"And when points are entered between the skin and those (organs); and accordingly cure that with water as previously stated which is to be healed."
"And when cauteries have three branches, because cautery is made with this one: once you can make three cauteries according to this shape:"
Chapter .xxv
Of cautery for tickling that is the head of the helper.
When the head of the helper is dislocated due to slippery dampness and does not remain firm at the time of its return, you should reduce its dislocation so that it can return to its usual position, using a small movement. Then, apply traction with your left hand on the back of the neck, where the joint of the head joins the cervical vertebrae, if the joint is dislocated posteriorly.
And then ignite the cautery having two heads; and this is its shape:
And then cauterize the neck so that it penetrates that joint into the other side. And here is the figure of cautery at that time, with four cauteries.
And sometimes it is adjusted according to this count, for there are eight cauteries.
And then pause upon the cautery and pour on it a little salt, and let the limb rest quietly without being moved for some time until it is comforted.
And if the dislocation is anteriorly placed and this has been done, then cauterize over the muscle with a claw-shaped cautery or with pointed cauteries, because the joint is confirmed and the dampness is removed and the limb is healed.
Chapter .xxvi
Of cautery for the stomach.
When there is heat and abundant dampness in the stomach that exceeds its capacity and causes pain, if you continue with careless treatments without confirming it, then it should be placed on its back, arms and legs extended, and cauterize it with three cauteries: one on the left side of the pit of the stomach, about the size of a finger joint with a claw-shaped cautery, and two others on either side of the pit of the cautery, so that they form a triangular figure; extend those that are not adjusted to prevent burning.
And if the depth of the cautery is equal to two-thirds of the thickness of the neck
And this is the figure of the cautery according to this form without addition. If you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form:
"Burn the stomach with cautery for one who is frightened by this cautery: and you should prick on the stomach as much as you want with a tent, then cauterize those points with cautery; and then treat them with the treatment that preceded until they are healed."
"Chapter XXVII"
"About cauterization of the liver."
"When there is pain in the liver due to coldness or humidity or excessive windiness such that its normal consistency has been altered by excess exit, and the illness is cured with what we have said and not otherwise, then it should be treated on the back of the neck, pricking three cauteries according to this form and this amount measured on the left side of the liver from the hypochondrium, where the man lies on his right side."
"And let the space between each cautery be according to the thickness of the finger, and let the cauteries be according to the length of the right side of the body."
"Don't put your hand on the cautery while it's hot."
"And if the amount of cautery is equal to the amount of the thickness of the spine, and it is not adjusted; and if the illness persists on the side of its weight; and if it does not persist, then let him lie down, having extended his legs, and raise his arms."
"And you can cauterize these cauteries with a cautery spoon if you have skill and caution in this art."
"And be careful that you do not proceed recklessly in the cautery, and let the spine be heated throughout so that the whole body is heated and reaches the vessels, for here the spine is subtle; know this."
"Chapter XXVIII."
"On the perforation of an abscess of the liver with a cautery."
When an ulcer or abscess appears in the liver and you want to know if that abscess is within the flesh of the liver or under its membrane, then if it is in the flesh of the liver, the patient feels heavy pain with sharpness.
And if it is under the membrane of the liver, then the pain is very sharp and sometimes even baffles doctors in its treatment.
Therefore, you should turn the patient onto their side; and carefully find the location of the abscess with touch; and then apply the cauterizing iron which resembles wool, the shape of which is described in the previous page. And cauterize it with that iron until the entire chain is burned through, until it reaches the cyst, until it emits healthy sparks.
And also treat this by treating other abscesses until it is healed.
"And one should not use this cautery method unless that person has prolonged their studies in the art of medicine and knows many illnesses by experience; although they may have tried it a few times, let them leave it to those who deserve to do so, for it is better."
The twenty-ninth chapter
Of cautery for pleasure.
They say that the ancient cauteries for pleasure were made in this manner: take a long, dry twig of aristolochia and make a punch with it, as thick as your finger.
And then immerse it in oil and heat it at the fire, and cauterize with one cautery in that place which is between the continuation of the furcula with the neck; and with two small cauteries diagonally, one a little inclined towards the right side of the beard, and with two cauteries declining between the fifth rib and the armpit, inclining a little backwards; and with another cautery in the middle place of the belly; and with another on the stomach; and with three cauteries on the back parts; and with one cautery between the two buttocks; and with two cauteries on both sides of the belly, left the cautery which is between the two buttocks.
And thou needest not hold thy hand with the cautery, but it should be manifestly done by the cord in work.
And they say that the ancients said that this is the way of men who use cauteries of iron like rays and heat it in that place which is between the ribs until you reach to that aposteme and let it burn soundly, as we have said in the aposteme of the liver.
But in this perforation with cautery there is fear, for many die at once when it happens in the place of the fistula which does not heal.
**Chapter 30.**
Of the cauterization of the womb.
When thou dost cure the disease of the womb with that which we have said concerning its treatment and division and if thou findest not that it helps, then cauterize in three ways, all of which are correct, one of them being to make three or four cauteries along the length of the womb according to its figure, just like those for the liver.
And let each cautery be as thick as a finger or a little more, and the manner of making the cauteries should be the same that we have said for those of the liver.
And thou needest not hold thy hand with the cautery, but let the disease be well above its two lips.
And there is another manner of cauterizing, which is that thou shouldst heat the cautery having two vents, as we have said in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and elevate the cord which is towards the womb where the seat of the disease is located on the left side.
And let thy elevation be such that thou dost elevate the cord along the length of the body so that cauteries may be made according to the breadth of the body.
And having entered both vents, insert them, burning much, into that through which thou dost penetrate the cord on the other side.
And then extract the cautery; and thus are made four cauteries.
And if thou wishest, thou mayst cauterize with a cautery having three vents.
And then thou shouldst cure the cauteries, since it has left of burning for many days, because it is more effective than other causes that we have mentioned in treatment.
**Chapter 31.**
Of cauterization of hydrocele.
Cauteries are not put in a hydrocele except in certain cases properly.
When thou dost cure the hydrocele with those ways of treatment that we have said in its division and if thou findest not that it helps, then thou shouldst cauterize with four cauteries around the navel and with one cautery on the stomach, and another cautery on the liver, and another cautery on the womb, and two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and one cautery on the right side of the foot, and another cautery on the stomach. And let the quantity of the depth of the cauteries be proportioned to the thickness of the cord.
And then let the cautery remain inserted until it has burned for a long time.
And thou shouldst not remove the disease from treatment immediately after the cautery with that which is necessary in order that two intentions may be added to it and healing may be hastened with its help.
The form of the cautery with which the belly is cauterized should be like a small club as we have said above regarding its shape, and that with which the back is cauterized should be olive-shaped as we have said previously regarding its shape.
**Chapter 32.**
Cauterization of feet and thighs
When the feet are swollen in dropsy and full of serous fluid, you should cauterize them on the back of the foot between the heel and ankle, raise your hand with the cautery and do not twist it; then raise your hand again and return the cautery completely, for serous fluid will exude.
The cautery is made in this way: Then make two cauteries on both thighs, and on each thigh there should be made a cautery with the tip of the cautery shaped like a small knife. The cautery should be made along the length of the thigh, one below the kneecap and the other below the middle of the thigh; and on each thigh there should be two cauteries.
Leave the wound uncovered until it is healed, so that no fluid accumulates from it.
Then treat according to the causes which have been mentioned [above].
Chapter XXXIII
Of the cautery of the body for abdominal pain.
When abdominal pain is due to friction and moisture within that debilitates the organs, such as digestion and retention, which are located in the stomach and intestines, it should be treated with the methods of treatment described earlier [in this work], without any addition. Sometimes, however, patients suffering from this condition may require cautery for the exhibition of their virtue. Therefore, cauterize them on their stomach with a large cautery according to what has been described previously regarding the cautery of the stomach, using a circular cautery and four subtle cauteries around the navel with a pointed cautery; and cauterize also above the bladder with a large cautery or two cauteries.
And if the excessive moisture and illness are tolerated by the patient, then cauterize them on the penis and above the intestines, and place two cauteries closely together on the stomach near the groin, for this is a perfect cure from which there can be no error.
Chapter XXXIV
"On the cauterization of ancient hemorrhoids."
"When they are in the last stage of ancient hemorrhoids or one of them is rubbed by thick humors or corrupted humidity, and they are cured with what has been said in the division and their cure does not conform, then cauterize them with three cauteries over the pus on both sides of the small triangle, and with a cautery above the navel through two such."
"And if you think that the stomach of the patient is cold and their food is not digested, and their face appears pale and yellowish, then cauterize it on the stomach with a large cautery according to what has been stated before; and with one cautery on the liver, and with another cautery on the lower abdomen with a pointed cautery, leaving the cautery there for some time until the interior is healed."
"Chapter XXXV."
**On cauterizing hemorrhoids near an abscess of theirs.**
When you amputate arteries, then you ignite the cautery that is assembled like a ray. Insert this ignited cautery into that artery you have cut off and bring your hand close to it until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which blood flows.
And do this once or twice, for if the arteries are too many, then cauterize each of them according to what we have described, and apply cure to those that you bind afterwards until they heal.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery over some area, it will cause more harm than good.
Chapter XXXVI
On the cauterization of fistulas that are naturally present in the parts of the groin.
When nature does not follow the treatment that we have recommended for it, and the patient is frightened by this, then it should be healed with cautery.
Therefore, when there is some vein fistula in the groin naturally present and it is old, corrupted with corrupt matter and humidity, then it is more appropriate to treat that with a thin probe, and thus know the quantity and depth of it with the aforementioned probe.
Then ignite the cautery which resembles a ray. And then insert that ignited cautery into this fistula, according to the quantity in which the probe entered it.
And repeat this cautery until those corrupt bodies are burned up entirely once or twice or three times, according to the quantity of your necessity.
And beware of burning the nerves and veins. If the fistula goes into the body of the bladder or the body of the intestine, then you should be careful with all those places; and do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshy place and you think that it is not penetrating.
And then dress the wound until it heals.
And if the wound is sealed, and its matter has been cut off from it, and it remains like that for a long time, then you should know that it is entirely healed.
And if the matter is not taken away from it, then you should know that it is penetrating or that there is some corruption in its front or that it is due to those causes which will be remembered in their place.
Chapter 37
Of the cauterization of running sores
When in the running sores there is pain from friction or rough windiness, and because of this the course of the illness has worsened, then you should cauterize that over the sores with a cautery on each sore with a needle-shaped one, about which there will be mention.
And use a strong cautery with the second one a little bit later, so that three cauteries in succession follow each other, and thus they will be more lasting in their effect.
Chapter 38
"Of cauterization of the bladder."
"When the bladder suffers debilitation and softening due to friction and moisture such that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize it at the opening where the pubic hair begins, cauterizing on the right side with one cautery iron, and on the left side with another."
"And let each cautery iron be of a length according to the number of hairs at the entrance; and cauterize thus at the lower part of the pubic hair, using one or two cauteries as needed."
"Let it be an awl-shaped cautery."
"Chapter XXXIX."
"The cauterization of the uterus."
"When friction and moisture come to the uterus causing it to be unsuitable for conception, corrupting its menses, delaying their onset, and causing pain at their time of appearance, then let the area be cauterized with three awl-shaped cauteries around the navel, as mentioned in the cautery of the bladder, and also cauterize on the lower part of the pubic hair with one or two cauteries."
"Chapter XL."
"The cauterization for dislocation of urine."
"When moist humors are discharged from the urethra causing its displacement and the cause of this is not apparent externally, a sign of which is that one part appears prolonged over another when they are compared together." "The location of the dislocation can be found in the lower belly."
"Then you should cauterize the disease on the opening of the urethra with a circular cautery around it, after first indicating with a probe the circumference of its opening as it is turned. Thus let the opening fall in the middle of the circle."
"And let the cautery be of such size and shape as to fit that used in cauterizing the stomach."
"And if this cautery is not at hand, then cauterize with three olive-shaped cauteries of large size."
"And let the cautery be made according to the quantity and extent of the inflammation along the entire length of the urethra, and afterwards cure the area until it heals."
"Chapter XLI."
"Regarding cauterization of the sciatic vein."
"When pain occurs at the opening of the urethra caused by friction and moisture, if the disease is not cured by what we have said and has become chronic, then you should remove it with fetid pills or artificial ones resembling them; and afterwards cauterize it."
"And the manner of cautery in this case is according to two methods: either cauterize with burning medicines or cauterize with fire."
"There are two known methods for this: one of which is to cauterize the area around the opening of the urethra with three triangular cauteries according to this shape, and let them be well penetrating." "And let the space between each cautery be equal to the thickness of a finger; if olive-shaped or large cauteries are used."
"But sometimes it may be necessary to place one cautery on the middle point above the opening of the urethra, making a total of four cauteries."
"And if you wish to do so, cauterize with the circle of which the form is prescribed in the cautery for dislocation of urine, making sure it is a continuous circle and burns the inflammation along the entire length."
"This is the method of cautery for sciatica when pain is adherent to the urethra and does not extend within the testicle."
"But if it extends within the testicle, then cauterize that area with two cauteries on the testicle above the point where you feel the pain, and one cautery on the thigh about four fingerbreadths below the right side."
"And if using a cutting cautery, let the depth of the cautery be according to the quantity of inflammation along the length of the urethra."
"And if you find that the pain extends to the area around the said testicles, then cauterize there where you feel it with three, four, or more cauteries as needed."
"And if you find that the pain is felt behind the testicle, then cauterize there with one cutting cautery."
"And in all cauteries be careful not to burn nerves or large arteries with the cautery, for if you do so, you will cause harm or contraction to the affected area."
"I have seen some people who cauterized on the thigh and burned too deeply in their cautery, causing the limb to swell up to the knee, with gangrene setting in and destroying all the flesh." "And afterwards, apply a strong solution of vinegar, and then death will ensue."
"And if the pain is in two places at once, cauterize each one according to this method."
"And some wise men have said concerning the cautery of urine, that it should resemble an iron ring whose circumference is about a palm in length; and it should be placed on its edge according to the thickness of a date stone or less."
"And within that circle there should be another third one; and the space between them should be equal to the thickness of a knuckle; and those circles should be open at two points; and their length should be one or two knuckles, and they should have decently sharpened edges made of iron in these circles; and this is their form:"
"And first it should be heated in the fire until it becomes red-hot and emits sparks, and then it should be placed on the opening of the urethra with the diseased side facing down." "And then cauterize that area with three red-hot cauteries at once."
"And afterwards leave it alone for three days; then plaster it with a poultice and allow the wound to remain open for too many days; and cure it with ointment until it is healed."
"Albucasis says: 'O son, concerning this type of cautery we have used it little because of the fear of disfiguring it, and therefore we have found few who regard it.'"
"But the good cauteries are those which are well endured by the patient, and are found on that part."
"But cauteries with adherent medicines are those which you should make two circles having a hole pierced in each of them through which the hot metal from the fire is poured; let the thickness of their walls be equal to two knuckles or somewhat less."
"And let the space between them be equal to the thickness of a finger; and they should be open on both sides and above, and should contain this form between them:"
"And then place it on the opening of the urethra with the diseased side facing down, and compress your hand over the opening of the urethra; and then take some boiling water and pour it between the two circles, and heat that gradually with fire until you have done so for about an hour, allowing the patient to endure its burning sensation and adhering power — for that has a biting effect like fire — until the burning ceases."
"And then raise your hand with the instrument, and wash away all the boiling water from the urethra with warm water."
"And then leave it alone for three days and apply a poultice to it until the blackness of adhesion is gone, leaving it alone for some days, and afterwards apply a linseed oil dressing; this is the last stage of treatment."
"And then cure it with ointment until it is healed."
"And if the pain extends to the scrotum or thigh, make him sit in hot water bath according to what is done for a urinary catheter."
"And this is the method of cupping, which I have already written about in my treatise on the correction of medicines." "Take equal parts of alkali and unslaked lime, mix them together, grind them finely, and place them in a new earthenware pot with a small hole pierced in the bottom according to the amount that will enter it."
"And place another inverted pot on top of the alkali and lime, then pour sweet water into it until it reaches about one finger's width above those materials. Then press them together with your thumb using good compression, allowing only the water from the upper pot to drip down through the hole in the bottom of the lower pot."
"And afterwards adjust all that water, and pour it onto fresh lime and new alkali, because at this point it will have very strong caustic power, which is administered in many medical operations and in cauterizations of other members, as it is an operation involving fire."
"And thus some medications are used for cauterizing wide areas, such as those made with turmeric and honey mixed together with lime soap."
"And Galen recounts an operation and cure with which he cured pain in the ankle and sciatica of the thigh, and highly praises it, saying that no other treatment is necessary for it. For it is healed by a single application, as he recounts, because that mixture enters the bath and exercises its effect."
"And if purslane juice is not available, then fresh fig juice should be taken. It should be well ground with a little salt and placed on the ankle where there is pain, or on the thigh, or on the hip, and wrapped up."
"And it should be left in place for a period of three hours, or until the affected area shows signs of softening due to the application."
"And then put that plaster on a bath, and when the body has become warm, immerse it in the sun, because the pain ceases and is healed."
"And know that one should not use cautery with these medications unless it is necessary for the evacuation of the body."
"But Dioscorides says that when the thigh vein is cauterized with goat's beard, it should be done well; and the cautery should be done in this manner: take wool, impregnate it with old oil, and place it between the pouches of the knee and behind the heel."
"And then take dry goat's beard, inflame it with fire until it becomes charcoal, and place it on the wool, wrapping it up until it is well extended." "And repeat this process until you feel that the sensation of pain has reached the ankle, and then remove the cautery, and the pain will be gone."
"And this manner of cautery is called cautery of goats."
"Chapter XLII."
"Of cauterizing pain in the hip."
"Some pains in the back are caused by various factors, such as by a blow or a fall or by excessive evacuation, and by similar causes due to the infiltration of moist and humid material."
"And cautery is applied only in this single case where it occurs as a result of an effusion of hot material."
"Therefore, after evacuating the pain with pills such as those mentioned earlier, which should be placed on the affected area in three lines according to its width, cauterize each line once or more depending on the severity of the pain and the strength of the cautery."
"And the cautery should be done with a pointed cautery."
"If you wish, cauterize it with three or four cauteries using a blunt-tipped cautery in this manner:"
"Chapter XLIII."
"Of cauterizing the beginning of jaundice."
"Very often this condition occurs in young children, and the sign of its onset in children is that they become yellowish around the eyes and have difficulty raising them."
"And you will notice this on the last thoracic vertebra of the back, where it begins to stick out above the others."
"Therefore, when you see this and wish to prevent it, cauterize that area with a ring-shaped cautery in this manner:" "That the cautery should be placed evenly over the entire surface of the vertebra."
"If you wish, cauterize around the perimeter of the vertebra with a pointed cautery twice or three times." "And let the points be close together."
"And then care for the area until it is healed using what we have said."
"But beware that cautery should not be used in cases of jaundice caused by spasm of the nerves."
"Chapter XLIV."
"On the cautery of gout and joint pain."
"When joint pains are caused by hot humors that accumulate in each limb of the body, then when pain comes on the feet, it is usually called gout properly by doctors."
"And therefore to cure gout caused by heat with a cautery method and the pain is not removed, then cauterization should be used."
"Then cauterize near evacuation in the circuit of the joint of the foot with hot irons."
"And let it be an olive-oil cautery, of which this is the form:"
"If it is necessary to make a puncture on the fascia of the foot, then do so with a cautery needle." "And if the pains go into the joints or to other joints, and this is done many times, then cauterize there on each pain with three or four cauteries altogether with this olive-oil cautery."
"And if many cauteries are necessary for this, then cauterize there and do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery before, but only around the circumference of the joint."
"And if the pains go into the joint and the two sides, then administer the cautery which we have mentioned in its chapter."
"And if the pains are only on one side and it is called "suagra", then puncture in the circuit of the tendons thus as they turn, puncturing in those two lines."
"And if pains remain there, then puncture in the circuit of the tendons on each knot and on the palm of the hand."
"And if the pains go near to these joints to the knees or to the muscles, then cauterize those on each side of the helpers."
"And do not evacuate the illness by good regimen and reception of medicines, for if it is done with good regimen and the matter is evacuated with this cautery alone, then it will heal, God helping."
"Chapter XLIV."
Of cauterization of fractures.
"When a fracture occurs in the joints and bowels breaking before the anus of the genitals, and this begins to approach, then you must order the patient to leave his food for that day and to use soft foods so that the opening from his belly may relax."
"And then follow the patient between your hands on his back and command him to hold his breath so that his anus may be opened or appear."
"And then return with your hands and search for the fracture on the bone of the pelvis with its extremity resembling half of a circle near the divided parts of the body."
"And then prepare the cautery of which this is the shape:"
"Until it becomes moist and glistens." "And then reduce the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent it from coming out."
"Then you have opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, another on their chest who holds their hands."
"And then place the cautery on that spot with your right hand holding the cautery, and follow that intestine until it joins the os penis in the middle of the scrotum; repeat this process again if you have not yet achieved success."
"And carefully observe the movement of the intestine during your cautery operation, ensuring that you do not burn it, lest great harm or death come to the patient."
"And know that if you cannot grasp the bone with the cautery, your operation is not complete."
"And it is necessary that the cautery for children be subtle according to their size and measure."
"And then treat the wound with clean water for three days until the burn scar has healed."
"Then treat it with other remedies until it is healed."
"And the patient should lie on their back for forty days until the wound is sealed and the plague has passed."
"And it is necessary to regulate the patient's diet according to the duration of their treatment, which will empty their stomach and prevent the intestines from protruding due to their efforts to recover."
"And then when it is time to get up after forty days, food should be administered gradually and cautiously for another forty days."
"And he should avoid hard work, excessive food and drink, and loud shouting, for if one follows this entire regimen of healing, they will be healed."
"And now I will discuss the treatment of ruptures in other parts of the abdomen. If such a rupture occurs suddenly and you wish it not to progress, then cauterize it with a round cautery according to its quantity, and it should be as wide as the third part of the intestine. Then treat it with water as we have said."
"And some authorities say that such ruptures should be cauterized with a triangular cautery shaped thus, because they are pointed:"
"And it is necessary to place a line that runs along the latitude on the side of the chest below the rupture, and another line above; then place your hand with a pointed cautery, but use the first cautery lightly."
"The Forty-Sixth Chapter"
"Of cauterization of twisted thread."
"When pain occurs in the upper limbs due to fracture or percussion and persists for a long time without being relieved by treatment with medicines, then it is necessary to cauterize with a pointed cautery."
"And the cautery should be of the appropriate size for the member according to its magnitude and smallness, strength and weakness, location of the twist and severity of the pain."
"Therefore if it is healed by the first cautery, that's good. But if not, then apply the cautery again; for these kinds of pains often result from injury to a member near where the pain occurs, so it is necessary to treat those with cautery until the illness is healed."
"The Forty-Seventh Chapter"
"Of cauterization for leprosy."
"Some lepers are occasionally cauterized with little benefit, but if the species of leprosy is caused by putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy, then caution is advised."
"And therefore, when you wish to cauterize someone with leprosy, consider whether it is contagious and if not, then proceed as described in the division above. However, be cautious about the illness so that corruption does not spread throughout their body and entire complexion. Therefore, cauterize them on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, another below it towards the forehead at the end of the hair; two on both horns; and one behind on the nape or back of the neck."
"Lastly, press your hand on the cauteries a little bit until they imprint on the bone with a slight impression, and remove them quickly so that the scabs are dislodged, in order to alleviate heavy vapors exhaling from it. And cauterize the navel according to what is necessary."
"And if the leprosy has already spread over the person and appears manifestly, then you must cauterize them with those cauteries which we have mentioned for the head; and with cauteries on the tip of the nose, and two cauteries on each cheekbone, and two cauteries on each shoulder blade, and six cauteries on each vertebra of the back, and one large one on the vertebrae near the tailbone, and one on the tailbone itself, and two on each ankle, and one on each heel, and two on the knees, and one on each kneecap, and two on each elbow, and two on each wrist. And cauterize them on all the joints of those limbs and feet, and on each toe, and on the hollows of their palms."
"And beware of cauterizing the nerves which lie over the heel, lest you burn them."
"Sometimes it is cauterized with one cautery on the breastbone and another over the mouth of the stomach, and yet another on the liver."
"And know that the more closely you apply cauteries, the greater the benefit and effectiveness. And know that the illness does not feel pain from the cautery, just as it feels no pain itself, because its body is already numb."
"And ensure that the cauteries are large or small according to the limbs and joints as described in the specifics of the instruments."
"Also, take care to dress the cautery with powdered earth mixed with honey and with other dressings until it is healed."
"Chapter XLVIII"
"On the cauterization of stupor."
"When some limb is paralyzed or numb and has been treated with medications, oils, and plasters but is not healed, then cauterize that paralyzed limb with cauteries according to its size."
"And let your cautery enter the thickness of the skin a little bit." "Then dress it with ointment until it is healed."
"Sometimes, certain paralysis which affects the arms and legs, backbones, or any other limb is cauterized near the emergence of the nerves that cause that limb's paralysis, and the paralysis disappears."
"But let not anyone presume to do this except someone who is knowledgeable in the anatomy of limbs and the emergence of nerves throughout the entire moving body."
"Chapter XLIX"
"On branding of eyebrows that is disfiguring."
"When eyebrows are ancient and do not conform to the customs of medicine, then you should brand them with a cautery a little according to the quantity of the specificity of the area that has been removed from their whiteness and color until it changes."
"And properly cure it with ground iris and lentils mixed with rose oil and fig leaves, and dove's blood or hen's blood, each one part of each, and all are mixed together. And properly a cloth should be placed on the location and paused until it is healed."
".I."
"On branding of the crab."
"When cancer begins and you wish to remove it, then brand it with a circular cautery in the circuit around it as it is rotated."
"And the wise say that it should be branded with the last cautery in the middle place; but this does not seem right to me, because I fear that it will become ulcerated, and I have seen this some few times."
"And it is more upright that it should be branded in the circuit around it with a circle as we have said, or with many cauteries."
".LII."
"On branding of hemorrhoids."
"When some hemorrhoids are delayed in maturation, and this is due to the superfluity present there, or due to the state of illness because it is old and decrepit, with little blood, or due to the time, and you wish to speed up the maturation of hemorrhoids; then brand around it with many small puncturing cauteries. And properly leave that alone until it matures."
"But if you wish the perforation of it with a cautery, then heat the cautery of which this is the shape: and pause that in the middle place of hemorrhoids until the chain penetrates."
"And if the cautery is placed in that location which is further away, so that the body of the arm may be relieved; and properly cure it until it is healed."
".LIII."
"On branding of eroding areas."
"Eroding is wandering corruption in the limb, which erodes it just as dry wood is consumed by fire."
"Therefore, if you wish to cauterize with fire the place where a burning sensation is felt, then heat iron nails, both small and large according to what is suitable for that location."
"And in doing so, cauterize the entire affected area until you have eradicated all corrosion and no cause remains."
"Then let it rest for three days, and apply only oiled cloth over the cauterized areas until all scabs are eradicated and all corruption has healed."
"And then treat it with new, fresh flesh."
If after three days the flesh appears healthy where there was no corruption, that is good; but if not, then repeat the cautery on what remains in the corrupted areas.
Sometimes corrosion is treated with medicine acutely because it acts like a cauterization. However, cautery with fire is more gently helpful.
I have already said about the cure of it by acute medicine in the division, therefore take that when you begin to heal from it.
Chapter LIII
About cautery of fistulas and other similar things.
Very often in the parts of the body called a fistula appears, which is a thick, inflamed thing that harms the flesh. Cautery for these is done in two ways: either by fire or boiling water.
But cautery by fire is done thus: heat the cautery tool resembling a chicken feather pen, which should be made of iron according to the size that contains the entire fistula. It should have thin edges.
Then pause that heated tool on the fistula and slowly rotate your hand with the cautery around the fistula until it reaches the depth of the fistula. Leave it for three days until it begins to heal. Then apply a plaster made of wild mallow leaves crushed with salt and leave it on overnight because it will draw out the inflammation from its roots.
Then treat the area with a salve made from animal fat until it is healed.
And if it is not converted, and these often happen on the surface of the body, mainly on the breasts and legs, then you must administer cautery with boiling water thus: take a cannula made of bronze, iron or chicken feather pen and place it on the fistula. Then fill the cannula with a little boiling water and hold your hand steady, pressing the edge of the cannula into the root of the fistula so that the boiling water flows into the front of the fistula's root. Wait for about an hour until the pain from the boiling water has subsided, then remove it because the fistula with its roots will be eradicated.
Do this to all of them until they are completely healed on the body.
Then treat those pustules where the roots of the fistulas have been eradicated with ointments that promote flesh growth.
Chapter 54
Of cautery for trembling.
When someone has trembling due to a chill in the nerves or fever caused by coldness or similar cause, then you should cauterize them with four cauteries or five placed on the vertebrae of the back between each one; and also place a cautery on their foot and another on their stomach using an olive-sized cautery.
And his trembling will cease and hasten the healing of the cold illness.
Chapter 55
Of cautery for accidental wounds on the body
When there are accidental wounds on the body and they are pustules with broken openings that have been made from corrupted materials, then at first appearance it is necessary to cauterize the head of the fistula with a small cautery made from myrtle wood whose tip has been heated in fire; or with long tongs; or with a lenticular cautery.
And afterwards it should be cauterized daily at the beginning of its expulsion in this manner; and they will not grow larger, but rather the superfluity will be broken up and they will heal from them.
But it is necessary that this should also be done after evacuation by phlebotomy
Chapter 56
Of cautery for accidental fluxes of blood through incisions made with an arrow.
Many times blood flows abundantly from wounds made by arrows that are stuck deep or from the incision of boils or cauteries on the member where it seems appropriate, and it is difficult to stop them.
Therefore, when such a thing happens to someone, then quickly with your hand cover the orifice of the arrow and press on it so that sometimes between you may hold it so that the flow of blood ceases from under your finger and does not seep through.
And then place in the fire olive-sized cauteries both small and large, many in number, and blow on them until they are sufficiently heated.
And then quickly take one of those small or large ones according to the place and depth where the artery is broken, and apply it to that vein immediately after you have removed your finger, and hold it there until the blood has stopped flowing.
And if blood is still being expelled from the orifice of the artery when you remove your finger and apply the cautery, then quickly take another one heated in the fire and continue doing so until the blood has stopped flowing.
And make sure that you do not burn the nerve nearby, lest you cause further harm to the patient's condition.
And know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to stop the bleeding except by four methods: either with a cautery as described above, or by extraction if it cannot be extracted, because when it is extracted the ends of the vessel are burned and the bleeding stops, or by tying it with a thread or bandage with strong tension, or by applying medicines whose virtue is to stop bleeding and then compressing them with a suitable poultice.
But whoever applies restriction too tightly with a thread and bandage or uses causes that burn or similar methods does nothing but harm.
But if such a thing happens to someone and there is no physician present or medicine, then quickly press your index finger over the orifice of that vein as described above, and hold it with great tension so that the blood stops flowing from the top of the wound, and do not remove your finger from the arrow; and pour cold water on the arrow until the blood congeals and thickens. And make sure to determine if there is a need for cautery or medicine.
Of incision, perforation, venesection and cupping, of wounds and their similar affections
We have already said in the first chapter all the diseases in which cautery with fire is appropriate and those in which medicine that burns is necessary, as well as the occasions and causes of them, and the instruments needed for them in their various forms. And we have arranged the chapters from the head to the feet in order.
And now I will proceed in this chapter in the same manner, so that whoever seeks it may find what he has asked for.
And before I begin this, note that in this chapter there is repetition of what was said in the first chapter on cautery.
And because it is necessary to be very cautious in the operations described in this chapter, many of which involve evacuation with blood which carries life when there is aspiration of the vein or incision over an abscess or opening of an ulcer or purification of the wound or extraction of an arrowhead or incision of a stone and their similar affections. And most of these operations are accompanied by fear and trembling, and many of them often result in death.
And I warn you not to fall into something that is dangerous, for sometimes one may encounter people with many bad habits who have many illnesses. "Among them are those who leave with their illness and find death easier than life, because of the severity of their illness, its duration, and they fear death which signifies this illness."
"He who gives you his wealth and says to you 'wait until he is healthy', his illness is harmful."
"And therefore you should not consent to that one who comes to you with this manner; and your caution should be greater than greed, and your rapacity; and do not presume any cause on this matter except proper certain knowledge which verifies it for you, and to whom there is a commendable success."
"And use in the treatment of all your illnesses prognosis and indication of him to whom health is converted, for in that one you have help in acquiring fame and memory, praise and glory."
"O, sons, God breathes His understanding into you and does not remove from you direction and protection, for this is in His hand."
"And I have ordered this chapter distinguishing by chapters according to what preceded in the chapter of cauteries, about the treatment of the head within the feet, so that it may be easy for you what you request from this and of which you have need."
"Chapter One."
"Of the treatment of water contained in the head of children."
"Know that this illness often happens to children during childbirth and when the midwife squeezes the head of the child without gentleness."
"And sometimes it happens for a hidden cause which is not known."
"But I have not seen this illness except in children; and all those whom I saw were cured of death, and thus it seemed to me that it was an easy task in them."
"And I have seen that the head of one child was filled with water, and his head was so enlarged that he could not cease on himself because of the greatness of his head, and more than moisture increased until he died."
"And this moisture is aggregated between the nape of the neck and the bone, or it is aggregated on top of the bone over the fontanelle."
"For the operation in that case if the moisture is between the nape of the neck and the bone and the abscess is small, then you should make an incision in the middle of the head with a scalpel in the latitude, and let the length of the incision be about two fingerbreadths so that the moisture may flow out, and this is the shape of the spatula:"
"And then if the moisture has increased more and the abscess is larger, then here are two incisions according to this manner:"
"And if the moisture is on top of the bone, the sign of it is that you see the sutures of the head opened from all parts and the water squeezed when you press there with your hand on the gaps inside and not on the outside." "It is necessary that you make three incisions in the middle of the head according to this manner:"
"and near the incision remove all the moisture; and near press the incisions with cloths and feathers; and near on the fifth day bore it from above with wine and oil, and near untie the bandage and cure the wound with tentas and ointments, and press the head evenly; and let the sick person eat dry food of little moisture until the member is comforted and healed."
"And this is another manner of incision, which you consider where the magnitude of the abscess appears and the collection of water, for sometimes it is more in the occiput, or at the forehead, or on the right side, or on the left side; and therefore make an incision where the abscess and the fullness of water appear, and do this according to what you find easiest."
"And observe that you should not cut into the artery and thus cause a flow of blood, which will aggravate the illness through this flow of blood with evacuation of moisture."
"Chapter Second."
"When it happens that some cataracts or tumors appear in the eyes or on the face, and they are old, and the cure of medicines does not help there, then the last cure in this is the incision of those two arteries."
"And therefore when you want to incise those that the illness has reached its head, and near rub the place with rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and near press the neck of the sick person with some cloth; and consider where the vein pulsates; and the places of each one above the places which are near the ears pressed down, and they are hidden unless in some men."
"And near mark with a thread above the artery, and near incise each one with the spatula of each parted acutely with incision arriving to the bone, and let it be done in the latitude of the head."
"And if you wish, insert the spatula from above the artery and cut that one at its divisions above."
"And let the length of the incision be about two fingerbreadths, for when some vein is incised blood will issue with pulsating exit, which flows freely by frequent flow."
"But if the artery does not appear to your knowledge, then you should measure from the ear the quantity of space for three fingers' breadths, and mark with a thread, and do this arriving to the bone."
"And that which is necessary to remove of the blood is one pint quantity, and sometimes more or less, and all this is according to the quantity that appears of the force of the illness and the fullness of the artery of it."
"And near consider the wound, and therefore if there remains on the bone some cause of the cicatrix, then incise that in order that it does not become a hard abscess."
"And near press the wound with feathers and bandages of linen cloth, and near cure that with ointments until it is healed."
"Chapter III."
"Of the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples."
"When there occurs some ancient migraine or sharp cataract due to humoral heat and quality in the membranes of the temples, or so it is ancient and vehement and seems like them, and it is medicated with the manners of cure of medicine but does not help, therefore we have here a remedy for these illnesses which is extraction of the arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those as we have shown."
"And the manner of the operation and extraction of those is that the sick person has the hairs which are on the temples removed; and understand where the artery appears in the temple because it is shown to you by its pulsation, and it is hidden except in few men due to force of rubbing."
"And if it is hidden to you, then press the neck of the sick person with some cloth; and near rub the place with a rough cloth or evaporate the place with hot water until the artery appears clearly to you." "And therefore you take the spatula of which this is the form:" "Then carefully remove the chain with ease until you reach the joint; then throw it on and extract that which is above until you extract that from the chain and uncover those tunics which are left behind, from every part."
"If the artery is slender, then you should wrap it with the extremity of the thread and then cut through it a portion according to how much its extremities are elongated and contracted, otherwise there will be no blood flow."
"And then remove about one to three ounces of blood."
"If the artery is large, then you should tie it in two places with strong double threads or long cords to prevent its decay before the wound solidifies and ensure blood flow."
"And then cut through any excess that is between two ligaments, and do this at that hour or another suitable time."
"And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery iron between the incisions of its extremities, and this will serve as that operation."
"It is better to perform this operation if the patient has fever or is of hot complexion; for cauterization helps to reduce excessive moisture and therefore is more beneficial in such cases."
"And after the extraction of the arteries that have grown into the wound site and are covered with decently fitting poultices, it should be treated with dry medicines to promote granulation and healing with bandages until it is fully healed."
"And if while performing this operation there is bleeding from the artery again, then you should stop that blood flow either by ligation with thread or cauterization using a hot iron. Then press your hand on the wound site until the bleeding stops." "If for any reason the bleeding does not stop, then press your finger on the wound site until the bleeding stops. Then irrigate the wound with cold water to relieve inflammation and dress it as necessary."
"The easiest way to extract an artery is by cauterizing the vein with a hot iron that has two points, after you have marked both ends of it with your finger. Then insert the cautery gently between them until it reaches and incises the vein in two places so that what remains between its extremities can be elongated as they are not yet fully consolidated."
"And this is the shape of the cautery:"
"And let the sharpness of the two points be equal." "However, if the points are too sharp, two cotton swabs would be better. For if they are very pointed like two cotton swabs, they will quickly prick each humor without cutting the flesh."
"Therefore, when there is some thickness involved, heat from the fire is applied to that area and the flesh is cut gently."
"This work is better than any other and is also easier."
"And let there be a space between two ribs equal to the thickness of a finger."
Here's the second sentence: "The fourth chapter".
"On the treatment of acute and chronic eye pain."
"When there are acute eye pains, and it is the course of those veins which are above the head that is affected, and there is no apparent cause for this medical condition, sometimes the face becomes reddened and the patient feels a crawling sensation on their forehead as if ants were walking on it; and the eyelids become thin and swollen with moisture so that the lashes stick together, and the corners of the eyes are scaled by the acidity of the tears. The ancient physicians had remedies for this condition, but they do not use them anymore."
"And it is also appropriate to command the patient to raise the eyelids which are on their forehead, and then incise three fissures equally spaced according to the length of the forehead." "And if the length of the incision is uncertain, then one can consider it equally distant from the length of the nose at the middle of the forehead; and the second according to the length slightly above the movement of the lacrimal glands which are in the eye socket; and the third on the other side."
"And be careful not to cut the arteries which are on both sides (of the head), and stretch out your hand from the continuation of both jaws." "And if the space for each incision is equal to three fingers' breadths adjusted."
If you have a sponge of sponges or dry cloths moistened with which to dry the blood.
Then insert the scissors into two acute ends that are from the division of the temples to the second incision. Excise with this all the chain that is between two incisions with the scalpel which is over the bone, and then do the middle incision between the second incision. Then place this scalpel and insert it into the first incision again with another tool called a knife, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
And pause the blade of that sharp side near the attached flesh to the chain, and on the other side within the bone, and employ it so as to reach the middle fissure, and cut with it all the vessels descending from the head to the ears.
But ensure that the incision continues until you reach the chain, and then do this in the middle fissure between one fissure and another.
And as blood flows in great quantity, express the places where the clots of blood gather.
Then pause in each fissure carefully with cotton wool dipped in wine and oil and vinegar, and ensure that there is not a dry cautery.
And on the third day untie the ligature and administer a large infusion of cold water or tea, and then dress it with basilicon salve mixed with rose oil and other medicines so that the wounds heal well.
Chapter V
On the treatment of ear infections and descending hearing problems from parts inside the head.
When there comes a sharp and continuous earache, sometimes the ears of the sick become small and shriveled, and the examination of them is impaired, and the eyelids ulcerated and their hairs fallen out, and in the forehead there is acute pain and subsequent extrusion, you should know that these materials and catarrh come only from small veins proceeding from inside parts.
And the best treatment for these cases is this: command the sick person to raise his forehead, and then make an incision in that place in the middle of the forehead, about half an inch long along its length (beginning with the left temple between the right temple; and let the incision be within the bone; and stretch your hand out from the muscles of the temples which are attached to the jaws), until the bone is uncovered.
Then dry up all the blood with a sponge or dry cloth, and then fill in between the two lips of the incision with cotton wool or linen. Then stretch above it with powders dipped in wine and oil so that there is not a dry cautery.
And when you remove this and see that the aposteme has diminished, then it is necessary to scrape the bone where it begins with naked flesh, and then dress it with a drying ointment which makes the flesh dry up, as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mix them together, and make a plaster from them and apply it to these wounds on the bare flesh.
Chapter VI
From the treatment of that which falls into the ears.
Every cause that falls into the ears is of four kinds: either it is mineral stone or similar to stone, like iron and copper; or it is from a plant such as chickpeas or broad beans; or it is a fluid cause like water, vinegar, or their like; or some kind of creature.
When a stone enters the ear or another similar cause that does not fit nor grow within the ear, pause the ear to the sun, and if the stone grows, then distill upon that some cause of violet oil or saffron, and immediately administer extraction of it, make him sneeze with condition, and close his nose during the event of sneezing. And immediately pause on the circuit of the ear with some pieces of cloth or wool, stretching the ear upwards, for many times it has been forgotten with these causes.
And if it is not gotten, then immediately administer extraction of it with the instrument called gesture epicicarios subtil, of which this is its form:
And if it is forgotten with gesture, then good! And otherwise, immediately administer extraction of it with a subtle hook of little duplication.
And therefore if it is not gotten by this, then immediately make a cannula of brass and insert the extremity of the cannula into the track of the ear and close around the cannula with wax and softened oil so that nothing escapes but the cannula. And immediately extract with little wind with strong attraction, for many times it has been counted with this that we have told about.
But if it is not gotten in this manner, then immediately take of halka alumbat or sometimes prepared with which the chickens are caught by taking a small quantity of it, and place that on the extremity of the ray, and immediately wrap over that gently placed. And immediately insert that into the track of the ear with facility, and immediately remove the ear from the humidity.
And therefore if it is not gotten with all the causes which we have told about, then you can try to cut that before it becomes an aposteme caut or spasm.
And the manner of cutting that is: first sanctify the illness of the vein sephasica and extract from it according to the manner of its virtue, and then make a cut between your thumbs and convert the ear towards its parts above, and end with a small fissure in the root of the ear, putting grease into the place well pressed. And let the fissure be of lunar figure until it reaches the ear bone, and when the ear bone is hardened, remove that if you can with appropriate instruments; and immediately close the fissure in that hour with speed, and cure it until it is healed.
And if the cause in the ear is one of those warts that grow and swell up, then immediately administer the cure and extraction of it; but if it does not obey your attempt, then you take a subtle, thin spatula according to this form: and use that for the excision of that wart which is fallen in the ear.
And do not do this when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, and place it in many pieces, and immediately extract those with tweezers or with subtle gesture, or with incision as we have said, for the extraction of it is eased.
But the water that enters into the ear must cause sneezing at the beginning, and fill its ear with a little cotton, and press gently over that ear in which there is water, and if it is forgotten by this, then it is good; but if not, then take thin pebbles and stones according to the length of the finger, heat them on the fire a bit, and the patient should insert one of those into the track of his ear and shake with another one on one side of that part and strike with another stone on the one which is inside the ear. Therefore do not stop this until all the water is removed.
Therefore do not stop this until all the water is removed. And if the water is still not removed in this way, then you take some paper or gauze and put one extremity of it into the ear and extend the other extremity with fire until most of it is burned.
And then put in another gauze and do this several times until all the water is removed, and close it with a cannula as we have said above of the extracting pebble.
But in the extraction of beast entering that ear, if it is a small thing, then press and leave it there, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is of great size which causes pain at the time of hearing, then immediately extract it with gesture and tweezers, for the cause of it is easier than all other causes that happen to the ear.
But in the extraction of worm generated in the ear, when you cure it with what we have said in the division and in the treatise of distillations and your cure does not succeed, then you must examine the ear by the sunlight.
And then if you see any cause of worms here, immediately extract it with gesture or with subtle tweezers, but if you do not see any cause, then take a cannula of this shape: And insert the subtle extremity into the ear according to the quantity that it can withstand; and immediately suck with it by strong suction, and do this many times until all the worms are removed.
But if it does not obey your attempt, then you fill and close the circuit of the cannula with wax as we have said; then immediately administer distillation which has already been spoken of before in the cure of worms, and you will find this in the treatise of distillations.
And let your effusion be with which you pour medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument, of which this is the shape: And make it of silver or brass, narrow on one side and having a small track, and flat above.
Therefore let there be something that pushes what is in the concavity of the cannula, which will be necessary here. And if you wish, take the ray and wrap it decently with cotton at its extremity, and then put oil in the concavity of the instrument, or juice of some herb, or whatever medicine you want in the cannula — which is in the ear — and then insert the ray with cotton above and press gently with your hand so that the oil may be expelled into the concavity of the instrument and the patient feels the oil inside.
And whatever is poured into the ear should already be scaled on the fire a little. And be sure that the cause which you distill in the ear is not too hot, for medicinals of the ear do not withstand this.
Chapter VII
Of the cure of blockage of ears.
Some children sometimes exit from the wombs of their mothers unperforated, and this happened to some men, opacity in the meat of the ear for plague or for flesh not there; and this opacity is sometimes made in the front of the track of the ear which does not consec the view, and sometimes it is in the parts outside.
And that which happened in his face, which cannot be understood by sight, is in the most difficult conditions of healing.
But in that one where it can be seen, you must hold the ear of the patient to the sun and look at it. And therefore if sometimes opacity appears, open with a subtle spatula whose this is the form of it
If its extremity where the width is small, one part of which is sharp and the other not; and the spatula be of two lion sides for that it does not make damage to the ear.
And therefore if the opacity is for flesh born in the ear or in its meat, then you must use with fine scissors and cut that very easily inside where all the flesh has remained.
And if opacity is in the front of the ear, then take a thin needle of gold and heat it a little on fire, and apply that gently into the meat of the ear.
And therefore if you find opacity with that which the patient finds with ease, for gravity of hearing, force the oppression of it with ease; and beware that you do not plague the nerves of the ear.
And then apply a dressing to the ear according to the quantity of the width of the track which you have involved in Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or that you take some cotton and put it into warm water and pulverize over it with rosewater and use it; and if sometimes the ear is already apostematous, then you must change the cotton and replace it with another one which you will wrap in cerate made with raw oil until the apostema be cauterized; and then cure that until it is healed.
But if bleeding occurs, then immerse a sponge or cloth in cold water and apply it to the ear, and use the other cure which restrains the flow of blood, which is called in the treatise on distillation.
Chapter VIII
Of the care of inflammation that happens in the eyelids.
"When moisture accumulates on the eyelids of the eyes, sometimes they are dry."
Therefore you must have those tongs or forceps, and separate the threads from their roots, and carefully pause over the locations as indicated.
But if pain comes with bleeding, then you should cauterize it with an antiseptic cautery.
And the best cauterization is near the incisions and wounds that often return when there remains some cause of their roots; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Chapter ix
Treatment for swelling that comes to the eyelids of the eyes.
Many times it happens in the eyelids of the eyes that some cause arises which resembles hardness and toughness, and for this reason it is called swelling.
And it is an accumulation of thick moisture in the lower eyelid and above.
Therefore, their operation is to consider whether the size of it appears from under the eyelid and grows throughout its entirety; and the cause of this is lightness.
Then make an incision along that fissure for its length and carefully examine the entire partition with ease within what evacuates, and then suspend it with forceps and cut it off.
And if the figure is large, then adjust it with suture; and care for it until it heals.
But if it's small, you won't suffer much from that because the ointment of it restores it and heals it quickly
And if the size declines towards the inner parts of the eyelid, then expose the surface inside. Then ever the eyelid and suspend the size with forceps, otherwise you will need to make an incision. Press it throughout its entirety, and if the eyelid is lengthened by incision, then this has no cause.
And after the incision, wash the wound with salted water; and care for the place with what heals it quickly until it is healed.
Chapter X
Of the cure of the inflammation in the eyelid above the wound.
"Axcirnath is a disease that arises in the tunics of the eyelid and occurs more frequently in children. It inflames their eyes and causes tears to flow constantly; they are unable to gaze upon the brightness of the sun due to this."
"And thus these people constantly rub their faces and sleep with their faces covered. Their eyelids are moistened by tears which have swollen from inflammation, and the signs of approaching Accirnath are evident in the eye; and when you press your fingers on the aforementioned location, you feel a sensation of pulsation within it."
"And there is a certain manner of operation in this disease: the sick person holds their head upright and props it up with cloth. They also measure the circle around the eye according to the quantity of Accirnath present throughout, then place that over the affected area and press with one's fingers all around so that Accirnath collects in the middle of the circle. Then they make an incision in the middle of that moisture using a spatula incidentally along its width, ensuring that the incision is no wider than that made in phlebotomy."
"But remember to cut the entire cord in order to reach Accirnath, for in most cases it protrudes through the incision like a white-gray mass."
"Then extract that with cloths which you have wrapped between your fingers, twisting it back and forth between the right and left hand until it has disappeared."
"And beware not to squeeze in the incision with the spatula lest you should reach the eye and damage it."
If it does not appear to you at the beginning of the fracture, then you should insert a small bandage easily between so that it proceeds backward; and then extract that as we have said; and then submerge cloths in water with vinegar and place them on the area and bind them with powders.
And some who crush salt and apply it to the concavity of the fracture, in order that it may remain from that humidity.
And also cure it until it is healed.
If an abscess forms at that spot, then treat it with cataplasms made of cedar until it heals.
Capítulo xi
On methods of examining the pulse.
When the eyelids of humans are swollen due to the growth of hair, then those who know about examining patients make inquiries about certain illnesses such as continuous tears and softening of the eyelids and tissue that may cause destruction of the eye, which is called pulsating of the eye, and it is cured in four ways: either by cauterization with fire; or with acute medicine, according to what was said earlier in the chapter on cautery; or it is treated by incision and suturing; or by means of tubes, as will be discussed.
Therefore, first you should examine the head of the illness in its place; then turn over the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it is turned over, that's good; but if not, insert a needle into that one through which pus was discharged earlier from under the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate with thread above, and this should be close to the edge of the eyelid where the hair grows, close to the hair, and pull the thread upwards with the eyelid turned over with your ray.
Then go into the opening underneath the eyelid where the hair is attached with a spatula incident to the larger tear duct entering the smaller one; then extract the pus and remove it from under the eyelid with small cotton balls or cloth, and finally press on the eyelid with a tent made of soft leather, like this:
"The shape of the incision should vary according to the amount of eyelid elevation, for this differs in men, and those who require a greater amount of skin removed should have it incised accordingly."
"And then open the incision with forceps along the two lines you have marked, starting from the greater lacrimal near to the lesser." "And if your incision is close to the natural hairs, such as the thickness of a hair."
And next, press the onion onto one of the two angles of the elbow, then scrape it clean, and then adjust with stitching the two lips with gut thread or fine wool thread, wipe away the blood, and make adhere what is superfluous from the threads over two incisions with some adhesive substance if you wish to do so, otherwise don't bother.
And next, remove the stitches of the threads inside after three or four days, and then care for it.
And if you wish, leave the plague open without stitching it up, and care for it with something that dries and tightens, because the eyelid is raised due to the sealing of the plague and the aggregation of pus; but stitching is better. Therefore thus do I prescribe according to the ancient teachings on cauterizing.
But if there is solicitude about the illness and it is of good operation, and not due to fear.
And it is another manner of cauterizing, and it is that you place on the eyelid figured thus like the leaf of a myrtle tree, and next raise the eyelid with three incisions separated and arranged in this shape:
But if that is not possible, then take the incisions, and whatever is not engraved, then take a needle on which there is thread, and insert it into the middle of the figure, and the other thread near the greater lacrimal, and the second thread near the lesser lacrimal, and adjust between these two threads with equality, and next with those elevate your hand with an equal elevation, elevate all the chain upon which it is placed thus as we have recommended.
And next adjust the two lips of the plague with stitching, and care for that area until it heals.
But if an aposteme occurs after your incision or fissure, cauterize that aposteme with a torch and its likeness, and with embers.
And sometimes it happens that the hairs of the eyelid are converted into themselves, therefore you should use in that case what we have said about incision; but suture where it is more convenient.
To cauterize with candles, do it thus: And it is that you turn the eyelid and cut the figure which is beneath according to what has been said; and next by art make two candles or two slender torches of which the length should be according to the length of the eyelid, and their width less than the width of the spatula. And you have already incised at both ends of each cut where you hold the threads.
Next carefully apply each one with subtlety over that which is superfluous on the eyelid of the eye, and press the candles at both ends with a strong grip, and leave them like that for some days, because the chain will die by the tightening and it will dry up and fall inside where you inserted it.
But if it is delayed, then break them with the tongs, and next care for the wound until it heals.
Therefore when it is healed, the eyelid will be elevated and the hairs will not tickle.
And this is how you make two candles according to this form: and have the quantity of length and width neither more nor less.
Chapter XII
Of elevation of tickling hairs on the eye when the hair is hard
When the hairs are not natural, hard and sharp and tickling the eyes, then the operation is to take a subtle needle and tie onto that thread of cedar wood and lion's hair, and next adjust both ends carefully one by one with great subtlety. And let the length of the threads be equal to the length of a palm.
Next take another subtle thread and tie it to that one in brief, and knot both ends if you wish.
Next hold the patient's head firmly with your left hand, and place it near the sun so that your work may be clear, because this operation is subtle and delicate.
Next insert the needle into the root of the hair that needs to be removed, and make it penetrate into the eyelid quickly until you extract it above the natural hair.
Next pull out the hair up above and insert that one into its place, and let there be one or two or three hairs, but not more.
Next pull your hand with the hair so that it comes out together with the eyelid and the natural hair.
But if it is pulled together with the eyelid and the hair is not removed, then pull the eyelid towards you again with the thread that you have tied onto it, until the eyelid comes out of its place.
Then examine it with the vision of the eye, because then you will remove the eyelid and the thread, and dress each one carefully and close the eye, and leave the dressing for two or three days until the hair adheres to its place and grows on good skin.
And if the hair is too short, then adjust one long natural hair and elevate it with that one, or let it grow until it reaches a certain space, and then elevate it.
Chapter XIII
Of the treatment of ectropion which comes on top of the eyelid
When ectropion comes on the eye, it is a contraction of the eyelid when it contracts upwards, either to the right or left side due to bad healing of a wound or section or cautery, and it is called "leporina," and this ectropion can be natural or accidental. It occurs because of healing of a wound or section or cautery, or due to similar misfortunes.
The way to operate on it is to cut that contraction and separate the lips of it, and tie onto it a wick of linen cloth in what is between them, and bind them until they are healed.
And it is not necessary to use the treatment of it with causes that dry and constrict because if you do so, it will return to ectropion worse than before.
Use on it causes that soften it like fenugreek, and soak with water in which bitter almonds have been cooked and strained from it, or diacyl, which has been liquefied with some oils, and submerge the wick in that and treat it with it.
And the treasury of your treatment is to perforate all that is not healed according to the form that was at the beginning.
And this operation that we have described is only some correction of ectropion which does not return to its former place.
Chapter XIV
Of the treatment of entropion which occurs on the lower eyelid
This entropion which occurs on the lower eyelid is truly called entropion. It can be either natural or accidental.
But accidental entropion is caused by wound, cut, cautery, or other similar things.
And the way to operate on it is to take a needle with double thread and insert it into the skin, and make it pass from the left lacrimal to the right lacrimal until the thread reaches both ends of the skin.
Next extend the skin upwards with the needle and cut it with the needle, then incise with a broad scissors. And then if the figure of the eyelid returns as it should be, that is good. But if not, take a thread and tie it in the cut figure, and with that turn the eyelid back, and make two stitches on the side of the lower eyelid.
And let the ends of the two stitches be at the two angles of the incision that you have made so that when they come together they form an angle and thus make the desired figure.
"And this figure is Greek letter: lambda."
"And then remove the flesh that much as the length of his wound has grown, so that the eyelid is secured."
"And then bring together the separated parts and stitch them with wool thread; and also treat them with what has been said about softening medicines and dressings until they are healed."
"And if the eyelid is torn from a cut or suture or cautery, then you should make a flat incision on the skin of the eyelid as was previously described." "And then separate with gauze between two lips as we have said."
"And in summary of the speech on the treatment of eyelids when they are dislocated or prolapsed, that it runs during the operation according to what has been prepared concerning the form of the eyelid, and this is in the shape of various mottled varieties."
"And the skilled artisan always prepares beforehand in every possible manner that is suitable to achieve the return of the figure to its natural form, or close to it, and that patient according to what is appropriate for the operation and the instruments in the best conditions."
"Chapter XV."
"Of adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea."
When such consolidation occurs in many men that the eyelid is solidified above with albumen of wool, and is prohibited from its facility of movement and natural works, therefore you must insert the extremity of a probe between the eyelid and lift it upwards, or extend it upwards with an awl.
Next, you should cut through the adhesion with a fine spatula, which is not sharp-pointed to avoid unnecessary incision, having blunted it slightly so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation. Then remove the spatula so that it does not accidentally injure the wool with its sharpness.
And your incision should be such that it easily removes that adhesion so that the eyelid returns to its natural form and all adhesion is healed.
Next, you should put salt water into the wool with which you wash it; or dissolve in its place distilled water that has been dissolved in water.
And then separate the eyelid from the wool with a small amount of water, and place on the wool lanolin infused in egg white, and on the third day use consolidating causes until it is healed.
Chapter XVI
Of Incision of Toenail and Cyst of Caruncle of Lacrimal
Know that a toenail has two forms:
"And both species begin only from the larger lacrimal gland, slowly spreading until they cover sight and prohibit light and eye movement."
"To perform the incision of it is necessary that the patient hold their head steady with the chin raised. Then open their eyelids and raise the upper lid with your thumb while using the nail of your index finger, slightly doubled over, to cut the skin at the corner of the eye." "And take a needle and insert it into that corner of horse or cowhide or calfskin or similar, or strong thread, doubling the tip of the needle bit by bit until it is in the middle of the nail. Then penetrate with the needle under the nail, and tie the thread around the nail; stretch it to the upper corners and remove the skin from the side of the nail that covers the pupil." "And then you will follow that with the skin inside the eye."
"And then you will cut the remnant of the lacrimal duct with fine scissors or forceps, and remove the tissue of the natural lacrimal passage so that cutting it does not cause continuous tearing."
"And sometimes the nail with the thread stretched out or tied as we have said, and then you should remove it with fine forceps of which this is the shape:"
"And be careful not to touch the corneal epithelium with the forceps and that there is no rupture in it, and that the pupil is not perforated."
"And then put a little salt water or drops of collyrium in the eye and leave it overnight; and then wash it with water that is suitable for healing."
"And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot put the needle in it or it does not remain stuck there, sometimes this type of nail is cured with medications, and it heals as you and I have discussed in the section on treatment."
"And if you want to cut that nail, then open the eye of the patient and take fine forceps like this, with sharp tips like this:" "with subtlety." "And if sometimes that nail is dried out and stuck in the corner of the eye, then distill drops of your saliva into the eye with a dropper or cotton wool soaked in siniar or rose water or salted water, and close the eye overnight."
"And then repeat the operation until everything that is of the nail has been removed, otherwise the opposite could happen and an abscess could form in the eye. For if you leave it like that, cure the abscess at the beginning so that it heals."
"And then repeat your operation on that with reason until it is healed."
"The prominence of the lacrimal caruncle, if it is noticed in the eye causing great harm, should be suspended with a thread. And cut it with fine scissors or forceps, and do not cut all the way through so that there are no continuous tearing flows."
"And then apply rose water or drops of collyrium to the lacrimal sac until it is healed."
"**Chapter 17.**"
**On Incision of a Pterygium and Removal of Adherent Epithelium from the Eye.**
"Sometimes, in the eyes of certain individuals, red flesh is born and it grows over the pupil, or approaches or presses upon the eyelids. Forcefully closing the eyelids towards their outer edges causes it to resemble a bunch of grapes."
"The operation on him is that the patient puts his head in this position; and thus opening their eyes of that one, collects all that flesh with suitable forceps or tweezers, and thus cutting through the beginning until everything is finished with scissors, be careful not to let any of it fall during your operation."
"And your incision should be made with the one in which you cut that or with the spatula which we have recommended in the incision of the nail, or with small forceps according to what is appropriate for this chapter."
"Therefore, once your incision is complete and all that flesh has been removed, then fill the wound with crushed salt, or sprinkle on it powdered rust like medicines corrosives, and place over it a cloth soaked in egg white until assured of cauterization."
"And if there remains some cause of inflammation and is sent to be cauterized with fire, and you fear cauterization, then leave the wound alone and treat that cauterization with whatever helps it, and repeat this operation until it is healed, and do likewise with the flesh that has been adjusted in the wound of this type."
"But you must ensure that all care of the wound is avoided by any means, either naturally or accidentally, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that that member has suffered that operation."
"Chapter XVIII."
"Of the collection of pus from a wound."
"Pus comes out red which is thick and covers the wound and hinders its operation, and uncover the wound for many days."
"Therefore it is necessary at the beginning that you consider whether the wound in which pus appears is strong and whether there is not some other illness besides pus, then collect that pus."
"And have the patient hold his head down towards you and then suspend those veins with one or two ounces according to your judgment; and let that ounce be of subtle doublefold according to this form:"
"or two ounces gradually in a body according to this form:"
"And then those veins should be collected with subtle forceps, with subtlety, and wipe away the blood little by little until you see that those veins are removed from the wound and turned back."
"And be careful that you do not cut the wound with the edges of the spatula. And if your operation is in the middle of the day before the sun, and if you are very firm in your operation, then only cut those veins."
"And when you have completed [the collection of pus], then apply to the wound chief vinegar or rogam for its sharpness to corrode what has been removed from the pus."
"But if that is not possible for you to collect all in one time, then plaster everything with whatever relieves the pain of it and leave it alone for a few days until the pain is relieved and assured of cauterization."
"And then repeat on it according to what seems best to you until it is healed."
"And this is the form of the forceps:"
"Chapter XIX."
"Of the reduction of bleeding from the nose."
"When you treat bleeding from the nose with cautery or with burning medicine according to what has been previously narrated and it is not healed, then do not go into it except that you cut over the aposteme when it reaches maturity, and extract all the humidity that is in it and the pus until the bone is uncovered."
"And then when the bone is uncovered and there appears corruption or blackness in it, then scrape it with an instrument of which this is the form:"
"And it is named rough head and should be made of iron and the head should be round like this, pierced with a file or scalpel with subtle punctuation (as it is in the following form):"
"And pause that on the corrupted place of the bone, and then turn it between your fingers, and press your hand little by little until you know that that corruption is scraped."
"And do this several times, and then restore the place with drying and styptic causes."
"Therefore if the place is consolidated and good flesh has been born in it and the body of the ulcer has been cut off and it remains for forty days without being renewed and without aposteme and without accidental occurrence, then you know that it is healed."
"And if not, then do not go into it except to reduce the fissure to the form of the nose, and according to this manner: And that you uncover the bone with iron or with sharp medicine, and when the bone is uncovered, then take trocar according to this form:"
"The extremity of it should be triangular, and its shaft thinly narrowed towards the extremity like this."
"And then pause that on the bone and let it be near the lacrimal; and lengthen your hand a little from the wound, and then turn your hand with the trocar until it penetrates all the bone, and you will feel the pain for as much as air goes out through it when you withdraw your hand."
"Therefore then restore the place with styptic drying medicines like those which I have mentioned."
"Therefore when the flesh has grown and the place has hardened, then that matter which flowed out of it returns to the nose. Therefore that is light pus on top of the pain."
"Chapter XX."
"Of the reduction of the swelling of the wound."
"When the wound swells with its entirety and no accidental occurrence of harmfulness or diminution occurs, then it is necessary to relieve the pain, and then follow this: And pause vents on the neck without scarification and suck well; And then pause on the wound with liniment which is made of acacia and aloe and sesame and sarcocolla, and then strengthen the plaster on the wound with many powders."
"And the manner of the powders is that you take wool from a lion's mouth, and each piece should be doubled into four folds; and make them of those hairs."
"And then pause those one on top of the other according to the quantity which the wound requires." "And then strengthen on them with a hard cloth with strong compression; And then repeat the vents with suction without scarification; And then remove the vents and leave the wound tight during the day and night."
"But if meanwhile the ligation is softened, then it must be tightened."
"And then remove the bandage day and night as we have said."
"And if the wound has already been reduced, that is good; but if not, then repeat the plaster with the powders and compression and vents until it is healed."
"Chapter XXI."
"Of the incision of the swelling of the tunic of the eye."
"When there is disruption in the tunic of the eye and it swells up and protrudes outside the eyelids like a grain of mustard seed, and it becomes roughened like a man's shape due to that, and you want it incised, then the operation here is as we have recommended: That you insert the needle into the furrow of the eye from below towards above, and then insert another needle with doubled thread on the side of the lacrimal, and make that penetrate and leave the first needle according to its position; And then incise the place of the doubled thread and lift it up with that, lifting the piece of the eye tunic around the needle, and tighten it much."
"And then remove the needle and place it on wool infused in egg white, allowing the thread to fall with the wool."
"And then take care of the wound so that it may heal quickly."
"And sometimes gather all parts with a circle of cloth around the wound, adjusted to its prominent edge, and then pierce it with a subtle spatula that reaches the depth of the wound, causing the whitish fluid to descend, and thus lower the wound."
"And then let it heal quickly."
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of styes.
This condition called stye is nothing but a swelling that forms in the eyelid, like descending water and not like blood.
However the method of treating it is as follows: Place the affected eye on a prepared seat and hold your head steady with both hands. When you see the swelling begin to form in the corners of the eyes, squeeze gently until the swelling stops and does not descend, then cover the light and keep watch over the condition as described above.
And if it does not descend downward, know that it is water.
But if the swelling does not descend as described earlier, then press the affected eye between your hands and take a subtle spatula and pierce it gently on the skin surrounding a small area near the continuation of the conjunctiva with the tunic cornea at its crown (at the location shown), so that the swelling is expelled.
Then, once it has been expelled, immediately distill into the eye water that has been boiled with honey or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
And then it will be cured along with other causes until it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of watery discharge from the eye.
We have previously discussed the types of water in division and which is suitable for piercing with clear explanation, so that one may follow according to health.
Then you must put the patient between your thighs on a cushion and hold their head steady with both hands firmly.
And properly place your left hand near the eyelid of their left eye if the water eye is on the left side; or with your right hand, if it's on the right side.
And take tweezers in your right hand if the eye is left; or in your left hand, if it's right.
And then place the tip of the tweezers near the edge of the cornea according to the thickness of the ray in the eye's white towards the inner corner of the eye, and gently press the tweezers with force while rotating your hand around it.
And then penetrate into the white of the eye and make sure that the tweezers have reached the outer corner of the eye.
And ensure that the distance of the tweezers from its point is equal to the measurement of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the blackness, and this is the edge of the eye; for you will see the pupil with the vision of the eye through the clarity of the corneal tunic.
And then place the tweezers into the location where the water is, and gently pull it down once or twice; and then if the water descends quickly, immediately relieve the pressure on that eye, and remove the tweezers from the eye.
And then pause for a moment; and if the water has descended, then gently remove the tweezers again making sure that they are not twisted.
And then when it's finished descending and not falling, gently remove the tweezers with ease, and rotate your hand around it little by little, and then dissolve a small amount of fine salt crystal in the water and wash the eye inside; and then place something outside the eye to stop or cover it with cotton wool soaked in rose oil and almond oil and tie it with that eye.
But those of us from this time should pause over this commandment written with white almond oil.
And if you are unable to insert the tweezers into the eye due to its hardness - as is sometimes the case with some men whose eyes are very hard -, then you should take the spatula which is called an "alberti" and this is its shape:
And then pierce that conjunctiva with it, and do not push your hand through the passage, and if you cannot, make a way for the tweezers to reach its subtle place.
And then insert the tweezers as we have said.
And you should complete your work by preparing the patient to lie down comfortably and make them sleep in a dark room where they can lie on their back, without any movement allowed.
And pause to observe the nature of that water so that its nature is pure and clear, and do not move their head to either the right or left side at all.
And place the plaster according to its position on the third day.
And then remove that one from that dark room and expose them to bright light, and show them some objects, and then return the plaster on the seventh day.
And you should not do this during the time of cure or immediately after the infusion. However, it is necessary that you deviate from this because water can sometimes flow gently and strongly due to gravity.
But if an abscess occurs suddenly, then you should remove the eye on the seventh day, and treat it with something that dissolves the abscess.
Then remove the eye from there and pause to observe the face of its appearance for which it guides the movement of its gaze upwards and downwards, keeping it in a dark room for several days.
And then gradually lead them out of that room and expose them to their causes.
Know that the apprentice of vision is not excused from seeing some things sometimes, and therefore you should be bold about the operation.
And it has reached our time that some of those who are in the art of cataract have said that fire is made on a magnesium ribbon perforated with which water is sucked up.
But however, I have not seen anything like that in our land that has perfected this, nor is it written in any of the ancient books; and therefore it may be something new.
And these are the forms of the species of tweezers for those who do not know them:
"There are made of iron or of steel properly, and they are extended by their ends with this triangular subtlety, the extremity sharp thus as that is the form."
"What follows is chapter twenty-four."
"Of the treatment of flesh torn in the nose."
"When in the nose there are born diverse pieces of flesh adhered together, which is some cause by which is assembled to scorpion of heavy weight, or to polyp fish; and this illness is called polypus because it resembles that fish's appearance." "And from it is cancerous flesh, gangrenous, of dark color; and from it is that it is lion's flesh not of dark color."
"So in that which is in these lion's flesh not fraudulent nor cancerous, you should make the illness cease between your hands and put it in the sun, and heat the nose of it, and prick its tip often in those flesh." "And properly extract that from the nostrils, and properly incise what you have comprehended of those with sharp spatula subtly from one part into where you knew that all flesh has been taken out; because if there remains thereof any cause by which the amputation is possible, therefore you cut it off with one of the subtle instruments easily into where there remained no cause." "But if it becomes covered with blood or occurs apostema hot, therefore you put on it what is necessary; but if they are of the malignant apostemas, therefore you cut it out and cauterize that where it has been incised, and all cavities have been taken out."
"And properly put into the nose properly the incision with vinegar and water or wine." "But if the nose is open and from it proceeds humidity into the palate, therefore you know that it is healed."
"But if the humidity does not penetrate as it should, therefore you know that within it is flesh that is nothing in the superfluous bones of the nose where no incision has reached."
"So therefore you should insert thread into it wherever there is any thickness, and twist in it twists, and pause between each twist the quantity of the finger or less, and generate the illness and insert one extremity of the thread into the nose with the wax or with another cause that is possible to it."
"And since that will have been done, let it draw its odor into where it reaches to the canals of the nose, and let it be exhausted over its throat, because often viewed similarly this action is made by the children in schools, and it is an easy cause for that who wants to do it."
"And properly pause the two extremities of the thread, one extremity that comes out from the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and properly administer a lock of flesh with the twists that are on the thread, and do this until you know that the flesh is already with the twists of the thread."
"And properly extract the thread, and pause in the nose properly the abstraction of the blood one time, and do this for three days or more until the corrupted ointment has corrupted all that remains of the flesh."
"And properly at the end of the cause, pause in the nose a lead canula for several days until it is healed."
"But if you need a cure that dries up, use that one."
"And this is the form of the instrument for nose purge maker with which oils and medicines are distilled into the nose:"
"And make it of silver or brass, which is similar to a small open lamp, like a small jug, and the mouth likewise."
"And if you wish, make a closed canula like this, and the canula of the instrument for nose purge maker let it be flat, uncovered; at which you should hold that when you pour into it the oil or water that you want from the juices and from the suction causes."
"Chapter XXV."
"Of sneezes coming out from the extremities of the nose."
"Many times is it sneezed from the extremities of the nose, and it is magnified and mentioned in these days within which much is spoken about its regard."
"And therefore you should insert that at the beginning of its appearance, and eradicate all of it." "And properly pause on the spot or cauterize or apply a burning medicine where it is located."
"But if its insertion is delayed until it becomes magnified, then consider whether it is indurated, hard, of dark color and little sensation, then do not touch that with iron because it is a cranious abscess; for many times he who incises this abscess dies from its great malice on him whom it had."
"And if the abscess is of lion-like touch and not of dark color, and sometimes incision is possible in all of it, then evacuate the sick person and incise that without fear, and cure the spot with something that dries up and astringes until it is healed."
"Chapter XXVI."
"Of suture of the nose, lips and ear when continuity is dissolved by plague or by wounds."
"You should know that when there occurs a solution of continuity in one of these cartilage membranes, you should not rely on that operation but rather on some men."
"Therefore, when it happens to someone some cause of those, you should consider whether it is a fresh plague with its blood, and then join the two lips of the plague with suture, and properly cure that until it is healed."
"And if the lips of solution of continuity are already separated and each one is made healthy, then you should cut each edge of its apparent cord until there comes out blood." "And properly join the two lips with suture and strengthen those, and over them sprinkle dragon's blood powder and enses three times, and pause over the powder a piece of plaster diafinicon or of some other consolidative plasters, and leave that bandage for two days or three; and properly untie it and change that plaster and leave it until its threads have separated by themselves, and properly cure with ointment until it is healed."
"But the manner of suture is that you join the solution of continuity with needles as we have recommended in the suture of the belly, or join the solution of continuity with thread as you know how to do."
"Chapter XXVII."
"Regarding the removal of causes that appear on both lips inside the mouth."
"Very often indeed many men have warts inside the mouth on both sides of their lips which are hard like kernels of cherries, some of them being small and others large."
"You must turn over the lips and divide each of those hardnesses throughout, then perform excision, filling the place with saffron powder to restrict bleeding, then wash it with vinegar and treat the wound with an astringent water until healed."
"Chapter 28."
"Regarding the incision of attached skin in the gums."
"Often there are tumors growing over attached gingival tissue which the ancients called albulus. Therefore, you should suspend it with a thread or hold it with forceps and incise it until its root is removed, letting the sanies run out and the blood flow."
"And afterward apply saffron powder or other styptic powders or caustic substances to the wound."
"If that flesh returns, then cut it again and cauterize it afterward with a hot iron so that it will not return again."
"Chapter 29."
"Regarding the cause of toothache."
"When there are rough, hard, yellowish, and sometimes blackish spots on the surfaces of teeth due to decay or between the gums where they are attached, it causes corruption which makes the gum swell and makes the teeth painful."
"Therefore you should first remove the cause of the pain between your molar teeth and cap the head of it in place with wax. Then rasp the teeth where those spots appear, making them smooth like sand so that none of their causes remain. This is done for blackness, yellowness, and other discolorations which need to be cleaned."
"So if the first remedy does not suffice for those who are at the beginning of this cause, then you should repeat the remedy on another day and a second and third time until you come to the last statement which I want."
"And know that teeth require many different rasps of various shapes and figures according to how they are prepared for your operation." "And therefore the rasp with which a molar tooth is scraped at its surface is different from that used to scrape between teeth in other ways. These forms of rasps should be prepared by you, as you shall soon see:"
"Chapter 30."
"On the extraction of teeth."
"You should cure the tooth that causes pain with all care and patience in every extraction of it because there is no cause that makes it necessary to delay its extraction since it is a sublime substance which must be removed by extraction."
"But when the pain is such that a tooth must be extracted, you should firmly be certain which tooth is causing the pain because many times the pain seems to come from a healthy tooth and you extract it, but the pain does not cease until the painful and sick tooth is extracted, as we have seen by the operation of barbers."
"So when you are certain which tooth is causing the pain and know it well, then you should scarify around the tooth with a spatula having some virtue so that it dissolves the gum from the entire surface of the tooth, and then carefully grasp it with your fingers or with subtle forceps gradually until it is loosened."
"And then place strong forceps with good craftsmanship or great strength and pause the head of the pain between your thumb and index finger so that you hold it well without hurting yourself. Then extract the tooth straightly in such a manner that you do not break it, nor cause greater pain to the patient."
"And therefore if it is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments and place it on either side of the tooth with ease and force so that you move it as was done at the beginning."
"But if the tooth is broken or decayed, then you should fill that break with cloth and strengthen it with the end of a thin rod so that it does not become further broken at the time of your grasp on it with forceps."
"And you should work carefully with the scarification around the entire gum area and guard your strength well so that you do not break or tear it, and return to the painful tooth because the pain will be greater than the first pain of it."
"And beware that you do not do what many ignorant and presumptuous barbers do in their haste and recklessness about the extraction of teeth without administering what we have recommended because many times they bring upon men great illnesses which are more difficult to treat than those caused by broken teeth, and they remove the roots entirely or some of them, or extract a tooth with some bones of the jawbone, as we have often witnessed."
"And then after the extraction of it, wash the mouth with warm water or vinegar with salt."
"And if there are flows of blood after this, as often happens, then take some quantity of sage and sprinkle it over the wound, and if it does not suffice, cauterize."
"The shape of the forceps and subtle forceps with which the tooth is grasped at the beginning should be of long extremity, short handle, and thick so that they do not bend when you work with them."
"And they should be shaped in such a way that their extremities are thick enough so that when grasped with them the tooth is not bent, but rather short at its end."
"And they should be made of Indian iron, well-made with straight extremities. And on the extremities of those there should be teeth among which one enters into another and grasps by strong descent force. And sometimes the extremities of those are shaped like the beak of a bird called 'ciconia,' that is to say, it is hooked, and they are of great grasping power."
"Chapter LXXXI."
"Of the extraction of teeth and the breaking of the jawbones that are broken."
"When you must extract a tooth that is broken and some cause remains, then you should place yourself on the spot with a board for one or two days until the spot becomes softened. And then insert gentle pressure with forceps whose extremities are shaped like the beak of a bird called 'ciconia' or hooked, the shape of which is as follows:"
"The extremities of them should be made with teeth like a saw or chisel."
"And if you do not succeed with this attempt using these forceps or forceps, then you should cut over the root and scrape away all the flesh and insert the instrument called 'atali,' which is a small lever of which the shape is as follows:"
"And it should be short with a thick end, not bent so that it is not broken."
"So if the root is removed by this, it is good. And if not, then help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the shapes:
The shape of the second tool should be triangular with a very fine tip.
And with this tool, having two branches, one is shaped as follows: "And there are other instruments which will be used for filing teeth. Help is done with this instrument, which resembles an iron comb."
"From the triangular-shaped end, twisted or shortened, which should have some thickness, and not be inserted too deeply to avoid injury."
"And you will also know that the tools for extracting teeth are similar to other instruments."
"Yet the skilled and subtle artisan finds for himself, according to what is meant by the operation and various diseases; for there are diseases that ancient authors did not give or mention any proper instruments for, due to their varied forms."
"If the bone of the jaw or other bones of the mouth is broken or pierced, then that part should be carefully treated with suitable instruments and forceps mentioned earlier for the extraction of dental roots. And this is how it is done:"
"And gradually widen it a little at a time, and hold or keep it with the mouth so that it does not escape until all the bone is removed. And then restore the area with suitable medicines."
"Yet if there is a small perforation in the bone, then remove that part of the perforation and its blackness, and treat it until it is healed."
"And Chapter XXXII:"
"Concerning the treatment of prominent teeth above the others."
"When teeth are prominent not according to their natural course, and especially when it concerns women, and most especially elderly women; therefore you should consider: if the tooth is not close enough to another tooth, and a filling or bonding is not possible, then extract that one. But if it is attached to another tooth, then cut that one with this instrument, which has the shape of a pig's snout, made of Indian steel with a very sharp tip."
"And your incision should be made in three days, cutting that tooth without damaging any other teeth due to its hardness."
"And if the prominent tooth is exposed at the gumline, then file it down with an Indian steel file that has this shape:"
"And it should be made entirely of Indian steel with sharp edges. And it has many fine points like those on a file with which the tooth is filed little by little over several days with ease, so that no other teeth are damaged or harmed." "And then polish it with pumice stone and scrape it with razor blades."
"And if it is a tooth where one part is chipped and irritates the tongue, then you should file that part until its sharpness is smoothed out and flattened so that the tongue will not be harmed and speech will not be impaired."
"And Chapter XXXIII:"
"Concerning the restoration of damaged teeth with gold or silver foil."
"When teeth are damaged due to concussion and removal by percussion or impact, and the patient cannot withstand food, and you have treated it with astringent medicines but your treatment has not helped; therefore, in order that they not be covered over again with silver foil which turns green and can fall off within several days, rather use gold foil which does not change at any time."
"And the foil should be made of such fineness and thickness according to how much can fit between the teeth. The way to apply it is to take the foil and fold its double thickness between two healthy teeth, then twist its two ends between two damaged teeth or one if there are fewer, until the fabric reaches the healthy part of the other tooth." "And then repeat the application several times within the area where you began until your hand has strengthened with ease and skill so that nothing is damaged."
"And your string should be made of such thickness that it does not allow the foil to slip out."
"And then cut off the excess ends of the foil with forceps or scissors and tuck them into each location with gestures. Then bend it and hide it between the healthy tooth and the damaged one so that there is no injury to the tongue." "And then leave it as tight as possible with cement."
"But if it becomes loose or broken, reinforce it again or those with other foil in this manner at all times."
"And this is the shape of teeth and the figure of the treatment of two healthy teeth and two damaged ones as shown here:"
"And when one tooth or two return to their places due to impact and have grown back as we have advised, and yet they remain damaged."
"This is the work of a skilled and knowledgeable artist."
"And sometimes a piece of cow bone is used for such a cause and made into the shape of a tooth. It is placed in the location where the tooth has failed and strengthened as we have said, and it remains and serves for a long time."
"And Chapter XXXIV:"
"Concerning the cutting of the frenulum that appears on the tongue and hinders speech."
"This ligament which appears beneath the tongue sometimes is natural to that person or it occurs accidentally due to a wound which has already healed."
"The procedure is that the operator should open the patient's mouth while his head is held down. Then raise his tongue and cut the nerve ligament according to its width until the tongue is freed from its attachment."
"But if there is hardness or firmness in that ligament due to scar tissue from an old wound, then you should use oil and cut it through its width until you have completely cut the ligament and dissolved the hardness."
"And make sure that there is not too deep an incision in front of the flesh so that you do not accidentally cut arteries and cause bleeding."
"And then wash the wound of the incision with warm water or vinegar or rubbed oil. Then place a linen cloth on top of it. This is the way that the patient should keep his tongue wrapped in clean linen at every hour to prevent reattachment."
"But if bleeding occurs, place on the location a piece of lint moistened with vinegar. But if the bleeding continues, then cauterize the location with a lantern cautery which is suitable for this purpose." "And then treat it with other remedies as necessary until it is healed."
"And Chapter XXXV:"
"Concerning the removal of a ranula under the tongue."
"Sometimes an abscess resembling a small mulberry appears under the tongue, hindering its natural movement. It gradually becomes larger until it fills the mouth."
"The procedure is that the operator should open the patient's mouth facing the sunlight and examine the abscess."
"If you see it as blackish or black in color, hard, and the patient feels no pain, do not touch it because it is cancerous."
"But if it appears white and moist, then put oil on it and cut it with a fine spatula. Cut all around its edges. And if bleeding occurs during the operation, place on top of it a piece of lint moistened with vinegar until the bleeding stops."
"And then return to your work until you have completely removed it with its base, until it is washed with vinegar and salt. Then treat it with other remedies suitable for this purpose until it is healed."
"And Chapter XXXVI:"
"Concerning the removal of abscesses in both ears and those that occur in the throat, as well as other abscesses."
"When swellings occur in the throat, they are called glands which are formed from fat tissue. These sometimes appear on the outside and are called ears. If you treat them with the remedies mentioned earlier in this division and they do not heal, examine whether the abscess is hard, blackish in color, and causes little pain. If so, do not touch it with an iron."
"Should the boil be red and its root large, then do not touch it with iron for fear of blood flow; rather let it ripen first, and then you shall draw it out or cut it open yourself."
"If it is white in appearance and its root fine, then that one ought to be incised."
"And when operating on it, ensure beforehand that the abscess has fully ripened or has at least begun to decrease; then make the patient lie down in front of the sun, with their head on a high pillow, and open their mouth wide. The servant holding them should press their tongue down using a fine instrument like this:"
"And it is made of silver or of bronze, being sharp-edged."
"Then, as you press down on the tongue with that instrument and reveal the abscess, carefully cut into it with your knife. Then grasp the opening with forceps and pull it apart from outside as much as possible." "And if you tear some of its coatings, then carefully cut into it again with this instrument:"
"And if you tear some of its coatings, then carefully cut into it again with this instrument:" "And it resembles forceps, but its ends are curved inward so that the tips of each meet at the opposite side, being very sharp. This should be made of iron dipped in lead."
"But if this instrument is not available to you, then cut into it with this spatula instead, which has this shape: It should be sharp on one side and blunt on the other."
"And once you have made an incision, make another according to the same manner of cutting, and then wash out the wound with water that has been boiled."
"But if there is blood flowing, wash it out with water from a decoction of oak bark or myrtle leaves and other styptic herbs until the bleeding stops. Then dress the wound once it has healed."
"And sometimes, other abscesses appear near those two that you have cut open. Cut into those as I have described for the incision of two equal wounds."
"And I once treated a woman who had an abscess in her buttock that tended towards a dark color and little sensation. The wound had closed over, but she was breathing with difficulty, her appetite had gone, and she was drinking no water. She was near death if not for one or two days."
"And the abscess had grown so large that it pushed out on both sides through two cracks."
"So I cut into it fistulously and entered through one of its orifices. Then I reached in and pulled out as much as possible. Then I made an incision where the other opening was apparent, opened her mouth wide, pressed down on her tongue, and then entered that orifice into the abscess."
"And then you cut away a large portion of it, but only a little blood came out from it." "So the buttock of that woman was completely healed. Soon she began drinking water and eating food again. However, I had to cut into that abscess many times over a long period of time, and it kept recurring in the same place."
"So I took this [iron] and cauterized the buttock. Then I added more [material], and then I wandered around not knowing what God had done for me."
Chapter XXXVII
About incision of a boil when it is abscessed.
When catarr descends to the uvula, and is thickened and elongated, it is then named perpendicular; and if it is at the exit and is thick and round, it is then called bubo.
If it is cured with what we have said in the division, and yet your cure does not succeed, especially when an aposteme has already burst open and becomes thin, then you should insert those that are aggregated roundly. And if it is at that length, and is bloody, of dark color or black, and there is no feeling in it, then you should fear the insertion of it, for there is danger to the patient in that case.
When you see that according to the manner I have indicated of its whiteness and length, then you should seize the patient and press their tongue with an instrument from which its form protrudes, and immediately place the onion in the new one, and pull it down and cut it with one of two instruments which are mentioned in the incision of two melons.
But you should not cut that except what is properly fitted over the natural term without addition, for if you cut more than that, you will harm him.
And immediately after cutting, use what we have recommended in the incision of two melons, and take care until it is healed.
But if the patient is frightened by the incision of it, then you should useengen in the cauterization of it without fear, and the manner of cauterizing it is not but with sharp water, and it is that you hold the head of the patient in his seat, and immediately press their tongue with the instrument which we have said, and immediately take some of the water which we have mentioned in the chapter of cauterization, and with that live cause, pause that no spessa nor subtil, and with that fill the concavity of the instrument whose shape this is:
Let the extremity of the concavity in which the medicine is placed be like this as the concavity of a spoon of radish, and place the instrument with the medicine over the wound, and let the patient lie on his side so that saliva or mucus from their mouth does not fall into the intrinsic medicine because otherwise it will not work.
And immediately take your hand with the medicine and press it on the uvula for half an hour until you see that it is blackened and sedated by the biting of the medicine.
And if you wish, take cotton and wrap it around the extremity of the radish, and immerse the cotton in the medicine, and insert the radish with the cotton into a cannula from above until the cotton adheres to that cannula, and do this many times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the wound, and then leave it alone until it dries and falls off after about three or four days.
And if you need to repeat the medicine, repeat it. And when the cauterization is finished, cleanse the area around the wound with cotton dipped in vinegar, and remove from that area anything that remains of the medicine, and wash it with warm water, and then cure it afterwards with embrocation, and finally with bandages until it heals.
And this kind of treatment is very beneficial, both for incisions and for wounds caused by fear.
Sometimes the uvula is cured with something so subtle that it is neither cauterization nor incision, because it is cured by sublimation in this manner: take calamus, hyssop, origanum, rue, safflower, chamomile, brooklime and similar herbs, and adjust all of them or some of them in an alembic, and moisten them with sour wine, and boil them. And the alembic should be well sealed with clay, and in the middle of it there should be a tube on which is placed an instrument concave made of silver or brass according to this shape:
And let the extremity be inserted into the patient's mouth so that the vapour can reach the uvula through the nostrils until the uvula is moistened.
And then repeat this many times until it is dry. And be careful not to do this treatment at the beginning of an appearance of abscesses, because it would tighten too much on the abscess and you should not do that, but rather declare the abscess cure by cautery.
But if you do not have this instrument present, then take a reed and place at its extremity a plug of wool, so that the patient's mouth is covered, because the plug of wool prevents the vapour from burning the mouth.
And this treatment is good for health.
Chapter XXXVI
Chapter XXXVI On the extraction of splinters and other things adhered in the throat, and other causes
Many times there are adhered to the throat a thorn of fish or some other cause.
Then you must remove that which is visible from those [the humors], upon which the gaze falls, because by pressing the tongue with an instrument beforehand, it will be declared what is in the throat.
And that which is not apparent and is hidden in the throat, you must make the patient vomit before the food has been digested in the stomach, because it easily causes a blockage in the throat if forgotten through vomiting; or have the patient swallow some bread dipped in honey or olive oil or a piece of dry bread; or take a sponge soaked in sea water and tie it tightly with flax, and have the patient swallow that, for when it arrives at the place where its spikes are removed, they will then be extracted. And if you take an eel and tie it with flax soaked in milk, and put it inside the table, it will be suddenly extracted; or take a pot and suddenly place it there and suddenly remove it.
And if they are not forgotten with those causes which we have said, then you should use an instrument of lead made in this way:
"The boil should be larger than a small pea; at its tip there should be an indentation which you insert into with ease."
"And lift your chin up high, and make sure that the touch of his bone on your throat does not happen, otherwise it will cause pain in that area and he might strike you with his hand."
"But if the patient enters it better, according to his knowledge of the place where the cause is attached, and pushes down gently and pulls his hand with the instrument upwards, all this according to how much he has prepared inside so that it will not be forgotten."
"Chapter XXXIX."
"Regarding the removal of bloodsucking parasites attached to the throat."
"When the bloodsucking parasite is treated with what we have mentioned in the division of treatment using medicines and does not stop feeding, consider the hours at which you should remove it from the patient's throat, because you must use the tongue-like instrument that we have recommended to you."
"Therefore, if you want to remove the bloodsucking parasite, do so gently with your fingertips or carefully with suitable instruments."
"And if it is not possible for you to remove it with your fingers, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the patient's throat, and place a glowing iron wire in the concavity of the cannula, and do this several times (until the bloodsucking parasite is dead and removed from the throat), and abstain from giving the patient any water that day."
"And then take a vessel full of water that has been wiped clean, and pour the mouth of it into the patient's mouth, and wash his mouth with it; do not let any of it pass through, and hold some water in your hand for about another hour, because the bloodsucking parasite immediately feels the water."
"But if it is not forgotten what we have recommended, then fumigate the patient with frankincense or asafoetida using the instrument that we have mentioned in the fumigation of the uvula."
"After doing this, let him rest quietly."
"And another method of operation in fumigation is that you take an earthenware pot with burning coals inside it, and cover the pot with a lid through which a tube has been inserted, and insert the end of the instrument into this tube; then start the fumigation; and have the patient put his mouth on the other end of the cannula, and close his mouth so that the fumigation does not escape until you know that the fumigation has reached the bloodsucking parasite, because the bloodsucking parasite will soon fall."
"And if it does not fall, then repeat the fumigation many times, and do not give the patient water to drink, and let him eat salted foods and almonds, and do not let him drink any water, and it is necessary that with this regimen he be kept under observation."
"And this is the shape of the instrument with which bloodsucking parasites are removed from the throat when they are seen, and it resembles forceps like these, except that it has some curvature:" "which is placed in the throat, and its end resembles the beak of a stork, which is smooth, so that when it grips something, it does not slip."
"Chapter XL."
"In this chapter is the summary of the discourse on the opening of abscesses and their incision."
"There are many kinds of abscesses, of many types, according to what comes to mind about them, each one is mentioned in this book."
"And they are diverse in perforation and incision of them by two methods, one of which is for the type of abscesses themselves; and because of what we understand about humidity."
"And the second method is for the places where they occur in the body, because an abscess that occurs in the head is different from one that occurs in the buttocks; and an abscess that occurs in a fleshy part is different from one that occurs at a joint; and each of them has its own treatment by operation."
"And moreover, there are abscesses which should not be perforated until maturation of the skin over them or completion of their formation."
"There are also abscesses which should be drained when they are crossed and not mature according to their completion, such as abscesses that are near joints, because an abscess when it is near a joint prolongs its being until you can put in there what is around it, and very often the ligaments or nerves of that joint are corrupted by it, causing contraction of that member; or it is an abscess near a main member, and if you delay its perforation until it has matured to the main member, damage will occur to the main member; or it is near the buttocks, therefore perforate it not matured; and it is not necessary to perforate one with unripe digestion except that which is near the buttocks, so that you do not putrefy its skin and elongate it into the parts inside the buttocks, and a fistula be made, or that it becomes in its term that cannot be healed." "But you should know the time of perforation of the abscess, and this is when it has matured."
"And you should know that it is mature when there is cessation of pain and fever, and around decrease of redness and swelling, and sharpness of the tip of the abscess, and other signs."
"And because you should know that perforation must be made where there is much pus near the abscess and coming from the cure of its swelling."
"And perforation is always done along the length of the skin or flesh if the abscesses are in the parts of the arms or legs, and in the location of the nerves, tendons, arteries; and finally in all places where there is no reflection; because those that are reflected, use perforation according to that member."
"But when the abscess is in a fleshy part, then it is better to leave its perforation until digestion of it has been confirmed according to completion, as we have said; because if you perforate it before that, the skin of its opening will be prolonged and much dirty, and very often the lips of it are hardened and deepened."
"But some abscesses are perforated according to the width of the skin or flesh due to necessity, or according to what the member requires."
"And you should make a small perforation, and in large abscesses a large and wide perforation or many incisions according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses."
"And others are abscesses in which it is necessary that the chain be concave and incised when it is made like this, as it was done with bread and then made in such a way that it has already stuck, such as those that occur in groin and buboes."
"And of those that are incised with three-angle sectioning; and of those which are incised like the figure of a spearhead leaf, such as the abscesses of the armpits."
"And of them there are those in which round incision and crescent moon incision is administered, similar to those."
"But that one to which it does not apply like its superficial abscesses, you should perforate it with superficial or flat perforation alone."
"But when the abscess is large and has already collected much pus, you should perforate it and not try to extract all the pus at that time; having extracted a part of it, then on the following day, apply a poultice to the abscess inside, and then extract a larger part little by little according to degree until it is completely drained."
"And if the illness is from a green boil, or pregnant woman, or infant, or old man in decline, because often the animal spirit is resolved with the exit of sanity, and easily death occurs, you operate thus."
"Be sure to examine this chapter with great care, and especially the incision you make for these boils, ensuring that you cleanse the wound and consider whether the boil's skin is thin or flat. If the boil is large and its incisions are many, then pause between each cut so they may heal together."
"And if in the boil a piece of skin is cut off or there is a concavity around its circumference, then you should fill it with old lint or fine thread made from linen, like when you tie loaves of bread or roasts, without moisture; and strengthen that wound on the third day; and likewise proceed and heal it with whatever ointment is necessary until it is healed."
"But if blood flows during your operation, then administer water mixed with vinegar in which a linen cloth has been dipped, and place that cloth on the location of the blood flow several times."
"But if the bleeding persists, then you should administer remedies and care and apply powders that are recommended in many places of this book and its division."
"But if it is wintertime and the location of the boil has many nerves, then you should wrap powders in warm wine and oil and place them on those locations."
"And if it is summer and the locations are fleshy, then you should place powders wrapped in cold water and oil or wine and oil, and all of that should be fomented until the third day, as we have said, and then you should lance the boil and cleanse it and administer to its care whatever is appropriate for it until it is healed."
"And this is what is necessary concerning the knowledge of the treatment of boils in general, but according to the way of distinction I have already spoken about each boil individually in its own chapter."
Chapter XL.
Of the Incision of Boils that occur on the Neck.
On the neck there are small boils and they have species of knots which contain tunics that are made in this way; and their species are many.
And among them are pimples, and those contain moisture like lime. And those which contain moisture similar to dust also resemble them; and those which are like stones are hard.
And in the section of all of these, and their extraction, there is no fear, because their extraction does not cause any harm to the artery.
And the operation for cutting these is that you express them with an instrument in the form of which can be seen below, which is called an "entromes," until you know that they contain.
For if what it contains is moisture, then cut it with a section along its length with a superficial section in this form:
And begin the section of the line from B to the line G. Then when the moisture is evacuated, then strip away that which contains that moisture and do not leave any cause for it, because otherwise it may return.
And next immerse the wound in Egyptian ointment, if available, and otherwise in water and salt; and fill it with that and leave it for another day, because with that you will corrode everything that is left of that skin.
And next apply Egyptian ointment to that wound secondly and thirdly if you need it, until you are confident that there is no remaining cause of that skin; then dress the wound with ointment until it is healed.
And if a boil contains fatty nodes, then cut it in this form: with a section having the shape of a cross, and make incisions between its two lips of the section and scrape it from all sides, and exert your strength in extracting the tunic which contains it.
But if cutting the artery causes harm, then do what I have already told you first.
And likewise do for the stone-like boil in sectioning and treating it according to what we have told you; and the sectioning of a stone-like boil is easier, because it contains little blood and moisture.
And sometimes there are some of these boils which are on the head in certain people who have little moisture; and this is because one once cut open a boil on an old woman's head and found it hard like an unsound, rough, white stone which could not be squeezed out, and if anyone struck against that it would hurt them.
But in other accidental boils on the head besides this one, do not follow this chapter, such as those that occur on the heads of children and around the ears, but their sections should all be superficial sections.
And pause the perforation of those which have entered deeply because of this, lest you cause harm to the body from the parts that are deeper.
Then treat them with whatever is appropriate for their treatment.
Chapter XLII
Of the sectioning of scrofulas which occur on the neck
Many times these boils occur on the neck and in the armpits and groins, and sometimes they occur on other parts of the body.
And those which occur on the neck are many and they are often generated among them, and all scrofula of these is inside its own tunic, just as in the nodes and boils of the head, as we have described.
"These types of boils are many, for some are hard like stones, and some contain moisture, and some are malignant which do not respond to treatment."
"Therefore, in that boil which you find to be of good condition upon examination, the color of which is similar to the color of bone, and is swollen on all sides, and not attached to any nerve, vein or artery, and does not appear to be filled with pus, then you should incise it with a scalpel from the surface of the swelling towards the body of the line .G. between the lines .B., and cut it away completely, and then extend the lips of the wound with forceps, or with many forceps if necessary, as we have said regarding abscesses on the head, and extract its contents little by little."
"And it is most important to take care that the vein or nerve is not incised."
"And if the sputum is not moved, do not adjust your hand at the incision, or else it will harm the patient. And also refrain from making unnecessary incisions; for if you cut a vein or artery and prevent blood flow, then apply a dressing of vitriol powder or other powders that stop bleeding, and remove the dressing, allowing that which was causing inflammation to escape and letting the wound soften and begin to heal." "When blood is cut off."
"And then return to your operation until it is complete."
"And if you find any cause of the other small wounds, then cut them and clean them."
"If it is in the area of a large vein, do not incise that boil at its root." "And be careful to lift that [boil] with a doubled fold of gauze and allow it to fall back by itself without causing harm."
"And then fill the wound with dry cotton that you have already subjected to Egyptian ointment, and apply a dressing there."
"If you cut open that entire scrofula, then it is necessary to adjust both lips of the wound and sew them immediately so that there remains no excess."
"But if some excess remains due to the size of the scrofula, then it is necessary to understand how to incise its root, and then excise that and administer suture."
"And those scrofulas that contain moisture, pierce them with a superficial perforation here where their point of maturity appears, and pause the perforation from that which goes down to the base of the body, as we have said."
"And moreover administer a plaster with gangrene and similar substances, so that it may burn away whatever remains of the corruption." "And furthermore, when you see that the wound is already clean, then cure it with a plaster of healing meat until it is healed."
Capítulo XLIII.
Chapter XLIII. About sectioning the head of an accidental aposteme inside the gluteal region.
The ancients called this section in the epilogue, and we have not seen anyone in our land who has done it.
And this is the inscription of their sermon.
But in humans, the extraction of the epilogue should be avoided because if this is not done properly, all the veins and major blood vessels of the patient are cut.
But in those who have sores on the mouth or throat or two ears when the illness is not on the head, it is necessary to avoid the epilogue section to prevent injury caused by suffocation.
Therefore when we want this, we should incise the epilogue from three circles of the epilogue circles or four with a small section across its width where it is between two circles in quantity, so that the section is on the hip joint and not on the cartilage. This location is convenient because it lacks flesh and the blood vessels are remote.
And if the physician is fearful, he should extend the neck of the throat with one hand and carefully cut the neck until it reaches the windpipe, but avoid the blood vessels if they are seen there for any reason.
And then incise the epiglottis according to what has been recommended, and it is indicated above the section of the windpipe by a flag which is that of its exit, with this being of that air which escapes from there because of the disruption and the absence of voice.
And let the wound remain uncovered for some time.
Therefore when the time has passed in which suffocation is feared, approximate two lips of the neck wound and sew that alone with catgut.
And then apply medications that make flesh grow so that it may be healed.
"Albucasis says that the summary of this speech amounts to this: some of these tumors have already filled the throat of the patient, and the patient has come close to death; and the artery of the patient is severed, and some go to incise the epiglottis so that the patient may breathe over the place of the plague for some respiration, and be saved from death."
"Therefore, order the plague to remain until it is consumed by the disease; and this lasts for three days. Then command the disease thus, and cure that one as soon as it is healed."
"I have seen this myself: a servant took a knife and put it into his throat and cut off a part of the trachea of the lung; and I was called to cure him, and I found him moaning like one dead, and I uncovered the wound and sucked out the blood that had flowed from the wound."
"Therefore I was convinced that neither vein nor artery had been cut there, and the wind came out of the wound, and I cured him until he was healed."
"And it did not happen to the servant that anything entered into his throat; after some days I returned for betterment of his condition."
"And now you say that in the section of the epiglottis there is nothing to fear."
"Chapter XLIV."
"Of cutting over an abscess that occurs in the throat externally, and it is called a neck hernia."
"This abscess commonly called hernia of the neck is a large abscess according to the size of the body, and is more common in women."
"And it occurs in two ways: either naturally or accidentally."
"And in the natural one it is not good to cure."
"And the accidental one occurs in two ways: one resembles fatty tumors, and the other way resembles an abscess that is made by the obstruction of an artery, and in that case there is danger." "And it should not be presumed to cut it with iron except where it is necessary." "And you should press it and examine it with the hand, and if you find it similar to fatty tumors, and not suspended from any of the veins, then you should cut it in the same way as nodes, and extract it with what it contains of skin and serous fluid; but if not, then you should carefully examine all its being, and especially cure the place with whatever is necessary for curing until it is healed."
"Chapter XLIV." (This is a repetition of Chapter XLIV. It should be Chapter XLVI.)
"Of section concerning kinds of tumors."
"There are many species of tumors, and you have already mentioned all the species of them in the division [of anatomy]."
"And it is necessary that you explain the difference between a tumor and an ulcer when there is doubt."
"Therefore I say that in an ulcer there is heat and fever and violent pains until the boiling away of the superfluity is quieted; but it is a complete putrefaction which then stops the fever, pain, and heat."
"But in a tumor there is neither heat nor fever nor pain; rather it contains in itself its own fluid which is enclosed within its proper sac."
"And it is according to the size of the body, and its beginning is like a pimple and it becomes like a bag, whether large or small, and they are of two species: either fatty and containing moisture, and the colors of the moisture are many, as you said in the division."
"Therefore, when you come to the treatment of tumors, you should examine it and inquire about its beginning with an instrument called a probe, according to what will be said about its shape in the next chapter."
"And this is the method of examining abscesses and all tumors: you should take this instrument and insert it into the moist place that you find in the abscess, and you should turn your hand with it little by little until you know that the instrument has already penetrated the chain."
"And then finally pull your hand according to the measure of the greatness of the abscess, and then extract the probe and consider what is issued in its track."
"And if the flowing moisture is forgotten, whatever its color may be, then you should cut it with a superficial section as I have said concerning other abscesses."
"But if there is no moisture in the track of the probe, then you know that it is fatty."
"And dry it over it with a cut having the shape of a cross according to this form:" "like this as you have taught, and suspend it with forceps, and cut the chain from all sides with ease, and guard the skin or sac over it if possible, and extract that tumor."
"But if it is broken during the operation, then it is not possible to extract that tumor whole; many times something remains there, and then you should extract it in pieces until nothing remains of it."
"Because if anything remains of it, little or much, the tumor will return according to its nature."
"And if you see that some small part of it remains, then complete the wound with a plaster of some acrid corrosive powders and strengthen the plaster, and pause over it that which makes an abscess heal quickly, and cure it with other treatment until it is healed."
"But if it is a large tumor, then cut the two lips of it and cure it with what heals it."
"But if there is pulsatile or non-pulsatile blood against it, then cut and cauterize the place with triple-segmented zinc and let it rest for two days or three until the plaster becomes dry and the boiling away of the blood returns; and then return to cutting what remains of the tumor."
"Chapter XLVI."
"Of the forms of instruments necessary for cutting and boring."
"There are three species of probes: some are large, some medium-sized, and some small."
"The form of the large probe is as follows:"
"The form of the small probe is as follows:"
"They are made of iron, of aluminum, with pointed extremities properly shaped, so that they may enter easily into abscesses."
"And these are the forms of probes used in experience: they are called sounders, and one of them is called a boring probe."
"And there are three species of them: large, medium-sized, and small."
"The form of the large probe for experience is as follows:"
"The form of the medium-sized probe for experience is as follows:"
"The form of the small probe for experience is as follows:"
"It is convenient that they be used for those abscesses and fistulas and boils, since they are also of bone and other causes."
"And they are made round, thick, blunt, like large needles with which the sutures are sewn, and they are made of citrus ivory or bone or iron or silver. And the best ones are those made of citrus ivory."
"And probes are made of black lead, which are used to open those fistulas in the concavities of which reflections occur, so that they may be reflected with their own levity by those reflections."
"And there are three species of them: some are long, others medium-sized, and others short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and the stenosis of it."
"The form of the large probe of lead is as follows:"
"The form of the medium-sized probe of lead is as follows:"
"The form of the small probe of lead is as follows:"
"The forms of hooks are of many species, for some are simple, with only one curvature, and there are three species of them: large, small, and medium-sized."
"Of them there are three sorts, of three species."
"And of those three kinds two curves exist, and they are of three species."
"Of them there are three curves, and they are of three species."
"And all these things were necessary in their place."
"Form of small simple curve, its form:"
"Form of large curve with two curves:" "Form of medium curve with two curves:" "Form of small curve with two curves:"
"Form of large curve with three curves:"
"Form of medium curve with three curves:"
"And these are the forms of the scalpels with which nodes and warts are cut and scraped, and they are of three species, for those are large, medium, and small."
"Form of large scalpel:"
"Form of medium scalpel:"
"Form of small scalpel:"
"The extremities of those with which section is made are sharp and the other extremities are not-sharp, and they are not pausing in such a manner, but so that the fear of cutting veins or nerves may be avoided when scraping nodes, and so that the illness may be healed and tranquility attained by the slight burning which follows the scraping of warts."
"And these are the forms of forceps, and they are of three species: large, medium, and small, as you see."
"They are made of iron and resemble a rod with which alcohol is made."
"And it has a pierced extremity on one side covered with a spatula, and in that corner you can insert the parts between which you wish to place it."
"The forms of sponges, which are hidden between the aforementioned to avoid injury from warts, and they are of three species: large, medium, and small." "And these are the forms of those:"
"The forms of syringes with which blood flow is drawn off, and they are of three species: large, medium, and small."
"They are made of citric iron, round and somewhat long, and they are delicate."
"And it is necessary that these species of syringes be large, medium, and small, so that blood flow may be drawn off quickly when needed, both for medicine and for other purposes."
"However, do not use them to draw blood from any part of the body, except for fleshy parts such as armpits and elbows, and thighs, breasts, abdomen, and buttocks, and similar moist fleshy parts."
"And sometimes these instruments are made in other small forms resembling those of fleams according to this shape: for drawing blood when performing phlebotomy or cutting a vein or artery."
"And sometimes they are made round according to this shape:"
"Chapter XLVI."
"Of the care of men's breasts, which resemble those of women."
"Sometimes the breasts of some men become swollen during sleep and begin to resemble those of women in appearance, and they are like warts."
"And for those who suffer from this, it is necessary to cut them with a crescent-shaped incision according to this form: along the line B to G, and then scrape off all the thickness, and then fill in the wound with an incarnative ointment, and then sew up the two lips of the wound, and cure it until it is healed."
"But if the breast declines towards the sides and becomes softened due to its size like those of women, then it should be split into two parts: with two crescent-shaped incisions on either side, each containing the other at their ends so that the larger line contains the smaller one according to this form from B to G. And then scrape off the chain which is between the two lips of the wound, remove the fat, and administer what has been said about suturing and powders as necessary in the treatment until it is healed."
"And if you do not perform the incision as necessary due to the agitation of the illness and for drawing blood, then it is necessary to fill in the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment and leave that which has been corroded by it until it becomes smooth from its thickness, and then cure it until it is healed."
"Chapter XLVIII."
"Of the perforation of boils that come from the joints."
"These boils that come from the joints are of the species of scrophulosis, hard ones which contain a point that is discharged."
"And among these are some that contain moisture; and those that contain moisture should be cut with a crescent-shaped incision according to this figure: from line G to line B. And when all that is in the boil has been evacuated, then fill it with cotton wool and leave it alone for another day."
"And then let the cotton be removed and the wound dressed with an appropriate ointment until it is healed."
"And if the boil is of the species of joints and scrophulosis, then incise it as we have said in the section on hard scrophulosis."
"But if the wound extends so that it becomes purulent, then apply cautery according to what has been said about it beforehand."
"Chapter XLIX."
"Of incision of boils that occur due to an artery or vein."
"When an artery is broken and the chain above it becomes consolidated, then sometimes a boil occurs. And the signs by which it is known that inflammation and boil are due to the artery or vein: for when a boil is due to an artery, it is elongated towards the front of the body; and when you press on the boil with your fingers, you feel stridor in it."
"And that which is due to a vein is round near the surface of the body."
"And incision on this boil is an error, especially for those that are located near the armpits, buttocks, neck, and many other parts of the body; and it is very large, therefore its treatment with iron should be avoided. And that which is on the extremities or head should be avoided."
"But for those that are due to inflammation of the covering of an artery, incise in a straight line along the boil. Then widen the incision with forceps and expose the artery, removing the surrounding tissues until it is visible."
"And then place an awl and make it penetrate into the other side, and tie off the artery with doubled thread in two places — which is like taking out two arteries that are on the temples."
"And then punch the spot between the two ligatures with a spatula until all the blood that is there has come out and the boil has been dissolved."
"And then apply treatment to where purulence has been generated so that the ligatures fall off. And also dress it with appropriate ointment until it is healed."
"When the aposteme is due to the section of a vein, you should hold as much of it as possible with your hand and then insert the needle at the spot you have kept under your hand. Then make the needle penetrate; draw out that thread from the other side, and then tie the aposteme tightly using the bandage method I taught you, dividing it into two parts."
"If you fear that the thread might come out, then insert the needle along with it throughout the entire length of the aposteme at the first incision point and tighten your threads in four places."
"Then dry the aposteme in the middle of its opening until it comes out and then cut off any excess skin from it, leaving only what is necessary."
"And then press on the powder that you have immersed in wine and oil, and then apply the cure which is done with gauze and bandages until it heals."
**Chapter 1: Abscess resulting from nerve injury.**
"Just as an abscess can occur in an artery and vein, similarly, an abscess can also occur in nerves when they are injured by percussion or due to excessive manipulation."
"And it most commonly occurs in the locations of the assistants [i.e., helpmates] or the heel, or in any place where joints are connected."
"And if the abscess is large and resembles the color of other flesh, and it is in the major parts of the body without any opening and when it becomes hard with great violence, then it causes a sensation similar to numbness."
"And if an abscess does not form on the surface of the body and instead is hidden beneath the skin, then it is difficult to find and cannot be seen in front or behind."
"Therefore, those that are located in joints do not need to be incised with iron, for it would cause too much contraction."
"But if it is on the head or forehead, then cut open the skin using a scalpel." "But if the abscess is small, then use forceps and squeeze it until it bursts."
"If it is large, then suspend it with a hook, remove that, and then hold that; immediately adjust the plug with stitches, and care for it until it heals."
"Chapter Two."
"Regarding an abscess that occurs in the cheekbone of a patient who has occurred in the abdomen."
"Some have seen moles in the bellies of those and in other parts of their bodies which are called functional because they resemble those with fungi, the cause of which is subtle and the head of that is large; and the lips of those are inverted, and it is of those that are small, and it is of those that are marvelously magnified."
"And I have already seen one, and in its belly there were two parts which were more like fungi, and there was no difference between them, they were white with small causes."
"And the lips of those were inverted and split open, and moisture ran from that all the time."
"Therefore I cut those and dressed them on the left foot weighing eighteen ounces, and the right weighing six."
"And in the incision of their skin, you should consider the hours if the patient is humid, and the color of the flesh is white, humid, of subtle texture. Therefore, cut with a broad knife, and they should be present at your fire, because many times you should expel much blood from the section. And if blood comes out, cauterize that."
"And if the patient is afraid and trembling, guard against cutting with iron; but rather take fresh lead filings, and apply them to that flesh, in the manner which we have said; let it remain so for two days."
"And accordingly adjust to the constriction of the lead thread; therefore, do not cease to apply the lead frequently until it is severed and falls off by itself without working."
"But if the flesh is of coarse texture, then in cutting it there is some cause for fear and trembling, especially that which is within the belly."
"But it is possible that you cut through the middle of it, and accordingly cauterize it so that it does not return."
Approximately: And then treat that wound which has been healed.
And beware lest thou presume to cut into thine own flesh which is of dark hue, lacking sensation and regular regard, for that is exceedingly cancerous.
And I bring this in remembrance concerning cancer right now.
Chapter 52
Concerning the treatment of hernia of the navel.
An umbilical hernia occurs due to many causes: either from fissures of the cicatrix which is on the abdomen, and through these the tissue or bowel may protrude like in other ruptures; or from blood that flows from a vein or artery as mentioned previously, or from constricted wind in it.
But if it is due to a fissure of the cicatrix and protrusion of tissue, then the color of the tumor resembles that of the skin; there is little pain, and it appears suddenly in different positions. And if it is due to protrusion of the bowel, then its position changes greatly like we have described previously, and when you press upon it with your fingers it disappears suddenly and returns immediately; it has a loud sound, and the opening into which it protrudes is greatly widened and experiences violent struggles.
But if it is due to moisture, then there is little pain, and it does not disappear when you press upon it with your hand, nor is it constricted or distended.
And if it is due to blood, then the tumor appears dark-colored.
"However, if it's due to flesh, then it is a serious, large and hard tumor, and its quantity can be considerable."
"If it is caused by windiness, then the touch of it is like lion."
"And the operation in this case is that if the protrusion of the navel is due to blood from an artery or vein, or windiness; then you should be prohibited from treating it, because there is fear and trepidation as I have taught you in the chapter where I spoke about tumors from an artery and vein."
"And if the protrusion of the navel is due to bowel or tissue, then you should order the patient to lie on their back and stretch out; next, take a bandage and wrap it around the entire navel area, and then place your hands over the patient's thighs but above their knees, and then encircle the navel area with a broad spatula over the area where you have wrapped the bandage; next, extend the mass of the tumor upwards with a large fist; finally, tie it tightly with strong flax or waxed thread using an appropriate tying method."
"And then press down on the center of the extended mass towards the ligaments and insert your finger into that space seeking for the bowel; and if you find it, grasp and hold it with the ligaments, then carefully extract it and push it back inside the abdomen."
"And if you have found tissue, then grasp it with your fingers and cut away its excess."
"But if it is against your artery or vein, then encircle that part and return to your operation; next, take two needles and tie two strong threads onto them and insert the two needles into the circumference you have made around the tumor in such a way that they cross each other, allowing them to penetrate; finally, stretch the tumor in four directions over the needles."
"And if you wish, remove the needles and leave the area that can hold the extended flesh and fall back into place on its own; or cut it when it becomes thin and falls away, then cure it with water that is suitable for healing."
"And if the prominence of the navel is due to raw flesh or moisture, then you should cut away the tumor as we have said and remove the blood or moisture that you find in it; finally, cure it with water that is suitable for healing and consolidation of the area."
Chapter 53
On the treatment of cancer.
We have already mentioned, in the division of species of cancer and how it can be cured with medicines, that cure by iron is avoided because it would cause ulcers; we have also said that cancer generated in the breast or armpit requires caution in its treatment.
The ancients said that sometimes cancer is located in an area where it can be completely eradicated, like cancer in the breasts or scrotum, and especially so when it is small at the beginning.
But when cancer is advanced and severe, it is not appropriate to approach it, because you cannot heal that ulcer nor have you seen another like it, nor has anyone else ever succeeded in treating it.
And the operation in such cases is when it is located as we have said: you should first let the disease take its course and purge black bile occasionally; then, if there is manifest fullness present, cut into it.
Then prepare the patient for the operation where it is located, and then introduce forceps suitable for that purpose. Next, cut all around with a good sharp knife, making sure not to leave any cause of recurrence of the tumor. Let the blood flow out freely, and do not cut too deeply; squeeze the area gently, and wipe away all the thick blood with your hand or an instrument that is suitable for you.
But if the flow of thick blood is contrary to your purpose during an incision of a vein or artery, then cauterize it until the bleeding stops; finally, cure it with other appropriate remedies until it heals.
Chapter 54.
"On the treatment of hydrocephalus."
"We have already discussed, in division, the types of hydrocephalus caused by water and their symptoms, as well as treating it with medicine."
"And that which is cured with iron is only the species of alithias alone, and it should not be approached with iron near the species of tympanites or the species of hypochondriasis, for this is fatal."
"And when you have treated this species of tympanitic hydrocephalus with medicine and your treatment does not confer benefit, then consider whether the patient has already attained debility from another illness or if it is another form of hydrocephalus, such as in the case of coughs or abdominal conditions, then beware that you do not treat them with iron, for there is fear in this."
"But if you encounter illness due to excessive virtue and there is no other illness but hydrocephalus alone, neither infant nor elderly, then the manner of operating on it is that you elevate the patient between your thighs, and the attendant presses the abdomen of it with his hand, expelling water from it through the nostrils, and appropriately takes a spina biceps in this way:"
"Let it be of double-pointed length, sharp at both extremities like a spine; but let there be some slight shortening towards the middle, so that in the operation you do not pierce into the bowel and hurt it."
"And consider whether the origin of hydrocephalus is from the bowels, for then you must perform an incision near the navel by about three fingerbreadths to the left of it, on the right side above the pubis."
"But if the origin of hydrocephalus is due to liver disease, then your incision should be left of the navel by three fingerbreadths."
"And if the origin of it is from the spleen, then your incision should be on the left side."
"And do not make your incision over the side where you wish to evacuate the water, lest the superfetation run to that place."
"And then perforate the whole chain with the instrument, and appropriately enter that incision, elevating your hand with the spine between the chain and the syringe, and draw out that water; if there is as much as a fingernail or nearly so."
"And then insert the syringe into it until the spine reaches the desired place, and that is the place of the water." "And then remove that [water] and insert an instrument of which this is the shape:" "It is like a thin silver cannula; it is made of silver or iron or lead, at the lowest part of which there is a small hole, and on its sides there are three holes: two on one side and one on the other; and its extremity is cut obliquely like a feather thus:"
"And at the uppermost extremity of it is a ring, for when the instrument reaches the water, then that will immediately stop over the instrument, hence evacuating as much water in one hour as is necessary, because if you evacuate more than is necessary at that moment, this may cause the death of the patient through resolution of its animal spirit, or it may happen to him that he approaches his end."
"But evacuate according to the quantity of its power and according to what the dispositions of the patient's virtue, pulse, and condition signify to you."
"And then remove the instrument, and retain the water which is kept by the chain that retains the hole on the syringe of which it has been commanded to you to pierce thus."
"And then repeat the instrument on another day if the patient tolerates it thus, and draw out a little water each time, doing this for several days until there remains of the water but little, and take care that none of the water remains."
"But if you are fearful about the patient and let out a great quantity of water, then cure him with dry earth burial, much sweat in baths, and expose him to sunlight for a long time; and cure him with drying medicines until he is healed."
"And cauterize the stomach, spleen, and liver near the place of evacuation of water according to what has been said above in that which is precedent."
"Chapter .lv."
"Of the cure of children who are born with the places of urine unperforated."
Some children are sometimes born from their mother's womb with the head of their mixture not pierced (or tightly stuck or not in its place).
So then it is necessary to cut around the perforation as soon as it is born using a very thin spatula in this way:
And then place there a thin lead needle and tie it, leave it for three days or four.
When they want to urinate, remove the needle and let them urinate; then put it back in place.
And if you don't use lead, it may happen that urine which falls on this area does not close it.
But for the one whose head is tightly stuck, let him be treated with a lead needle, as we have said, for too many days until it widens.
But for those in which the head is not in its place, they are called "strangled," and this cause is that some of them are born with the end of the penis bent back so that they cannot urinate properly until they lift up the penis with their hand to do so; and it is not due to generation, for therefore semen cannot reach the mother correctly, and it is a very bad illness.
And the manner of operation in this case is that the patient should be placed on his back, and then extend the head of the penis with your left hand using vigorous traction, and incise the end of the head of the penis where it enters the perineum with a sharp spatula, just as you would incise a feather, so that the middle part of the penis resembles the head of the penis and the slit falls into its proper place.
And be careful in your operation for the flow of blood, because it often happens that this occurs; and stop the bleeding with whatever you can cut to cauterize the blood vessels, and dress the wound until it is healed.
Chapter .56
Of whitening (albater) which occurs in the foreskin of the glans penis and its discoloration, blackness, and adherence.
This whitening happens very often on the penis and it is a prominence of flesh like this:
"And among them, one is malignant, another is non-malignant."
"And having suspended it with a fine needle and severed that which you cut off, immediately press upon the stump with an Egyptian cautery; and then apply a dressing of fine linen until it is healed."
"And if it turns out to be malignant, with red edges, then you should apply a hot cautery immediately at the incision and its cause."
"But if it occurs on the foreskin of the head of the penis that has not been circumcised, and one part of the inflamed area is inside the foreskin and the other part is outside, then you should remove the inner inflammation first until it has healed; and only then treat the outer one, for when you treat both together with the foreskin, there is a risk of it becoming damaged."
"And if it happens on the genitals or the blackened foreskin with decay, then you should remove all that is already discolored and about to decay or has already decayed; and apply linseed over it with honey, which has been mixed with barley flour and finely ground salt and sieved."
"And apply this cure along with the other cure until it is healed."
"But if there is a flow of blood, then perform a lunar cautery according to this method:"
"because a cautery for the purpose of healing is applied in two ways together, it treats both bleeding and putrefaction when it occurs."
"And if the head of the penis is completely destroyed in a single hour, then you should insert a lead cannula into the opening of the foreskin so that the urine flows through it."
"In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion only occurs in those who are circumcised, and for them it is not necessary; and when adhesion occurs due to inflammation or an aposteme), you should scrape with a blunt spatula until the adhesion is dissolved and the head of the penis is completely freed from all parts."
"And if it is difficult to remove it in this way, then you should scrape with a spatula from the head of the penis and the foreskin, because when the foreskin is thin, it is easily perforated by its own thinness."
"And apply a piece of fine thread between the foreskin and the head of the penis, which has been moistened in warm water so that it does not adhere again."
"And then treat it with styptic wine until it is consolidated."
"Chapter 57."
"Of the cleansing of children and the treatment of what happens to those who are circumcised."
Circumcision is not a solution for continuity like other diseases: although it may be our operation and will, and especially concerning children, we must assign the best operation and way that is easiest to achieve health.
The ancients did not mention circumcision in all their books because they did not practice it according to their laws. And this is only because we have acquired this knowledge through experience, which is why most craftsmen and barbers today use circumcision with a razor and clippers; they also use lye for cleansing and the nail for cutting.
And I have already tried all these methods and found that cleansing with tweezers, lye, or using the nail for circumcision is not as good as cleansing with a scalpel; because often the cord escapes upwards, since the foreskin has two tunics, and only one remains underneath. It is much easier to force another incision and cause certain pain. And regarding cleansing performed by apothecaries using a speculum (digital method), which is used by barbers, it does not ensure the incision of the end of the male member because it often slips into the trap of it.
But in the operation using a nail, you often hit bone and spoil your operation. And the child's foreskin is short by nature, and many times it appears in such a way that it does not require cleansing, as I have seen it myself.
But regarding cleansing done with tweezers and lye, the operation described by me has proven to be good because tweezers provide proportional cutting; since the sharpness above is equal to the sharpness below. Therefore, when you press your hand proportionally with two sharp points, you cut equally at one time, without error in all parts of the foreskin.
And the first way of operating is that you should make sure the child is well restrained if he is one of those who understands a little, so that you only apply lye to his foreskin and leave it on for another day.
And appropriate at that moment is to make the child happy in every way possible according to your ability, so that he can better tolerate the operation. And it is appropriate to have the child between your thighs and well restrained without centering him, hiding the tweezers in your hand or behind your ear so that the child cannot see them nor anyone else's instruments.
And then insert your hand between the child's legs and blow on the foreskin to cause it to retract. Once the head of the penis is exposed, promptly clean away any accumulated dirt from there.
Here is the form of tweezers used for cleansing:
The nails are well-shaped and not too short, ensuring the nail bed is not exposed; the length of both points should be equal to that of two knuckles when fingers are pressed together.
The mistake in cleaning is often fleeing the entire inner chain or breaking it from where the incision is made.
Therefore, you must extend that part of your hour with your nail in front of the pustule and incise it evenly.
And if you cannot hold it with your nail, then extract it with tweezers and cut it open.
However, if three days have passed and the swelling has increased around the boil, you should then let what is inside come out until the boil bursts open naturally, carefully squeeze it out, and incise it according to your preparation.
And be careful of the head of the boil, so that nothing comes out.
And then treat it with the ointment consolidated from the powders which we have recommended in our treatise on powders.
If it has been cut open too much, and you have followed the instructions above, then nothing will happen to it.
"And let him who has this, as we have said, be healed."
"The fifty-eighth chapter"
"On the treatment of urine retention in the bladder."
"Retention of urine in the bladder occurs due to excess thickness caused by stone or concretion, or due to weakness or obesity, and it is similar to those conditions that we have mentioned earlier regarding the methods of treatment."
"And if it is not dissolved with what we have mentioned before, then the cause for the illness is very severe. Therefore, extraction must be performed using an instrument called a syringe, which has the following shape: It should be made of silver and carefully crafted like a bird feather quill, with a length similar to that of a palm and a half, at one end of which there should be a thin tube."
"And the method of extracting urine through this is as follows: Take a folded feather and insert it into the narrow opening of the syringe, then cut any excess feathers with scissors. Then insert the feather into the tube with force, and then attach the syringe to an eggcup or a vessel containing hot water."
"And have the patient lie on their back and then insert the syringe into the urethra, having first greased it with a mixture of olive oil and water."
"And then gently insert the syringe into the urethra until it reaches the opening of the bladder; and then bend the urethra upwards at the navel; and then push the syringe further inside that; and then push it further still until it reaches the bladder, and when this is done correctly, the patient will feel relieved. But if it does not go in as described here, then it may be due to some tortuosity of the passage."
"And then gradually extend the feather with the syringe, because urine follows the feather."
Approximately extract urine through a curette for treatment purposes, and use a catheter. Do not cease until the bladder is evacuated and the patient shows alleviation of their condition.
Chapter LIX
Regarding the quality of catheterization of the bladder with clamps and similar instruments, which are suitable for this purpose.
When an ulceration or abscess occurs in the bladder, or blood clots form there, or its opening becomes obstructed and you wish to introduce water and medicines into it, then use the instrument called a catheter, which is shaped as follows:
but at its end it is blunt, so it is closed. And in that there are three openings: two from one side, arranged thus.
At the beginning there is a concave place where urine accumulates and is expelled according to its quantity without adding anything. If any cause prevents it from being drawn out, then it is drawn out with this device. When it is expelled, this is also drawn out. This is similar to how catapults were used in naval battles.
Therefore, when you wish to introduce liquid into the bladder, insert the end of the catheter into the liquid and draw with it what is expelled from the aforementioned openings because the liquid will be drawn into the concave part of the catheter.
And also insert the end of the catheter into the urethra as we have described in the surgery section. Then push the liquid through with whatever you are pushing it with because that liquid will reach the bladder quickly and relieve the pain there.
Here is the form of the slender catheter used to evacuate the bladder, which is as follows:
"Let a silver or latten probe be made, whose head should resemble a small feather, and let it be inserted gently within."
"Then take a vessel of mucus and place within it the moisture you wish to crystallize in the bladder, tie that vessel tightly with two firm knots tied with doubled thread, and heat that moisture over the fire."
"And insert the extremity of the crystal into the urethra."
"And stretch your hand over the bladder with the moisture, pressing down until you feel that the moisture has reached the bladder."
"But if the bladder is not present, then take a piece of parchment and make from it a circle; pierce that through its entire thickness; then insert strong thread into those holes thus: so that it may be turned; then attach the circle as it is attached to aloft, for you place in that water what you wish of moistures, oils and waters."
"And then you tie that to the instrument and do with it as you did with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder."
"Chapter .lx."
"On the removal of a stone."
"We have already spoken in the division about the types of stones and their treatment with medicines, and the difference between stones generated in the urethra and those generated in the bladder, and the signs of this."
"And we have spoken of the stone in which every operation is done by hand, and cut."
"Only the stone that has been formed inside the bladder itself is considered true."
"I am now relating that in exposition manifest and abbreviation."
"Therefore it says that stone generated in the bladder mostly goes to children; and among its symptoms is that urine which exits from the bladder is like water in its subtlety and appears in that area; and the patient rubs their groin, often pants, and is suddenly erect; and at this time there is often discharge from the anus."
"And it would be easier to heal children from that illness who have reached fourteen years of age; and difficult treatment in old people." "But among young ones, it is half as bad because it is between them."
"And for that person from whom the stone is larger and its cure easier; And if it's small, it opposes that."
"Therefore, when we come to the cure of this, it is necessary at the beginning that we cleanse the patient with a clyster which draws out all the openings which are in their bowels; for that opening sometimes hinders the exit of the stone during its investigation."
"And then let the patient be taken with their feet and shaken up so that the stone may descend to the neck of the bladder, or what comes out of place sometimes."
"And then let that water be put between the thighs more prepared, and its heat should be close to it, so that the whole bladder may become inclining towards those parts."
"And then inquire about that and all that, carefully."
"So if you feel the stone in its place, then quickly make an incision over it."
"And if you cannot find it with your touch at all, then you must anoint with oil the tip of your left index finger if the patient is a child, or the middle finger if they are fully grown, and insert it into their anus." "And inquire within to see where the stone stands near your finger." "And gradually guide that little by little towards the neck of the bladder."
"And then press upon it with your finger and expel it out through the place where you made the incision."
"And command the minister to press upon the bladder with his hand; and command another minister that with his right hand he extend the thighs upwards, and with his other hand he pull back the cord which is below the thighs, away from the place where the incision is made."
"And then introduce spatula-shaped probes as follows:" "Make an incision in the patient between the buttocks and genitals, on the left side; the cut should be made over that hip bone and your finger should be inside the buttock during the incision, which should be transverse so that it is wider outside and narrower inside according to how much of the hip bone can possibly be exposed, not more, because too much pressure could cause the hip bone to break."
"And know that there is some bone at the tip of the hip bone which makes its exposure difficult due to this."
"And from that part it seems like a glans, round and light exposure is made."
"So if this is the angle and margin, fit into the crevice."
"And if it is not forgotten like this, then you must act upon that, or press strongly on it gently and decently, the tip of which should be like a file with which pressure is applied to the bone, and do not erase it; or introduce that subtle instrument with curved extremity."
"But if you cannot act upon it, then slightly widen the path and if you see blood flow, cut into that strongly with crushed vitriol."
"But if there are more than one hip bone, then initially introduce your hand into the mouth of the bladder and cut directly onto it; also introduce a little bit right next to it; similarly proceed if they are many."
"And if it is not a large hip bone, then ignorance leads you to incise that with a wide section, because the patient experiences one of two causes: either obstruction or the formation of calculi in continuous urine distillation due to which the location is not completely consolidated."
"But administer expulsion of that within which was forgotten outside, or engage in the fracture with forceps within those which extract it piece by piece."
"So once you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with aloe leaves and dragon's blood, and press it strongly." "And place on that cloth dipped in oil and wine, or in rosemary oil and water, so that the wound may heal without inflammation."
"And also have the patient lie supine on their pillow, and do not remove the bandage for three days."
"And when that has been removed, cleanse the wound with warm water and much oil, and also treat it with daffodil ointment and diabaesilicon ointment until it is healed."
"But if inflammation occurs in the wound, hot and corrosive, and it resembles as if the blood is frozen in the bladder, and therefore urine is prohibited (and this is known by the exit of blood with urine), then introduce your finger into the wound and remove that blood, because if it remains it provokes the bladder to corruption and putrefaction."
"And also cleanse the wound with vinegar, water, and salt, and with opposition to all kinds of inflammation, with what is suitable for the cure until it is healed."
"And ensure during all the time of the cure that you keep both hands clean and adjust the medications which are placed on the wound."
"And if the hip bone is small and it is in the middle of the urethra, and it is stuck there and urine emission is prohibited, then cure it with what I recommend earlier that you should resort to sectioning, because many who have been seen through this cure have been accused of sectioning; and now I will explain how:
Triangle-shaped, sharp, inserted into wood.
Then take some wax and smear it on the stone to prevent it from returning to the bladder.
And then insert the iron into the stone, carefully maneuvering until the drill reaches that particular stone. And slowly rotate the drill with your hand against that small stone until you pierce it through so that urine can flow out again.
Then press your hand on what remains of the broken stone outside the stone-cutting tool, because it is triangular and has been emptied by urine, and the illness is healed.
But if this treatment is not suitable for you due to any reason that prohibits it, then place some wax beneath the stone and some above it. And then strike the stone on that cutting tool between two clamps. "And then extract that." "And then untie the ligature and modify the congested blood, which is formed in the plug."
"And there is no need for a thread of catgut around the stone, except to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and the other ligature above that one, because when the catgut near the neck of the bladder is untied, the cord returns to its place and covers the opening."
"And for this reason it is necessary when you tie the catgut above that you elevate the cord to the parts above, so that it may return to its place and cover the opening as we have said."
"Chapter .61."
"On the extraction of stones from women."
"Stones in women are rarely formed."
"But if a stone is seen in any of them, its cure is difficult and is prohibited by many authorities."
"The one reason for this is that women are usually reluctant to undergo treatment."
"And the second reason is that it is difficult to find a woman who knows how to explain her symptoms accurately when she visits the doctor, or who is a virgin, or has not had sexual relations."
"The third reason is that it is difficult to find a woman who knows this art, especially the operation of lithotomy with a knife."
"And the fourth reason is that the site of the incision for lithotomy in women is far from the location of the stone, so that a deep incision is required, and there is fear involved."
"But if necessity demands it, then you should take a woman who is very knowledgeable, and not afraid."
"But if you are deprived of that, then search for a wise and subtle physician, or present a mature woman who is skilled in the ways of women, or a woman who has some knowledge of this art."
"So have that woman present, and command her to do everything that you order her to do regarding the examination at the beginning; for this reason: if the woman is a virgin, she should insert her finger into her anus and feel for the stone."
"So if she finds it, have her remove her finger, and then command her to make an incision there."
"But if she is not a virgin, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the vagina of the patient and examine for the stone, because she can press there with her left hand on the bladder, and compress it well."
"So if she finds it, then gradually move that towards the opening of the bladder with the strength of your virtue until you arrive at its root."
"And appropriately make an incision on that side of the opening of the vulva where you stop and find the stone, making sure to keep your finger pressed against the stone as you remove it."
"And the incision should be small at first. Then insert your hook into that incision and if you feel the stone, then adjust the size of the incision according to how much of the stone you know will be removed from there."
"And know that stones are many in species: some are small and large, pointed and rough, long and round, and have branches."
"So you should know how many species there are of it according to what you indicate about what you want."
"And if you see blood flowing, adjust the location of the vessel cut by the knife and let it bleed for an hour until the blood is stopped. Then return to your operation until the stone is removed."
"And have ready with you the instruments that are mentioned in the extraction of stones in men, so that you may be assisted by them in your operation."
"And if you see blood flowing and know that the flow of blood is from the artery that has been cut, then place powder on the location and strain it with a bandage and compression downwards, but do not repeat this. Leave the stone and do not extract it, for strong bleeding will kill the patient." "And then dress the wound."
When the sharpness of the blood decreases somewhat for several days and the place is freed up, then you return to your operation before the fever has passed.
Capítol lxii.
Of cutting on an incarcerated hernia.
An incarcerated hernia is nothing but the collection of moisture in the white sac that contains the intestine and is called the "sac."
And sometimes it is in the proper peritoneum which nature prepares for it at the place where the intestine passes through, whether it has already passed or not; and it is the intestine between the white sac that we have mentioned, and this is called "tart."
The cause of this hernia is the weakness that occurs in the intestines, due to which this material accumulates there, and sometimes it happens due to a blow received on the intestines.
And this moisture has many colors, because the color of the fluid is changing to yellowish or reddish, or purple, or blackish, or cloudy white, and this is what happens most often.
And the signs by which it is known where this collection of water is located are as follows: if it is in the white sac that we have mentioned, then the swelling will be somewhat elongated in length like an egg shape, and the intestine will appear because the moisture contains that part on all sides.
And if the moisture is in the proper peritoneum, then the swelling will be round at the place where the intestine passes through, and for this reason it is thought that it is another hernia.
And if the moisture is between the intestines and the white sac, then the person feels discomfort on the left side.
"And when you wish to know the color of the humor's moisture, then examine the color of the moisture in the abscess with narrow cautery from which its form is preceded; and according to what issues forth in the tracks of the narrow cautery, judge what lies beneath it."
"Therefore when we come to the treatment of him with iron (surgery), then it is necessary that we command the patient to be placed on their back if possible, and turn his side facing up."
"And appropriate let him lie on his back over some cause with a little higher than usual, and pause for a while under the mouth drapes."
"And appropriately sit on the left side of him, and command the assistant to follow on his right side, who shall extend his handspan between one or two fingerbreadths at the joint of the thighs and at the start of the scrotum of the abdomen."
"And appropriately take a wide spatula and incise the scrotum of the testicles from its middle part along its length up to near the penis."
"And let the section be made according to the correct way, equally distant from the line that divides the skin of the scrotum, until it reaches the white cicatricial scar."
"And remove that, and observe, and beware lest thou cut that; and thy excision with which thou dost excise it should be parted equally suspended with the hook, and more subtly search with the excision according to the quantity possible for thee."
"And appropriately pierce the cicatrix full of water with a wide perforation, and extract all the water."
"And appropriately separate between the two lips of the section with forceps, and extend the cicatrix at its parted ends; and do not touch the scrotum containing the testicles, and incise the cicatrix in that manner which is possible for thee." "And incise that with its entirety or in pieces, and more subtly its edges, because if thou dost not search meticulously the incision of it, there is no certainty that the water will not return."
"But if the hook proceeds from that outside of its scrotum in the hour of thy operation, then when thou hast completed the section of the cicatrix, return within it, and appropriately adjust the two lips of the scrotum of the testicles with suture, and appropriately cure it even as the other wound until it is healed."
"And if thou findest the hook corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary that thou ligate the vessels which are sore near the suspensiony ligaments, and extract the hook, and appropriately cure it with what we have said."
"But if the water is collected in two parts separately, then thou shouldst know that there are two hernias; therefore incise that part according to what thou hast done in the other equally; and if it appears to thee that it is one operation, then thou dost do it."
"And appropriately thou dost cleanse the blood, and enter into the sections wool immersed in oil or rose oil; and afterwards put another wool which thou hast immersed in wine and oil, and spread it over the two testicles and the marvel of the belly; and put doubled cloths and powders on top, and tie those upon it with a bandage which is according to this form:"
"And appropriately two cloths should be taken and humidified with carded wool according to this likeness; and their extremities should be made with cotton or wet wool, and they should be attached with a bandage in the breeches of the breeches, and one of the extremities should take the buttock within the other, and the second should take at the part of the thigh, and two extremities over the hips and two other extremities over the ankles, and all constriction should be adjusted in the breeches of the breeches."
"And sometimes this hernia is medicated artificially with cautery instead of sectioning with iron; and it is that thou dost take a sharp knife cautery and incise with it the scrotum of the testicles, and it is ignited according to what we have recommended until the white cicatrix containing the water is discovered, and then thou dost take cautery in this form:" "And it is like Greek letter."
"And appropriately perforate that cicatrix with it, and burn until all the moisture has evaporated."
"And appropriately extend the cicatrix with forceps and remove it with forceps and burn it with a sharp cautery that is ignited; and incise it according to what thou art able until thou dost eradicate all of it; and guard thyself lest the hook be touched by the fire."
"And know that this operation is safer and further from blood flow, and better than operation with section."
"But if thou findest an aposteme caut in the hour of section or in the hour of cautery, or blood flow, then thou shouldst cure whatever contrariety thou dost have for it with the cure which is convenient to it according to what is said."
"But if the disease is fearful and does not await a second operation because of its horror, then thou shouldst administer perforation according to what I recommend it; and it is when thou art certain that that hernia is watery, as we have said of the significations."
"Then thou shouldst do this: cut the disease over some elevated prominence, appropriately perforate the aposteme in the lowest part of it with a broad spatula, and make the perforation according to the length of the body."
"And let the aperture be wide enough to evacuate all the water."
"And appropriately put cotton on that location and tie it and leave it there, so that it may drain the remaining water." "And appropriate care should be taken until the wound is healed."
"But if there is a hindrance to the exit of water at that time thou dost perforate it: but this is done only when the white paniculus in the orifice of the wound makes hindrance and prohibits the exit of the water, then thou shouldst put into the wound a pen or an instrument with which the water is extracted from hydrops, the form of which is preceded; or adjust to the opening of the wound a small tube."
"And know that the water returns, and it is aggravated appropriately six months or more after; and when it has increased, then it should be perforated in the same manner, for thus the disease will pass its days."
"Chapter LXIII."
"Chapter on Fleshy Hernia and Its Treatment."
"You should know that in this section about this hernia, there is fear of losing patients with the most serious dispositions. Thus, for me, it has been seen that its dismissal and being saved by surgery are preferable."
"And you remember the operation on that one and the types of fistulas."
"So, I say that fistulas are born in the bodies where the veins are damaged and this happens for many causes: either by acute painful excess blood flow that spills into the veins, or by injury."
"And the color of the fistula follows the color of the body, and it is not found in the pain, and it is a serious fistula."
"And the most severe type of fistula is called 'lapified,' which has a dark color and does not have sensation."
"And sometimes it occurs due to the hardening of the arteries, and also because of inflammation of those vessels which is already perceived as remembered, or by inflammation of veins."
"But what happens due to the inflammation of arteries is recognized by the spreading of the fistula when you press it with your fingers; and it does not need to be touched."
"But that which occurs due to inflammation of a vein does not spread from it at all, even with pressure applied with your fingers."
"And it is possible that on this type of fistula there may be made an incision and on other flesh; and if you insert the chain of veins, and approximate the edges towards each other, and extract from it the white matter, and deliver the suspensory vessels, and tie them up, and cut the suspensory ligaments until you have delivered everything from all parts of the wound."
"Therefore if the wound has already consolidated with those flesh parts, then it is necessary to extract the wound and incise that [area]."
"And if there is adhesion within the wound due to some reason from the fat, or between that which is between the vessels, then it is necessary to deliver all of that adhesion and make an incision through a round incision."
"But if there is new flesh in the place of adhesion that is behind it, then it is necessary to incise all of that which is from it and extract the wound as we have said."
"So when your operation is completed, then fill the wound with a wick of wool moistened in rose oil and wine; and approximate it with another dressing until it has healed."
"Chapter .lxiv."
"Concerning the treatment of a hernia that is from wind."
"An abscess has formed around the testicles, wrapped in some soft, swelling-like covering, making it difficult for the patient to move and walk."
"And in treating this illness, one must first address the underlying cause that led to its onset."
"But how shall we call this operation according to what was said earlier?"
"I say that you should place the patient on an elevated table; then pull back the suspensory ligament of the testicles from the scrotum using forceps; and also grasp the spermatic cord with its contents using your fingers, pulling it away from the pubic bone. And have another assistant hold those parts with great tension."
"And then make a transverse incision with a sharp spoon or scalpel on the right side of the vessels where they are exposed."
"Then carefully strip away all tissue as we have described in the removal of hernias, leaving only the vessels intact."
"And then insert a needle with a double thread into the initial and final points where the vessels were cut." "And then make a second transverse incision in the middle of those points along the length of the body to remove any accumulated putrid and corrupted fluids."
"And then treat the wound with the same care as any other wound to ensure that it heals properly and does not result in the loss of one or both testicles, for this is not a good outcome."
"But if all the vessels are severed, then it is necessary to remove the testicles or tie them off with the vessels because otherwise they will become gangrenous due to the lack of nourishment caused by the cutting of the vessels. This should be done without causing any harm."
Chapter LXV
Of the treatment of intestinal hernias
The occurrence of this hernia is due to a separation that occurs in the diaphragm when it is extended over the abdomen on one side of the stomach, allowing some loops of bowel to pass through that opening.
And this separation can occur either from the diaphragm itself or from an opening in it. These two types of hernia occur for many reasons: impact, straining, coughing, vomiting, lifting something heavy, or other causes such as tumors.
The sign that this is due to an extension of the diaphragm is that it occurs gradually over time and not suddenly. This is because the diaphragm compresses the bowel loop causing an abscess to form between the peritoneum and the abdominal wall.
The sign that this is due to a separation of the diaphragm is that at the beginning it causes sudden severe pain. An abscess will appear different from usual, near the groin, and this is due to the displacement of the bowel. The body part affected by this type of hernia is usually located in front of the diaphragm.
Sometimes the bowel becomes obstructed and strangulated due to the hernia, which is then called an "incarcerated" or "strangulated" intestinal hernia.
Sometimes there is flatulence, sometimes the bowel contents are poured out and retained in the hernia, causing great harm to the patient. Sometimes severe pain occurs when the hernia is pressed upon.
In treating this condition with iron, care must be taken to avoid cauterizing the bowel in that location.
The procedure for treating this condition is as follows: tell the patient to try to push the bowel back into place with their own hand on the inside of their convexity if it returns, then have them lie on their side and elevate their hips.
Then tie the scrotum, which holds the spermatic cord at its upper end, and cut through the entire spermatic cord. Then put two ligatures on both sides of the incision to secure it open with the aid of needles as needed.
If you make an incision large enough that the hernia can be completely reduced through it.
Then strip away the thin diaphragm-like tissue on both sides of the spermatic cord until the white, firm diaphragm is exposed on each side.
Then insert your finger between the white diaphragm and the spermatic cord on both sides of the hernia sac. Then separate it from the adhesion that is behind the hernia sac.
Then grasp the spermatic cord with your left hand at its outer end, stretch the white diaphragm upwards with your right hand, elevate the hernia with the diaphragm to the level of the incision. Then ask an assistant to extend the hernia sac upward and you can dissolve the adhesion behind it using a saturated solution.
Make sure that there is no bowel wrapped around the firm white diaphragm. But if you find such a cause, then carefully pull it back into the abdomen on the left side.
Then make an incision on the left side of the spermatic cord through which blood and pus can flow freely, as previously mentioned.
Then apply sterile gauze soaked in oil to the wound and close it with the suture we have recommended (and sometimes cauterize the white diaphragm at the time of the incision to prevent bleeding, as this is often necessary). Then tie the knot so that it falls by itself.
But if the closure of the wound takes too long, then use hot water to cleanse it and apply sterile gauze soaked in warm water over it until it falls into place as mentioned earlier.
Then treat the wound using the usual methods for treating wounds until it heals.
Chapter 66
Of Inguinal Hernia
In this type of hernia, there is no record of anyone having been burned during its treatment with iron.
The early surgeons said that it should be treated in the same way as a hernia with pus, which involves lying the patient on their side near the incision and drying the area around the abscess with the aid of whatever helps to promote wound healing.
Then treat the wound according to what has been said until it heals.
Chapter 67
Of Dislocation of the Ankle
Sometimes there is also a fracture of the ankle bones as mentioned earlier.
There are rarely any problems with the bowels in these cases and if there are, they are minor ones that resolve quickly.
But if the condition persists for a prolonged period, a fissure forms in the diaphragm through which the bowel may herniate into the chest. This occurs due to the expansion of the diaphragm in the area of the ankle, which leads to softening and inflammation of the tissue, followed by the formation of an abscess.
"The cure for him is with such cautery as has been previously narrated."
"Sometimes it is cured with iron according to this method: the patient lies on their back between your hands, and then you carefully dry the location of the protruding apostemes through a lateral section according to its quantity."
"And then strengthen the white cyphac that is under the neck until it is discovered."
"Then take the wand and place it on the highest point of the navel, pressing firmly upon the stomach."
"Then mark both prominent points on either end of the navel wand and adjust them carefully together with one against the other."
"Then remove the wand and ensure that the navel is completely emptied of its contents, neither stretching it out nor causing any other similar injury, as you should know in the care of intestinal hernias."
"Then proceed with the treatment of hernias and, when you have incised the skin, cleanse it and restore the hernia until it is consolidated; for the navel contracts and does not adjust to the prominence of rupture."
"It is better to cauterize here because it is closer to safety."
"Chapter .lxviii."
"On the softening of the spermatic cord."
"The spermatic cord in some men becomes softened in this way because the flesh between it is softened; and this should be observed."
"Therefore, it is necessary for someone who seeks treatment for this to make the patient lie on his back and incise all the softened spermatic cord above the natural one; then approximate both lips with a suture."
"And if you wish, cut away the initial excess of the softened spermatic cord with three or four stitches and close it firmly with a suture."
"Then incise between the sutures; then treat by treating other hernias until they are healed and the skin falls off."
"Chapter .lxix."
"On castration."
"Know that castration is condemned by our law, but for the sake of instruction it was permitted to me to remember this in this book; and there is no need to remember this except for two methods, one of which concerns the knowledge of the physician when he is summoned for it, so that he knows how to treat it if it happens; the other method concerns the fact that we often have a need for castration of other beasts due to our livestock, as with sheep, goats, pigs, and similar beasts."
"And therefore I say that castration is done in two ways: either by crushing or by cutting with an incision."
"But in that which is done by crushing, the way of the operation is to make the beast lie down in cold water until its testicles become softened and enlarged and hang." "Then take those with your hand so that they are resolved and do not appear from afar due to the touching."
"But in castration done by incision and cutting, you must hold the beast and press the spermatic cord of its testicles with your left hand."
"And then ligate the suspenderian fascia, and incise above each one with an incision so that two openings result."
"And then incise those until you have cut out each one." "And do not leave any cause on those of the scrotum except for the thin skin which is above the vessels."
"And this method of castration is better than that done by crushing, because crushing leaves no cause of the testicles so that the beast desires copulation."
"And then treat the wound until it is healed."
"Chapter .lxx."
"On the treatment of hermaphroditism."
"Hermaphroditism in men occurs in two ways: one is when there appears between the space of the spermatic cord, between two testicles, a figure resembling that of a woman's vulva."
"And sometimes from that same place urine flows which is in the spermatic cord."
"But in women, it is one kind: and it is that the vulva above the pubes resembles two testicles of a man somewhat diminished at their entrance into the furrow like the male penis and two testicles."
"And the treatment is of three kinds: two for men and one kind for women." "And it is necessary that you incise those adhered flesh so that the emission of that may escape, and then treat those with treatment for other wounds."
"And in the second kind of men from which urine flows which is in the spermatic cord, there is no treatment nor operation for it."
"Chapter .xxi."
"On lens and flesh protuberance caused by women."
"Freckles are rarely attached to natural causes, but they can become raised and appear like moles due to carelessness. And sometimes in some women they become large and spread out like those of men and cover the face."
"So it is necessary that you hold the excess of freckles with your hand or with a wisp of wool and incise them."
"And do not make the incision too deep, especially on the forehead, lest bleeding occur."
"And then treat it with treatment for wounds until it is healed."
"But flesh born is flesh that grows in the horrible part of the mother so that it fills there, and it often appears at the openings of the furrow according to the likeness of a tail (and for this reason some first called it “tailed disease”); therefore we must incise it like freckles, and treat it until it is healed."
"Chapter .lxxii."
"On the treatment of albinism."
"Albinism is when the vulva of a woman is not perforated, or has a small opening." "And it can be either natural or accidental."
"Accidental is due to illness that has preceded, and it occurs either by flesh adhered or by thin skin or thick skin."
"And it occurs either in the forehead of the mother, or on the sides of it, or above it, or below it, and it prevents coitus and pregnancy and childbirth, and it often prevents menstruation."
"And the recognition of it is done by observation of the mother if the obstruction is apparent, but if not apparent, then you must examine her with your fingers or a probe."
"But if the obstruction is due to thin skin and it extends between the two lips, then you must cut through it with scissors."
"And if it extends over both lips, then you must first dilate them with your fingers, and then insert the tip of your index finger from both sides."
"And the woman should be placed on her back, with her thighs extended, and then you must dilate both lips with force so that the thin skin is torn and the obstruction is opened."
"And then take wool dipped in oil and place it on that location, and leave it there for a day so that the wound does not close up."
"But if the skin is thick and thick, then you must incise it with a broad blade or with a myrtle leaf."
"But if the obstruction is due to flesh adhered, then suspend that with a wisp of wool and incise it."
"And use on it the medicines that stop bleeding without biting, such as aloe, dragon's blood, and frankincense mixed with white lead."
"And then apply a wide leaden cannula so that the wound does not close lightly."
"And keep it on for a few days and apply hot water compresses."
"And then treat it with other treatment for consolidation until it is healed."
"And sometimes during childbirth other flesh appears, and therefore you must incise according to this manner." "But if this is due to a head boil, then do not let it be treated with iron in any manner."
Chapter 73
Of the treatment of hemorrhoids and anal prolapse that occurs in women's buttocks.
Hemorrhoids are caused by the veins around the anus becoming enlarged due to continuous strain, and when these hemorrhoids become hardened and gangrenous.
As I have already said in the division of species and symptoms, I will now say which ones receive treatment and which do not.
Therefore, I say that hemorrhoids and anal prolapse that are in the front of the anus and do not protrude can be treated with iron.
But those that are on the surface of the anus and can be felt, are those that receive treatment
And it is necessary to place the woman in a warm bath and then extend her buttocks with forceps or rough cloth, and incise those that are hard.
And then sprinkle over them powder made from the fluxes of menstrual blood, ground without biting, such as cinnamon and similar things.
And then wrap her buttocks with hot wool for an hour, and then place that one in warm water.
And if the bleeding continues, then make her sit in a decoction of sumac and walnut husks, pomegranate seeds, oak bark and similar things.
And then take barley flour and mix it with honey, vinegar and wine, and make a plaster with this to put on the back of her.
And if the blood is cut off, it is good; and if not, then make two leeches adhere to them, and scarify the breasts.
And then take wool and immerse it in juice of coriander or juice of coltsfoot or juice of guaiacum with five parts wine, and make it adhere to the place; and also cure the place with a poultice until it is healed.
And cure her until she is healed.
"Chapter 74."
"A perforation of the bladder occurring in the thigh."
"Among the most frequent occurrences of swellings in the thigh are those like the crab and aposteme, as well as ulcers, scabs, hernias, fistulae, hemorrhoids, wounds, moles, and other swellings." "I have already discussed these illnesses, their types, their symptoms, and their treatments in the previous division."
"And so you should say in this treatise about the cautery operation performed on an aposteme that occurs in the thigh: how it is done with iron."
"Therefore, you should consider whether at the beginning of an aposteme's pain there is sharpness with percussion and inflammation and fever, sometimes redness and tenderness. If so, do not attempt perforation, but instead treat it with water that promotes maturation until the sharpness of the symptoms ceases."
"And then you should make the woman lie on her back and place two pillows under her hips. She should adjust her feet close to each other near the thighs away from the belly, with her knees expanded, and pause her arms at her sides, and bind each thigh with a cloth dipped in warm water."
"And the midwife should then go to the right side and administer the instrument with which the opening of the thigh is widened. Its shape will be shown in the following causes."
"And when you want to administer this instrument, you should place it on the root of the thigh of the woman, ensuring that only as much of the instrument enters the thigh as is necessary for treating the illness." "But if the instrument is larger than the root of the thigh, then you should place powders on the texture of the root of the thigh so that the entrance of any instrument into it is prohibited."
"And you should place a handle on the left side above the instrument so that the person administering it can hold the instrument and turn the handle until the opening of the thigh is widened."
"And when the extraction appears, and it is touched with the hand and found to be soft and moist, then you should cut its head off with a broad knife."
"And when the sanies is evacuated, then you should place a wick dipped in rose oil or wormwood oil, which has some astringency, on the plug of the wound. Then press the cloth onto the section at the root of the thigh."
"And then close the thigh and place a clean linen cloth dipped in water infused with mallows on top of it."
"And it should be treated immediately for two days using an ointment that is suitable to heal this."
"And sometimes the wound and the ulcer are washed in such a way that it is crystallized with water and honey, and also with water in which rue or long-rooted comfrey has been boiled, and then return to using the ointment."
"And if the ulcer is deep within the wound, then you should be prohibited from treating it with iron, having instead treatment with what has been mentioned in this section."
"Chapter LXXV."
"To teach midwives how to treat women with child who, according to their figure, are not natural."
"It is necessary that the midwife knows at the beginning the figure of a natural childbirth by its signs, and it is this: when she sees the woman pressing on her hips and desiring to smell the air, and when she is relieved by what is above her during labor, and she hastens the birth of the child, then you know that this birth is according to nature's figure. And the second [sign] is that the head presents first, with the second coming either suspended from or pendant on the navel."
"Therefore, when you see those signs, it is necessary that the woman's belly be pressed so that the child may descend gently, for when the head presents, then the second [sign] follows. And she should be cleaned of those superfluities with good cleansing."
"But if this birth is other than that which is natural and laudable, for when the child presents feet first and its body emerges before its head and its feet, and one of its hands, or even its foot, or its head appears with one of its hands, or it presents on its belly, then it has become turned toward its backside, resembling those figures which are not laudable."
"Therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and skilled in all these matters, and to guard against error and deception."
"And I show you here all those figures, and what kind each is, so that it may be understood by this and its state may be known."
"When the feet are presented first due to a natural malposition, and that is vehement upon the woman and she suffers difficulty in childbirth, and her strength is already weakened, then let her be seated, or have others hold her up, and evaporate her pain with incense made of fenugreek seed and humid oil."
"And appropriately the midwife should insert her little finger between those said lips and tear them apart with that second [finger], or cut them with her nail inside, where there is moisture." "And press on the woman's belly so that the child may descend."
"But if it does not descend, then it is necessary for the woman to be rubbed with a mixture of pitch and fenugreek seed mixed with wax."
"And appropriately command her to be pressed, and have her rubbed again with the mixture, and make her sneeze with condimentum; and hold closed her mouth and nose for one hour, for the child will soon forget [the pain]."
"And if both hands of the child are forgotten at the beginning, then it is necessary that you gently reduce them one by one." "But if it does not obey the maneuver, then place the woman upon a bench and lift her feet up, and appropriately strike the bench on the ground; and let the woman be held so that she does not fall due to the concussion."
"And if the hands are not turned in and the child is dying, then cut them and extract the membrane of the child or tie its body to your hand with cloth and extract it gently, for it will soon forget."
"When the child presents feet first, then it is necessary that you push those upward, and appropriately turn the child gently, and appropriately anoint it, and appropriately take one of its feet and extend them little by little."
"But when it has entered into the cavity, then you command it to be expelled, and make it sneeze with condimentum, for it will soon forget if God wills."
"And if it is not forgotten with what we have recommended, then return the child gently until you pause it according to its natural figure, for it will soon forget now with easy emergence."
"And if it is prohibited with all that we have recommended, then take pitch and gum dissolved, and pound them together in the mortar with good pounding, and appropriately anoint the pain of the woman, beneath her belly." "And appropriately let her sit in warm water, until she achieves the hypochondria."
"And when sometimes the passages of childbirth are relaxed, then let her have fumigation with myrtle steam and pause her upon it." "And when she has had steam fumigation for one hour, then let her sit upon a bench and appropriately make her sneeze and open her mouth, and lift from that, and press the lower part of her belly with gentle compression, for the child will soon forget."
"Emergence of the child laterally suspended by one of its arms." "It should be gently reduced by its arm, but if you cannot reduce it, then lift the woman up and make her walk."
"And if she cannot walk, then let her lie on the bed and strike its cavity with violent concussion, and appropriately administer remedies which you have and recommended of mucilages."
"And if the childbirth has come, then let her sit upon a bench and appropriately study about reduction of the arm, and anoint the child according to its natural figure, and make the woman sneeze and command her to press herself until it is forgotten."
"Emergence of the child on its neck with its arms expanded and its face turned towards its mother's back." "It is necessary that the midwife hold the hand of the child and appropriately turn it little by little, and ease it out gently."
"And when it is eased out and quantified, then pause upon its head what we have recommended of oil and of mucilages."
"And appropriately command her to move gently little by little, and when you have done this, then let her sit upon a bench and command her to lean on her right side, and appropriately command her to press herself; and make her sneeze with condition." "Preparatory exit of the fetus over the side."
"When you see horrible things in the mother according to this manner, then consider it, and appropriately incise the secondine with your nail until it is evacuated of humidity."
"If the body is hanging over the face and neck, then incise that part of the belly to prevent suffocation."
"Therefore push the body gently to its sides until it rests in position, and tell the woman to hold her breath several times. Then, let him exhale easily, if God wills."
"Exit of twins or multiple fetuses." "Know that twins are often born and sometimes even three or four at once, but this is rare and should be avoided if possible. But there are five causes of nature, not to live."
"And if they are multiplied, one after another, and are separated by membrane, distinguish those that are connected through the ligament in the navel of each. And sometimes they are expelled thus as one fetus by easy exhalation, and sometimes they are expelled by difficult exhalation as we have explained."
"And if some of them are difficult to deliver and arrive at what we have said about the unnatural figures, then care for them as we have explained."
"And if the midwife is subtle and does what she does with ease and subtlety, and with patience, and if she is knowledgeable according to all figures as prepared by nature for bringing about health."
"Recollection of what is formed in the matrix from embryos and are aborted."
Some women have twins, and three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine or more formed in the womb. It has already been verified that one woman aborted six, and another bore ten fully formed, which was caused by measurement of the glorious wise ones.
And also it is necessary that there be in the science of midwifery knowledge about how to deal with such a small one like this, and thus pause until it can open.
Chapter LXXVI
Of the extraction of the dead fetus.
When you treat a dead fetus as mentioned in the division of medicine and it has not yet been expelled, and you wish to use manual operation, then consider whether the woman is of healthy disposition and is not affected by any accidents that could lead to her harm.
The woman should be placed on her back on the bed, with her head inclined downward and her buttocks raised.
The assistant should hold the woman's thighs together, keeping them on the bed to prevent excessive extension of her body during the extraction of the fetus.
Then you should moisten the mouth of the woman with oily water and a poultice made from marsh mallow, fenugreek, and linseed.
Then the midwife should anoint her own hand with those oils and poultices, gently insert her hand into the woman's vagina, and then locate the position of the fetus' feet with her hand.
In this situation, you should then consider whether the fetus is prepared to be born feet-first. If so, place your fingers in one of the following locations on the fetus: the heels, the neck, the mouth, the palate, the chin, the furcula (the wishbone), or near the ribs or hypochondria (the lower chest).
But if delivery is occurring feet-first, then in the perineum or in the middle of the back.
You should hold the fetus with your right hand and guide its curvature at that point where it enters between the fingers of your left hand. Insert your left hand gently and place your fingers in one of those locations mentioned earlier until you reach the full width of the baby's body.
Then you should place another finger or even a third one if necessary alongside the first one to ensure equal traction is applied and not excessive tension according to the baby's curvature.
And this should be done gently throughout the entire delivery process so that the fetus is delivered as easily as possible, just like removing a tooth during extraction.
In this case where traction needs to be softened, the midwife should anoint some of her fingers with oil and gently insert them carefully while twisting those fingers around the part that is stuck.
Therefore, if the baby's presentation is engaged (stuck), then the midwife should change her position so that she can push harder. She should do this until the entire baby has been born.
But if the midwife's hand is pushed out ahead of the baby and cannot be reduced by pressing down on it, then a cloth should be wrapped around that hand. Then pull gently until the entire hand has been delivered, cutting any membranes or skin that remain attached to the hand or wrist.
And the same procedure should be followed for the other hand and both feet if they become stuck as well.
But if the baby's head is large or the presentation causes difficulty in delivery, or there is an excess of fluid around the head, then you should insert your hand between the spinous processes and separate them with a finger to expose the fontanelle. Then extract the fluid using forceps or a tool called "alundat," the shape of which will be shown later in this chapter.
Similarly, if the baby has a large head by nature, you should perform a fontanelle incision using scissors or extract the bones using forceps as described earlier.
If the baby's head is delivered but is stuck behind the pubic bone (symphysis pubis), then make an episiotomy to allow for drainage of the fluid in the perineum.
But if there are no complications and delivery is not imminent, then you should perform a cephalotomy (incision of the baby's head) whenever it is feasible to do so.
And if there is ascites or hydrops in the left lower abdomen, you should perform a paracentesis to drain the fluid.
But if the baby is presenting by the breech (feet-first), then traction should be gentle and the baby's direction towards the mother's vulva should also be gentle.
But if the baby is stuck at the level of the pubic bone and perineum, then you should extract it using a cloth wrapped around your hand. Then make an incision in the skin and tissue of the lower abdomen and perineum to relieve any tension or pressure.
But if the other limbs are extended and the head is turned back, then the midwife should insert her left hand. If the mother's vulva is covered with secretions, she should insert her hand into the perineum and encircle the baby's head with it. Then use this hand to guide the baby's head towards the birth canal and deliver it using one or two fingers inserted into the baby's mouth.
And if the mother's vulva is obstructed by a hard scab that has formed due to an inflammation of the urethra, then do not try to push through it. Instead, administer a warm compress with thick ointment to soften and remove the scab. And apply poultices; follow up with the patient using warm water to soften and moisturize.
If the baby is lying on its side, try to rotate it (if possible) and administer the remedies mentioned for a live baby.
And if that is not possible, then make an incision in the uterus and extract the fetus.
And be sure to remove all afterbirth.
And once you have completed your procedure, then administer the remedies mentioned earlier for treating hard scabs that may have formed on the mother.
If there is bleeding, use compresses with astringent water and apply other treatments to stop it.
I have seen a woman whose uterus contained a dead fetus, and later she became pregnant again with another dead fetus. A scab formed on her umbilical cord for a long time; it swelled up and opened, and then she began to cough up blood.
I was called to treat her and did so for a long time, but the illness did not improve.
Then I applied poultices with strong drawing power and extracted a bone from her, but after some days passed, I extracted another one. I was greatly amazed, for there are no bones in the uterus.
And then it occurred to me that these were the bones of the dead fetus.
Therefore I healed the illness, extracted many bones from her, and the woman recovered and remained in good health for a long time, until she gave birth to a child.
I do not find this strange, for in this there is skill and assistance to aid what the skilled physician administers with his hand for treatment.
Of the shapes of the instruments that are necessary for extracting the fetus.
Form of scissors with which the mother is opened:
This is the form of a forceps in which the blades are hinged together at one end, with two small scissors at the other ends. However, this scissor should be more slender and narrow, made either of iron, horn or wood from a young oak tree.
And let the width of each blade be two fingers wide at its outer edge and one finger wide on both sides, with a length of one and a half palms; in the middle of the two blades there are two holes for fitting together the metal blade which is already securely fastened, each with a width of two fingers or slightly more, and a length equal to one and a half palms.
"And these two additional things are inserted into the mouth of the mother so that it can be opened with those when you turn both prescribed powers."
"Another form similar to this one, but even more subtle and lighter:"
"It should be made of ebony wood or boxwood according to the likeness of forceps." However, at the end of each of these two additional things there are thus times two, and the length of those additions is one span, and their width is two fingers.
"And when you want to open the womb with those, then make the woman lie on her back with her feet hanging down, opening what is between her thighs." "And then open your hand with the instrument thus, as you do with pincers grasping according to the amount that you wish of the opening of the mouth of the womb, until it makes what you want."
"The form of virtue which they called it in ancient times:"
"The form with which the fetus is pushed out:"
"The form with which the large head is contained"
"And it is similar to forceps with teeth at the end thus, sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form, sometimes with teeth like those of a saw with which it cuts and contains." "The form for containing little:"
"The form of a hook having a spine:"
"The form of a hook having two spines:"
"The form of a spatula having two extremities with which the head is cut off:"
"The form of two lateral spatulas:"
"All those instruments must be exercised, and when they are multiplied the more easily is their operation performed, and the better is the art of the craftsman through their quantity."
"And do not work with those instruments, whichever they may be, for the necessity of them is inexcusable."
"On the extraction of the afterbirth:"
"When the afterbirth is retained at childbirth, you should order the midwife to hold her breath, and then make her sneeze with some condition, and stretch your hand over her mouth and nose, and if it comes out thereby, so much the better."
"And if not, then you take some water and make a hole in its covering, and pause on that herb which has been burned for the mouth of the mother, thus with calamint and rue and aneth and camomile and dried scammony and arabic seed and cassia lignum and golden seal." "All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the bowl, and that is placed on the fire."
"And at the same time place a cane tube into the mouth of the mother, and hold it so that the steam comes to the concave part of the mother."
"And at the same time make her sneeze as we have said, and the afterbirth will be expelled with speed."
"But if it still remains after this treatment and is not expelled, then you order the midwife to immerse her left hand in olive oil or in white wax, and then insert that into the vagina and try with that to draw out the afterbirth; and when that has been found, then take it and extract it little by little, but if it adheres to the perineum of the mother, then insert your hand as we have recommended, and when you have found the afterbirth, draw it out little by little directly, so that the mother does not suffer from violent traction." "It is necessary that they be changed on the right and left sides with ease."
"And if the mouth of the mother is obstructed, we have already recommended treatment by sneezing and by medication with water containing herbs."
"But if it is not expelled despite all the causes we have recommended, then be careful not to tire yourself out in repeated attempts at abstraction, but what does come out of her should be placed on the thing of the woman, and then crystallize that with ointment and tetrafarmacon; for that will cause it to soften and dissolve and be expelled."
"But when it softens, bad odor arises to the head and stomach, and that leads to illness for the midwife; and then fumigations and suitable remedies should be administered."
"But some of the Ancients used fumigation with nitre and dried figs."
"Form of an instrument with which a woman is fumigated during the retention of menstruation and afterbirth:"
It should be made from vein or sinew.
"The narrow end of the funnel should be placed in the vessel and the wide end over the fire; beneath this arrangement place a smoky fumigation over the embers."
"And hold it until that fumigation is consumed, then repeat with another."
"Treatment of unperforated anal disease in a child."
"The anus and buttocks of these children are not perforated, being closed up narrow and tight." "Therefore, have the midwife carefully perforate that opening with her finger; if not possible, use an acuminated probe to pierce it, taking care not to touch the intestines."
"And then place a poultice made of wool soaked in wine and oil; keep applying this ointment until it is healed."
"But if you fear that it might become obstructed, then place a small tube there for several days and remove it when the child wants to defecate."
"And if blockage of the anus occurs due to a scab or abscess, then that scab should be cut and removed, and then treated with what we have said about cure and plaster."
"Treatment of fistulas that deviate from there."
Fistulas that occur at the exit of the anus are usually small and thick, often appearing near the outside of the buttocks or in the space between them.
And it is a fistula or warts.
And when that nodule becomes old and breaks open due to dampness, it produces white moisture or thin pus, and sometimes these fistulas have some penetrating points.
And those penetrating points are known by what comes out of them through the exit and from the windy state; sometimes they cause pain upon evacuation, and often it is bloody matter that comes out.
And sometimes from those fistulas in the space penetrating points enter into the bladder and into the flesh of the penis; and from those penetrating points they can also enter into the junction of the thighs and into the groin.
And it is known that a penetrating fistula enters into the anus when you insert your finger into the anus and gently probe with a thin probe of iron or lead to see if there is a hole.
But if there is no opening, then use a thin probe of lead or horsehair until you feel the probe or the hair on your finger inside the anus.
And if you do not feel anything with that probe or find any cause of evacuation such as blood or windiness, then you know that it is not penetrating, and thus you should apply treatment.
And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the flesh of the penis, then the meaning of that is that there will be urinary incontinence from that place and prohibition of sexual intercourse until the location has been consolidated in medicine.
But if it is penetrating into the junction of the thighs or into the bone and surrounding tissues with pain in the area, then the sign is that the probe has entered here if there is not an opening into the bone, and pain at the point of departure; and that from that place there will always be pus; and that medicine and ointments are ineffective and it does not heal.
And in all those penetrating fistulas there is no cure at all, and the cure for those is the struggle and ignorance of foolish doctors about which we are firm.
But if it is not penetrating and not ancient, then healing with iron is expected according to what I will recommend to you, and that which I have already said is true.
And the disease appears between your buttocks, mostly on the left side and lifts up the folds of skin there, the thighs being inclined towards the belly, and gently introduce a probe of lead or iron if there is an opening in the fistula, so that you may know where the probe goes.
And if the pain is around the anus, then it is necessary for you to insert your finger into the anus.
And if you feel the probe already entering through its own opening when inserted, other than what you feel between your finger and that fissure or flesh, then you know for certain that it is penetrating; and therefore do not attempt to treat it, because healing is not possible there, as we have said.
But however some people say that it can heal in certain cases.
And the treatment by which healing is hoped for in this case is that you ignite a cautery subtly according to the width of the fistula, as is described above, and introduce that burning iron into the fistula until it reaches around the anus; and repeat that twice or three times until you know that all those flesh-like tissues attached by the fistula are burned.
And then dress it with gauze wrapped in a bandage until all those tissues are healed, and then treat it with medicines that generate and consolidate flesh, and if it heals, good; but if not, then it will not heal at any time by any other treatment.
And if the probe enters but does not penetrate into the anus which is in the buttock, and between that and the probe which is covered with flesh or skin, and the fistula goes along the surface of the hip bone, then cut through the hip bone at the beginning of the fistula, insert the probe there to see where the section reaches, and by means of the probe it will be freed and cleared.
And then clean those tissues attached to the fistula which resemble a feather quill, and do not leave any residue of them.
But if blood flows frequently between you and your operation while cutting those tissues, then milk it and remove the pus with a light instrument cauterized with fire or with an acute medicine, because cautery with fire is good for burning twice and adjusting those attached tissues, and for removing blood and drying out moisture.
And then dress it with gauze wrapped in a bandage or twisted catgut until the wound closes up and then treat the inflammation with hard flesh-generating and consolidating ointments.
And these are medicines that have astringent and drying properties; when they are applied, the wound is restored and it will not need to be repeated.
But if the fistula has already opened up into the perineum and is elongated along the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and explore with it.
And therefore if you cannot find the probe and between you and it there is skin or flesh covering it, preventing penetration, then do not operate on it, but follow another route with caution and hope.
And therefore administer one of these three methods: "Sometimes the fistula is finished in this manner: when you insert the probe into the fistula and it enters on the side of the buttock near the surface of the body and on the edge of the anus, then take a probe with a perforated end, like a needle for preparing hearts."
"And insert the probe into that field, enveloping it with five fields or around them; and then insert a probe with thread into the fistula until you reach its concavity."
"But if it enters near the margin of the anus inside, then you remove the thread from that track in such a way that you insert your little finger into the anus; and pull out the end of the thread and adjust both extremities evenly, and tie each one separately, leaving this for one or two days. And when you can see that the flesh is incised, carefully cut that thread between those two fleshy parts which are between the two extremities of the thread."
"And then cure the wound until it is consolidated and healed."
"But if the opening of the fistula does not penetrate, then make it penetrate in any way you are prepared to do so, but do not press too much on the front because otherwise you will incise the skin. And then leave it alone until it is healed."
"The shape of the spatula used to open a fistula: its curvature is very acute, and the other end is not sharp, so that you do not incise anything unnecessary, as often happens."
"Regarding the suturing of hemorrhoids in which blood runs from the incision of them."
Hemorrhoids occur in two manners: either they are between the anus resembling blackheads, or they appear like red grapes. And those are small and large, and blood flows constantly from them and they are one, many, or outside the anus, and at its extremities.
However, those that are outside the anus are due to a lack of humidity in the intestines, from which citrine water or a little blood continues to flow continuously, and they are according to the color of the body.
And the treatment for those that are inside the anus is to order the patient to squat and expel while the anus opens and the hemorrhoids appear. Then you take hold with forceps or your fingernail, and press gently to incise their roots.
But if the forceps do not hold onto them due to the humidity and softness of those parts, then grasp them with rough cloth or cotton or a wool thread, and extract them with your fingers and gently incise them and sprinkle some powdered myrrh on the incision so that they adhere there instead of cauterization; or cauterize them according to what is mentioned in the chapter on cauterization. And then treat those with another cure until they are healed.
And if the anus does not obey to evacuation, then have the patient kneel on a cushion with a small bite in it, and wash them with the water that is in the anus so that they may evacuate easily when the patient expels.
But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then their cause is slight, and it is that you grasp them with your fingernail or with forceps, incise them gently, and treat them with water as mentioned earlier until they are healed.
And those who have had an incision should administer sutures in this manner: take linen thread and insert it into a needle, and then grasp the hemorrhoids on both sides and insert the needle through the root of the other side, and wrap both ends of the thread around the part below the needle horizontally; then tie the hemorrhoid tightly with the thread and knot the thread and remove the needle.
Do this to all of them, and leave one alone without tying it, so that the superfluous blood may flow out from that one.
And then apply over the anus a piece of cloth soaked in rose oil or wax, and place it on the perineum and instruct the patient to remain at rest. And then leave that one open; and when it is healed, treat it with ointment or with another cure until it is completely healed.
"And since those old remedies prove ineffective in this case, now you should remove them with the point of a spatula or your nail, ensuring they are moistened and that the old pus on top is scraped off, which was hindering consolidation. Then cure those areas that have already consolidated."
"Now you should remove them with great care, so as not to hurt the first time and cause them to become excoriated; then cure those areas that are healed."
"Know that ophthalmia is key and not if it's not round like the head of a nail, and it occurs throughout the body but more so in parts near the feet and hands. There you should examine for those pains."
"And then it is necessary that this be incised around the nailhead and held with forceps or tweezers, and then removed from its root. Then cure that."
"And if you wish, cauterize the second one which is mentioned in this chapter."
"But a verruca is a small, rough, fustulated and round elevation on the surface of the body, many of which appear in most children."
"And its treatment is to stretch it out and incise it, or scrape it off with a file or a sharp-pointed knife." "And if you wish, cauterize it with fire or with an acute medicine, as we have said before."
"But a wart is a small, smooth or fustulated elevation on the surface of the body, often found on the face, and when it's rubbed it feels like an ant bite. It can occur anywhere on the body."
"And its treatment is to take a feather quill of an owl or a vulture, and it should be strong. Place it on the wart so that it encompasses the circle of the quill's opening. Then turn your hand with the quill so that you incise around the perimeter of the wart, pressing it against the skin. And then remove thewart from its root."
"And if you wish, do this with a heated iron or steel probe following this method:"
"The point of the probe above should be sharp, blunt (not perforated), wrapped in cotton so that when it is placed on the wart, it does not burn and can be rotated."
"And if you wish, cauterize thewart according to what has been mentioned earlier in the chapter of cautery regarding the cauterization of warts."
"Regarding the forms of instruments used for giving cautery."
"Sometimes cautery is done with silver or lead or melted iron or brass. And sometimes it's done with instruments that are small and large according to those used by others, for the one used in treating children should be small; and those whose handles are loops or dolorous ones, their cauteries should be small."
"The method of performing cautery using a large iron and rarely:"
"The end of the probe above, onto which the bag is tied, should be wide in this manner, and it should be at the same distance where the bag is tied as this."
"And the extremity below, which is inserted into the bag, should be blunt (not open), somewhat pointed at subtlety; and on one side of it there are two holes, and on the other side one hole. And the width of the holes should correspond to the thickness of the rays, with larger ones being smaller."
"And the bag in which vesicatory medicines or sheep's wool are placed should be about a palm long."
"And it should be perforated with many holes around it, so that the space between the holes is about the thickness of a finger."
"And then insert into those holes a strong thread of raw flax, which should be about ten threads thick, or wind it around them. And adjust the bag with that. Then place the bag on the cautery device between two points with strong constriction. And then cauterize with that through each hole: But the quality of cauterizing with that is to warm the bag of medicine according to the quantity of the patient's tolerance, and be careful not to make it too hot nor too cold."
"And then the patient should lie on their back, raise their hips up and place underneath them either a cloth or a blanket. And then anoint the end of the cautery with oil or egg white or fenugreek mucilage or something similar. Then insert it into the rectum gently. Then the attendant takes the bag and presses it with two hands and squeezes vigorously until all of the contents of the cautery have been evacuated from the bowel. Then remove the cautery, and the patient should raise their hips to the wall."
"And if the medicine causes him to have an emission, let him hold it as long as possible. And if he sleeps with it for the whole night, it will be more effective in its action."
"But if you cauterize him for conditions of diarrhea and emission of feces from the anus, then repeat the cautery until he is healed."
"And if there are hemorrhoids or painful fissures in the anus, then the cautery should be very subtle and pointed, like those used for children."
"Regarding the treatment of plagued wounds."
"I have already said in the division on the treatment of plague wounds what was appropriate for this book, and I will now explain the treatment of those with medicine according to their complexity."
"So I say that plague boils are differentiated according to how they occur and the location on which the boil has appeared."
"And the causes for which many times plague boils occur are like this: a cut from a stone, or an incision with scissors or knife, or a blow with a lance or club or arrow, or similar causes."
"But plague boils that occur in certain parts of the body are like this: one that appears on the head, neck, chest, belly, thigh, and similar ones on the limbs."
"And I am recounting the treatment of certain plague boils because this reasoning and rule applies to other plague boils as well."
"And I will begin with simple head plague boils, for the memory of compound ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter."
"So I say that when a simple head boil occurs and it is not a fracture, then consider: if it is from a cut by a stone or something similar, and the chain has broken only on one side and it is a large boil, and you fear that an abscess may form in that patient, then quickly perform phlebotomy on the cephalic vein, and do not delay doing so. And extract blood according to the quantity of its strength if there is no other cause prohibiting phlebotomy, especially if the blood that has issued from the boil is little."
"And let the phlebotomy be done on the opposite side of the boil. And keep the patient from exertion and wine and heavy foods."
"But if you prohibit any cause from being performed because of its minuteness, then let him be diminished in food and not approach meat or wine."
"And if an abscess forms on the boil, cut it open and put in warm rose oil or wine in which something has been steeped."
"But if you are sure that an abscess will form, then pause over the boil, if it is fresh with its own blood and the air has not changed the powder that I will recommend later."
"When that air has changed its place, then place it over the wounded area until it is healed."
"If the wound is large or it has gaps and edges that are not aligned due to swelling, then align those edges with stitches according to my recommendations on wound closure."
"But if the wound is already cleaned of bone and pus, with only a slight swelling but no retention of fluid, then incise it and carefully clean the wound with medicines, restore the flesh appropriately in place of any deficiency, and instruct the patient to be fed on gruel made from wheat flour, broth, and similar foods until they are recovered."
"And if you find putrefaction in the flesh that does not adhere to the bone, then incise all of that rotting flesh and remove it, and cleanse it properly."
"But if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which blood flow can occur and it cannot be stopped by medication, then inquire about the artery. And if you find that it has not been incised, then incise it with a scalpel or ligate it; and if what has been said does not suffice, then cauterize until the bleeding is stopped."
"And if these wounds are simple and small, their cause is light. Therefore, powder them with this powder, so that they may be consolidated before the air alters them."
"And the manner of making this powder is as follows: take one part oil of sesame, two parts dragon's blood resin ground, and three parts of un-extinguished camphor. Grind everything together thoroughly and sift it, and use it to fill the wound and bind it with a good bandage so that it adheres to it, and let it coagulate with its own blood."
"And bind that wound above with powders and leave it alone. Do not remove the bandage while it is still healing, because otherwise the medicine will lose its efficacy before the wound is healed."
"And sometimes you may use cautery alone when you do not have sesame oil and dragon's blood resin present."
"And this same operation is also performed on large wounds when it is necessary to put pressure on them and bind them tightly, especially fresh wounds with their blood, which the air has not yet altered."
"And if the air has altered them, especially during the summer time, then it is not appropriate to use this powder. But in such cases, treat those wounds with what has been said above, that is, apply some of these ointments or apply flour paste with water and honey until they gain strength; and thus cure those wounds until they are healed."
"But if there is a fracture in the bone with the wound, especially if it is small, then treat that with gesture alone."
"And I will discuss the treatment of fractures of the head in what follows."
"Regarding wounds to the neck."
"But if a wound occurs on the neck, there is no difference in treatment between that and a simple wound on the head."
"But if the nerve or artery of the neck is cut, then if it is a nerve, avoid treating it with anything that causes violent styptic action, such as vinegar and quicklime which are harmful to nerves and cause them to contract." "And do not apply any caustic substance on the wound, because the substance of nerves is fiery and their continuity is with the brain, which is the chief part of all members."
"And if it is treated with light medicines, such as washing it with rose water or infusing it in rose or white oil, or with thyme when washed with rose water and other minor drugs according to this manner, then apply a moist ointment."
"But if the wound is large, then stitch it up or bind its lips and then cure it with powders until it is healed."
"But if the wound has depth or occurs in a hollow or sunken part of the body, then make a perforation there to relieve the pressure."
"But if an artery is cut in the wound and bleeding occurs, then separate it or tie it off with a ligature or cauterize it if necessary."
"But if the spinal cord of the neck is injured or completely severed and the veins of the neck are saved, then adjust the lips of the wound with stitches over the windpipe of the neck and do not touch it; then align that and reduce it to its natural shape, then strengthen it with proper traction, and leave it alone for a few days. Then cure it with ointments which have styptic and stimulating properties until it is healed."
"But if the wound reaches down to the bone, then probe it with something and remove any bone fragments that you can; leave what cannot be removed alone until the wound granulates and separates from it, so that its tension is relieved."
"And if the wound is fresh, then sprinkle some of this powder on it which I have recommended to you." "But if there is a fistula in the wound, then cure that with what will be mentioned later on in its proper chapter."
"If it is a wound from a lance or knife thrust and the depth of it varies, then consider whether there is ventilation in the wound when the patient exhales. If so, then know that the wound is mortal."
"And if it is not deep and the wound is fresh with its own blood, then pause there during the first hour with this powder. Do not strengthen it so that the blood does not remain in its depth and return to the heart and worsen the condition of the patient. Rather, apply an attractive ointment twice a day."
"And if the ointment is not available, then plug the wound opening with wool so that it does not suck up anything from its surroundings. Make sure that the patient sleeps on the wound side so that what has gathered there flows out."
"But if three days have passed since the wound was inflicted and no spasms or cardiac palpitations or respiratory difficulties occur in the patient and other dispositions are good, then know that the wound is safe. Then cure it with lotions and other treatments until it heals."
"But if the wound does not heal despite all efforts and time has passed without improvement, then know that a fistula has formed. Then cure it according to its chapter."
"And if the wound is from a slash or cut with a sword or knife and is simple on the surface of the flesh or back, then cure it with something preceded by stitching if it is large, or with powder if it is small."
"But if the wound has reached down to the bone and some pieces of it have already been cut off, then turn the wound and try to extract those pieces if they are separate." "But if they are not separate, then leave them alone until the wound granulates and the extraction of them is relieved."
"And regarding other accidental wounds in other members, their treatment follows what has been said."
"Regarding abdominal wounds"
"The condition that occurs in the abdomen is either too great or too little, or moderate."
"It is difficult to make a cut in another manner, and so the reduction of them is more difficult if you do not quickly restore their intrusion to its proper place, because it has already been broken and swollen due to its contents."
"And therefore the best incision is midline, because in that one it is not difficult to reduce the intestine, as it is also difficult in both species mentioned above."
"And know that there are four ways to suture the abdomen, but two sutures are common and can be used for other wounds of the body."
"And the other two sutures are specific to other wounds, but they are more suited to the suture of the abdomen."
"I will recount each one with its explanation and description."
"Therefore it is said that when the wound is small and some cause of the intestine comes out through it, and it is difficult to reduce it, then there are two methods: either because of the smallness of the incision, as we have said, or when the intestine has come inflamed due to the cold air."
"And therefore when that is the case, then you should cauterize it in such a way that you immerse a sponge or wet cloth in hot water alone, or in water with squinanth, cyperus, spic and embroques, until the inflammation has been resolved."
"And sometimes it is useful to do this in wounds where there is hemorrhoids, and it is better to use hot water alone for the resolution of inflammation."
"And therefore when you see that the inflammation has been resolved, then you should moisten the intestine with water in which altaea and mallow have been cooked, because by doing this the pain is alleviated with little cause."
"But if the pain has not been relieved by this treatment, then cut the incision a little with an instrument with which you can remove hemorrhoids."
"And the first treatment is better when it is appropriate and not necessary to cut, and there is no need for unnecessary cutting."
"Concerning the instrument, describe its form:"
"The one side of it is cut into a sharp edge, and the other side not sharp, and its end is thin but not too thin like a spatula, rather it should be somewhat blunt."
"And therefore when the wound has widened and the intestine has come out, then its reduction should be according to its natural form, in its proper place if that is possible, because that is better."
"But when the incision is wide and is in the lower part of the abdomen, then you should make the patient lie on their back, and place their feet higher than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then place the head of the bed down and the feet higher than the sides."
"And similarly if the incision is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then always place your intention and attention on this so that the side where the wound is should be higher than the other."
"And thus you should administer this in large wounds and medium-sized wounds."
"In cases of smallpox, place what is prepared at hand and make sure your assistant stands between your hands. They should hold the entire disruption with one hand and adjust the lips of it. Then uncover that which might cause some other suture."
"This is the common method of suturing: First take a needle, or count needles according to the size of the wound. Then leave it at the end of the disruption on your little finger, and pull the thread through one end, making sure not to knot the two ends of the thread together with a ciphac that is left on both sides of the wound. Once you have pierced it from one side, bring the two ends of the thread together and tie them in four knots."
"And pull with doubled thread around the needle, tying it sometimes at two places together. Then bring both lips and the wound together neatly by suturing. Leave the thickness of the finger and place another needle there. Tie this one with thread as you did with the first needle. Continue doing this until you have completely closed the wound."
"And needles should be moderate in thickness and fineness. For fine needles scarcely pierce the flesh, while thick ones are difficult to pass through the thread; therefore they should be of moderate fineness and thickness."
"And it is not necessary for the needle to be inserted at both ends of the wound very close together. For this reason the flesh should not be pierced lightly and the wound should heal before consolidation."
"And sutures should not be prolonged so that the wound is not hindered from healing."
"And cut off the ends of the needles so that they do not cause injury while sleeping. Then sprinkle powdered resin over the sutures, pressing it on with both hands, especially at the ends of the needles. Leave them there until you know that the wound has healed."
"And this kind of suturing with needles is more suitable for small wounds, as they can be closed with one needle or two or three."
"But the second type of suturing is common: it consists in sewing together all four ends, those of the thread and both ends of the needle, at once with a needle on which there is doubled thread of moderate fineness."
"And when the needle has pierced all four ends, withdraw it from that same opening where you began. Thus the thread will draw together both sides of the wound and the stitching will be like sewing cloth, with the edges joined together."
"And pause between each stitch the thickness of a little finger."
"And this is how it is done by skilled people."
"And with this stitching, I closed a wound which had been accidentally inflicted on a man in his abdomen by a knife, the disruption of which was more than a palm's breadth. The wound had extended from two palms around the mid-gut and had disrupted the middle of the intestine. After twenty-four hours, I reduced that part where the intestine had been exposed through the wound."
"And the wound was healed in about fifteen days or so. The man recovered and was restored to his former condition."
"And other physicians had judged that he would not recover. But it was a miracle that he did, for I did not treat him with any ointment or medicine, but only applied clean bandages twice a day and washed the wound gently with warm water mixed with honey until it healed."
"But I will describe two other kinds of stitching according to the account given by Avicenna."
"The first kind is that you begin with sewing the thread and insert the needle from without inwards."
"Then with the needle passing through the thread and along the length of the body, leave the end of the needle in that side where you first inserted it. Then pass the needle from within outwards on the other side."
"And then when you have made the needle penetrate once more on that same side from without inwards, leave the end of the needle on this side and make the needle penetrate again on the other side from within outwards."
"And make your penetration with that needle through which you made the previous penetration, and bring it out on the same side as before."
"And start again on the same side and bring out the needle with its end which is on the other side, withdraw the thread that has been passed through, and reduce it back into the thread and tie together the ends of the needle on both sides."
"And do this once or twice more until you have closed all that is outside according to the example given."
"The purpose of this method of stitching is to close the skin wound in such a way that it closes the skin. The needle should be passed through once from the end of the thread and left once more before completing it."
"But the second kind of stitching, which Galen describes in detail and recommends for use internally, is as follows: sew along the length of the wound, joining together each part with its opposite part according to nature. Then apply the end of the thread to one end of the wound and the point of the needle to the other end, and do this accordingly."
"First place the needle on the point at one end of the wound and pass it through from without inwards. Leave both ends of the thread outside. Then turn the needle around and pass it back again from without inwards, bringing both ends inside."
"And then reverse the process, passing each one through from within outwards on both ends of the needle, but on the opposite side."
"And this kind of stitching is better than common stitching because it leaves fewer marks afterwards."
"This is the speech of Galen"
"And some say that stitching the abdomen is best done with two needles, each threaded with a silk thread. Begin by inserting one needle and sewing from one side to the other according to the method used for sewing heart wounds."
"And know that when there is a disruption in the middle of the abdomen, stitching it is more difficult than stitching other parts of the abdomen."
"But judgment regarding the treatment of wounds applies to all kinds of wounds."
"This is because when you close a fresh wound with its own blood before the air can corrupt it, reduce the gut and sew it up properly, then apply that healing powder."
"If the air has already corrupted the wound, then apply some healing ointments that are readily available to make the threads hard and strong, and bind them together. Then treat the wound as you would any other wound until it heals."
"But if you are not present with medicines, then apply some clean cloth immediately, because it begins to ooze blood and pus, and change it two or three times a day as I have taught you until it heals. For in many cases simple wounds do not require other treatment."
If you fear that the plague may communicate injury to the main members, then it is necessary that you submerge lion's wool in warm oil of good quality or in rose oil, and place that on the course between the angles, leaving them there.
And if there is pain or putrefaction in their bowels, since often this occurs, then you should cover that with vinegar and black syrup of hellebore, especially if the putrefaction has reached the bowel and it is necessary to penetrate within its curvature.
And know that that which is of the large bowel is of lighter healing than that which is in the subtle bowels.
And it is difficult to heal the bowel which is called "gegunu," since plague that falls into it causes no healing at all; and this is because of the great multitude of veins that are in it and the magnitude of them that are there, and their subtlety of body, and their proximity to the nature of nerves.
But if what proceeds from the plague is the tissue, and you obtain that fresh, then reduce it according to your discretion, together with which you also reduce the bowels equally.
But if it has passed into the bowel and is now black or green, then you should burn that with pitch on the spot that is darkened by it, so that fluxes of blood may come forth, since in the tissue are veins and arteries.
And furthermore incise that other membrane which is over there and suspend the ends of the pitch from its edges where the plague has flowed forth, so that you may relieve its attraction by removing the coating of the tissue and emission of the branch of the plague.
Reminder of the plague when it occurs in the bowel.
When disruption occurs in the bowel and it is small, then it is possible that it may be restored in certain individuals, as I have seen this happen to a man who had been struck with a lance in his abdomen on the right side of the stomach, and the plague was ancient and had made a fistula, but nevertheless he was cured and well.
Therefore I followed the cure of it even though it was not confirmed in its healing, but ceased investigating that bowel which had been healed and the spot is consolidated.
And I also put that you saw the spot consolidated, and was careful about the illness that might occur from that accidental injury in his belly; and he did not succumb to any harm because of this accident but rather remained in his usual good health eating and drinking, and even entered into a bath and exercised his body.
And some experienced persons have said that when a small plague occurs in the bowel, then it is necessary to tie it up in this manner: and thus you should take frogs with large heads; and furthermore adjust the two lips of the plague and place one of those which has its mouth open over the two lips of the plague; therefore when it seizes upon them and stretches its mouth, cut off its head because it adheres and is not dissolved.
And furthermore place another frog nearby the first one, and do not cease doing this with frogs one after another according to the quantity of all the plague.
And furthermore reduce that and close up the plague; and those attached heads will remain in the bowel until the bowel is healed, and there will be no harm from any injury.
And it is also possible that the bowel may be tied up with fine thread made from the gut of an attached beast, because it is more like a needle; and thus you should take the end of these threads of gut, and have it well cleaned, and furthermore tie the end of it with a thread of itself, wrapped around, and furthermore insert that thread into needles and sew it up with that bowel, and reduce it in the disruption.
And this manner of suturing with frogs is only a matter of trust and hope.
But if the plague is large and extensive, especially if it is in one of the small bowels, because then it is only a matter of subtlety, and not a complete healing of it.
Of the treatment of fistulas and fistulous openings.
Know that all plague and abscess when it opens and becomes ancient, and is made into an ulcer, and is not consolidated and continually gives forth a bad smell but is not cut off, then, whatever member it may be in, generally it is called a fistula, which we call that fistulous opening.
And in truth a fistula is a hard, thickened, white scar without pain and with a cavity like the cavity of an egg-shell; and for this reason that ulcer is called "penis," that is, egg.
And there are some people with a moist ulcer which gives forth a bad smell; and if the moisture is cut off in some hours it is cured. "This humidity is sometimes excessive, scanty, thick, and subtle."
"I have now explained all those causes and their signs, along with the treatments for them in the relevant sections."
"And furthermore, I want to inform you about the treatment of fistulas, which is usually performed surgically using my method."
"And you should know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body: some originate from large veins and arteries, nerves, bladder, intestines, or from between the ribs, spine, or joints composed by articulation like those of the hand and foot; others are situated near the main member and similar structures."
"And therefore, those fistulas that are difficult to heal according to this method receive little care and attention, often being neglected due to ignorance."
"And if there is any fistula whose depth does not extend to those places I mentioned earlier, and you hope for healing from it, then take a probe or needle, and if the fistula appears straight, try to explore its course with that."
"But if the fistula is tortuous, then investigate it using a lead probe with thin walls, because due to its own weight, lead is straightened and can navigate around curves."
"And if the fistula has many branches or openings, it will not be possible for you to mark them with a probe."
"Therefore, cauterize each opening separately, because the liquid used for irrigation will flow into the other openings and branches."
"And carefully examine whether here you have bone or nerve present, and whether the fistula is deep-seated or superficial, or if it has many openings and lies under all of that with your utmost strength and thorough examination, using compression with your hand over the area to locate the source of pain, and similar signs and accidental causes of an abscess."
"And after you have considered all of these causes carefully and truly, then proceed to treatment with confidence: consider whether the fistula is apparent near the surface or in a sound location, distant from joints, nerves, arteries, veins, or any other locations mentioned earlier."
"Then dry out the fistula according to what was said earlier about its irrigation, and remove whatever is present in that filtration that consists of putrid flesh, and anything that has been born from the opening of the flesh or similar, until it is healed."
"But if the fistula is deep and goes straight downwards, then it is necessary to insert probes into it as far as you can reach, carefully removing all putrid flesh from inside; then apply hot compresses wrapped in sharp medicines, inserting them into the depth of the fistula that you have reached with an iron probe."
"And do this several times, until the sharp medicine has destroyed all of the putrid matter within the depth of the fistula."
"Then restore it using ointments that promote the growth of healthy flesh, until it is healed."
"But if it is not healed by this method, then cauterize it according to what has been recommended."
"But if the cause of the fistula is bone and you are certain of this, then examine it and dry it out according to what has been recommended, provided that there are no veins, nerves or main vessels involved as mentioned earlier."
"But if the bone is exposed and there is no corruption or blackness present, then scrape away the surrounding flesh until all of the corruption has been removed; then cure it using a suitable remedy until it is healed."
"And if it does not heal and continues to discharge as before, then you should know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; therefore, uncover it again carefully and investigate its cause, scrape away any remaining corrupted matter with your last effort, and then restore it."
"And therefore, if it is healed, that's good. But if not, then you should know that the corruption lies deep within the body and has not been reached; in such cases, there is nothing else to do but leave it alone."
"And if the bone is small and decayed, or if it can be removed, then remove it with small forceps that are suitable for this purpose."
"If there are many bones involved, then carefully remove all of them using your full strength and leave none behind."
"But if there are any difficulties due to the humidity involved and there is no fear or mistake in its incision, then incise the ligaments or flesh that may be present, and free up the bones."
"But if you are not prepared to remove the bones yourself at that hour, then apply a dressing that will protect the wound and leave it there until those bones of flesh and ligaments have grown together; keep the dressing moistened and press the edges of the wound that you have incised during your operation so that they cohere."
"Then if you are afraid, apply a poultice consisting of linseed oil or Egyptian ointment or one of the green ointments, for when these ligaments and bones separate due to the attraction of each other, relief is brought about."
"But if it is a large bone such as the thighbone or shinbone or similar ones, and only the surface of it is decayed, then scrape away that decay only from behind until all of the blackness and corruption has been removed, and then apply a dressing."
"But if a large part of the bone is decayed and the corruption has already reached its marrow, then it is necessary to close up that area and incise into the location where the corruption has spread; then treat it until it is consolidated."
"And I recommend to you that when performing an operation on the shinbone of a man, you have assistants and helpers nearby to aid in your procedure."
"A young man of about 30 years of age suffered pain in his shinbone, and it was found that the swelling on the inside of his leg had spread to the bone itself, forming an abscess with a large amount of pus. This was not due to any external cause."
"And so much time passed with him due to the error of his doctors in not opening up the abscess earlier, that by the time it was finally done there were many materials present and its cure was delayed until the thighbone became fistulous, with many orifices all discharging pus and humidity from the body."
"And thus he was treated by many doctors for about two years, but none of them knew more than the art until I was called."
"Then examine the bedding of the patient and the matter that flows from them, those horrible things due to excessive corpulence; already the body of this man was entirely stiffened and his complexion was yellowish."
"I then inserted my hand into one of those openings and reached the bone."
"And further, you examined all the openings and found that they all originated from all parts of the bedding."
"And then you took me and inserted me into one of those openings where I discovered a fracture in the bone, and I encountered that rotting flesh which was earthy and rotted and discolored; already a part of the bedding through which it had penetrated to the middle was corrupted."
"Then you closed that which I had discovered and prepared from the bone discovered."
"And you showed me that it was not in the bone but rather that corruption which I had cut away and closed, and you were already healed."
"Then you paused the treatment of the plague with consolidative medicine for a long time, and it was not consolidated."
"And then you opened again over the bone according to your first discovery, and you found continuous corruption with the bone."
"And I closed that which appeared to me from that corruption, and then you were pierced fairly deeply in the cure and restoration of it, but it was not restored."
"And then you discovered it again and did not cease to gradually incise the bone little by little particularly and deeply in order to restore it, but it was not restored until you incised around about a palm's width of it, and that extracted with its marrow, and then you restored it with medicines, and it was lightly consolidated and healed."
"And it is not necessary to repeat the operation and section of it except for the disposition of its fleshiness and for its scarcity of tolerance and fear of death, because it has idleness in all hours due to superfluous evacuation and fainting."
"And thus it is healed in its entirety, and nothing remains but hard bone; and the disposition of it in its body is good and returns its virtue to it; and it has been converted in its dispositions and does not do contrary things in walking nor cause harm in any cause."
"But if it is prominent in the place of the body already broken, then you should cut it in this manner: and that you take linen and bind it around the extremity of that prominent bone, and command someone to extend it while holding it; and pause that first bandage which is thickest; and then lay another one over the flesh which is near the bone, and stretch out the extremity of it so that you can draw the flesh away from its sides, and uncover the flesh above the place where you want to cut in order that the saw does not touch the flesh."
"And pause a piece of wood or board near the bone decently, for when you do this it is not forbidden that the saw does not cut corrupt flesh."
"And the sawing should be done on the corrupt place little by little, because if it is in the concavity of the bone corruption and does not appear in its appearance to the touch, it will force you to saw it again."
"And if the bone is corrupt and not prominent, then it is one continuous piece with another, and the corruption is in the middle of it or in a piece of it; then uncover the flesh from all parts altogether; and pause wood near it, and saw that first piece where the corruption is until the sawing reaches the other piece."
"And let the sawing be according to the place of the corruption a little, as we have said."
"And if the corruption is at the joint, then cut off that corrupt joint and saw the bone where it continues from the other part."
"And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in its proper place but ingenious."
"And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or foot, it is very difficult; but you should inquire into the corruption in whatever manner appears to you, and scrape that off and clean it according to each disposition which is possible for you, and with every device make it rectified to you when it does not harm veins or nerves."
"And know which are the cutting instruments and saws for cutting these bones are many according to the situation of the bones, and their preparation, and their thickness, and their subtlety and greatness and smallness, and their hardness and rarity; therefore you should prepare all kinds of appropriate instruments for each operation."
"And know that this operation signifies to you about the type of instrument which you need; because if you have great knowledge and long experience and understanding of the ways of this art, and experience of diseases' symptoms, then you already know what is suitable for each disease regarding instruments."
"And I will tell you at the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you should prepare with them, simple ones with which you will proceed to your prohibition which you will experience over others." "Form of saw:"
"Form of another saw:"
"Form of large other saw:"
"Form of awl:" "And let the head of this awl be in the form of a starred key head, and its points be in the shape of asterisk points."
"And it is not convenient unless with that are rubbed together the heads of joints when they are corrupt or have a large wide mouth."
"Form of smaller razor:"
"Form of broad razor:"
"Form of another saw properly made: let it be made with its upper part arched and sharp like iron, and its handle made of wood nicely made." "Form of it:"
"Form of razor in which there is a concavity:"
"Form of another subtle razor:"
"Form of another razor with curved extremity:"
"Form of small rasp similar to a probe:"
"Form of another smaller cutter:"
"Form of another cutter; this similar to an awl, and its extremity is like a saw, and it is used in many places in the ratio of bones:"
"Form of awl which is suitable for that which is bored through the bones:"
"And its extremity is triangular and has a sharp point."
"And it is made of Indian iron, and likewise all the causes that we have mentioned of razors and cutters and saws."
"Of cutting off extremities and sawing bones."
"Extremities are removed either by intrinsic cause or extrinsic cause, or because you have medicated that corruption with curation of those medicines and the cure does not occur, or sometimes the corruption goes towards the member which you do not perceive due to no cause; then you should cut off that member where the corruption has occurred, so that the disease escapes through that death or malice which is greater damage to the member."
"And the sign of that to which it happens is that the member becomes black where the corruption has been burned up or becomes black nearby where putrefaction enters into that member which seizes it and takes all the body; therefore you should cut off that."
"And likewise if it is a cause of corruption from some venomous blows such as from the sea scorpion or viper or rat and similar ones."
"And if the corruption or blow is on the extremity of the finger, then you should cut off the finger and not give space for the corruption to go into the hand."
"And similarly if you approach the hand, then incise that of the wrist of the arm, and do not give space to corruption within, lest it take hold in the joint of the arm."
"And if you remove that [the hand], then incise the arm between the elbow at the joint."
"And if corruption passes through and becomes widespread in the cold regions, then that is the death of the patient; administering another cause for this in treatment is a matter of quantity of virtue."
"And similarly concerning the foot when corruption invades the aforementioned skin, then you shall incise it into one of the bones."
"If you take hold of the foot's sole, then you shall cut off the entire foot." If the pain can enter the anus, then you should cut open the skin at the joint of the anus.
And if corruption has already reached the anus, then it is only a matter of dismissal and letting the patient die.
To incise the member or cut it off, you should stretch the tissue at the part where you want to make the incision and place another tissue on top of it; extend one ligature to both sides of the incision site and another ligature above them; and then separate the flesh that lies between the two ligatures with a wide-bladed knife until all the flesh is exposed; after this, it should be incised or cut off.
It should be translated as:
"Should bleeding occur while working, cauterize the area carefully or apply powders to constrain the blood; then return to your treatment until completed."
"And then tie the limb with linen bandages where appropriate, and care for it until healed."
"You should know what happens to a man on his feet. This is the accident that you and I are discussing: it occurred when he fell into the darkness, suffering burns resembling fire combustion."
"And this corruption first happened in his fingers spreading throughout his entire foot."
"And then that man began to apply remedies with greater urgency as the pain and burning increased in his foot, which eventually resulted in gangrene at the junction."
"That corruption persisted for a long time in the fingers of that hand."
"Then it came to me, and that superfluity began to reverberate with what I had applied on the hand for medicinal purposes. It then started to spread throughout the body; however, the superfluity did not reoccur, but instead began to affect another finger on the same hand."
"He ordered me to amputate his hand, but I refused to do so hoping for the reverberation of that superfluity. Instead, I was more afraid of the death resulting from the amputation of his hand, as the power of the disease was too great."
"And after he left me, he returned to his land and it reached me that that man had prepared himself and amputated his entire hand, and he was healed."
"And I have now ended this narrative only so that it may serve as an aid to those who suffer from this disease, and that its meaning may be understood according to which it is signified and according to which it is acted upon."
"On the cure of sinus (boils) and the quality of clysters with medicines."
"When an aposteme occurs on certain fleshy members and the space of the aposteme is prolonged until it forms a collection of pus, and then bursts open and discharges its contents, leaving behind an empty cavity that appears like a vessel, and the cord that is above it resembles a thin thread, and there is no further corruption nor impression on the bone or nerves or ligaments, this is called a sinus (boil), but not fistula."
"But if the space is prolonged until corruption impresses on some member, then it is called a fistula and not a boil."
"And its cure is to excise that entire cord as it revolves, especially when it is thin and resembles a thread, and ensure that it does not adhere to the location due to its corruption."
"But if you hope that the cord will adhere and that corruption has not yet spread further, and there is inflammation in the cord, then you should treat it with clysters."
"And when considering the sinus (boil), if it is large and the arm that it affects emits a foul odor, then you should clyster it with the Egyptian medicine which consists of oil, sour wine, and cinnamon bark cut into equal parts, adjusted in a vessel, and cooked over the fire until the medicine becomes thick like honey."
"And then you take what is necessary from it and dissolve it with water and honey; and you clyster the sinus (boil) with this, and strengthen its opening, leaving the medicine inside for about two hours."
"And then extract it with a lancet; and do this for so many days until the sinus (boil) is cleansed and the corruption removed."
"And sometimes it is clystered with water of ashes when this medicine is not present; and you should take the ash from vine wood, place it on the water, and then boil it and clyster with that until you are satisfied that the sinus (boil) has been opened."
"And if the condition does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine nor the water of ashes, then clyster with water and honey mixed with cinnamon bark crushed fine, and also clyster with wine and honey mixed together, because it is a property of honey to cleanse and wash, and wine causes the sinus (boil) to adhere, especially when there is excess heat and dryness in the wine."
"And when you have done this several times and are satisfied that the sinus (boil) has been removed, then clyster it with water that makes flesh grow in its place."
"And take some diaphoretic unguent and dissolve it with refined oil and cold wine, or clyster it with other medicines and unguents that have the properties which I have already written about in the treatise on unguents."
"And if the opening of the sinus (boil) is narrow and will not allow the clyster nozzle to be inserted, then you should gradually widen it with a small probe, pausing to apply hot water wrapped in Egyptian unguent or Basilicon unguent until it has been widened."
"And similarly, if the opening is wide, then you should draw together its lips with stitches and leave a space for the clyster to pass through without additional openings."
"And if the opening from which corruption runs up to the parts above is elevated, then dry it with pus applied beneath that part where the arm runs in order that the flesh may not be generated there due to the constriction of the sinus."
"And if it is not possible to dry the sinus from beneath with pus as you wish, then prepare the member with such a preparation that corruption runs out of it lightly according to what appears appropriate to you, and ensure that there is no cause retained in the arm."
"And that which is over the opening of the sinus should be removed at all times in order to allow that which has accumulated in the arm to be expelled." "And so that you may know whether what runs out of the arm is much or little, digested or undigested."
"And at the same time consider the location of that sinus, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and if it is an aposteme (abscess)."
"And when your treatment has been prolonged in this manner and you see that the matter which is thrown out onto the opening of the sinus already adheres or has begun to adhere, then remove it on the third day, and when you remove it, change the cloth for another one and renew the ointment."
"But if from the sinus a subtle virus spreads over a long distance, do not despair of its adhesion because the healing of it will take place because some people have late generation of flesh in their wounds, and others have accelerated growth."
"And if from the sinus undigested corruption is issuing over many days, then you will know that the sinus does not adhere; and if adhesion of the sinus is delayed and the cause prolonged, then adjust for drying of medicines. And if the medicines are humid in their substance and virtue, they become dry like a fine ointment when there is an abundance of addition of gypsum."
"And the final treatment is to take some powder of diaphoretic drugs, dissolve it in rose oil, and apply it as a poultice on the affected area."
"And similarly in this action when there is no broth, you take diaphoretic powder and honey which has been mixed together and apply it; or else you take myrrh, aloeswood, and incense, grind all these together and powder them over the honey when it is on the fire, then line that with cloth and apply it to the chest; and apply that honey which has been mixed together onto the cloth and powders it."
"And sometimes it is administered with long pepper and small quantities of celestial lily (and this is the celestial lily) and barley flour and centaurea, and apply those simples either separately or combined, grind them and sieve them and powder them over the honey which has been prepared; then use that."
"And if the chest is prolonged and not healed by this cure, then you should know that the corruption is in the lungs, and then make an investigation into the bones or other hard members or the humors. Then you treat it with a fistular treatment, as has been mentioned above."
"And concerning the cure of panniculus carnosus and horny callosity and trimming of nails and cutting of fingers and amputation."
"Panarici is an aposteme that appears under the nail of the thumb or other fingers, and when it becomes prolonged its cure is more difficult. Either it is an aposteme from cauterization or corrupted, and it pushes out brawn that corrupts the skin around the nail, and sometimes it corrupts all of it. And sometimes it permeates its corruption to the bone so that there is a foul odor, and the tip of the finger becomes gangrenous, and the color becomes dark."
"And therefore, when you have that with what has been said in the division and your cure does not confer, then it is necessary for you to cut away with iron all the superfluity that remains from the nail and apply caustic to the wound nearby, because cauterization is very helpful in this."
"But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the edges of the nail begin to hollow out and then they start to sting and hurt that place, then it is necessary for you to make a thin incision at the angle of the nail that pierces the flesh and push it upwards and cut that flesh easily. Then apply medicines that burn corrosively until all the remainder of the flesh has been removed. And then cure it with ointment until it is healed."
"But if the corruption has already entered into the bone, then it is necessary for you to cut away that bone and extract it because there is never a time when the bone can be healed once it is corrupted."
"And if sometimes the corruption and decay go into the finger, then you should cut it at one of its joints according to what is remembered in its treatment. Then cure it until it is healed."
"But if the nail receives percussion or attrition and there is violent pain in that place, then it is necessary for you to perform flebotomy at the beginning, and then dry out the nail with a sharp spatula making a transverse section above and below, but guard yourself so that the section does not go into the flesh that is near the nail because you will cause great pain there and produce superfluous flesh in that place. Then cure that place with something that alleviates pain."
"But this is a condition that occurs in many men. Sometimes it is fleshy throughout and sometimes it appears on the bones or sometimes it appears under the nail."
"And some of them are born in the joint of the root of the nail, or they appear at certain joints of these fingers." "But that which appears at certain joints of the finger is not painful. But that which appears in the joints is usually painful."
"And of those that are born fleshy, the section is easy to make. And it is necessary for you to cut it down at its root with a broad spatula."
"But of that which is born at the root of the joint, the cure is difficult. And therefore guard yourself from doing an incision to it."
"But in that which appears on the finger between the joints, it is necessary for you to first cut away the flesh of it with a round incision down to the bone. Then saw it off with one of those convenient saws suitable for this purpose and then cure it until it is healed."
"But consolidation which occurs in these between their visible spots or by nature of the man who is born thus, or by consolidation of wounds or by burning with fire, or by similarity, then it is necessary to dry out that consolidation until those things return to their natural form."
"And apply between their wounds layers of cloth soaked in rose oil to prevent them from becoming consolidated easily. And separate those places or apply a thin plate of lead between them so that they become consolidated as necessary."
"And similarly if consolidation occurs in some fingers on the palm, then you should dry out that consolidation according to what is prepared and suitable for the shape of the member."
"There are two kinds of incisions:"
Vices cause varicose veins, and these are thick veins filled with superfluous melancholic humors that come in the form of swellings on various parts of the body, especially on the legs. This is more common among travelers, workers, and porters.
Therefore, you should administer a purge of black bile several times with forceful evacuation and draw blood from the patient's basilica vein.
But the treatment of varicose veins with iron is done in two ways: one way is to cut them open and draw out that black blood, and the other way is to elevate the vein and extract all of it.
The sectioning is done in this manner: first, insert a sharp-pointed blade into the vein at its beginning with cold water so that the thick blood may be dissolved and drawn out, which is the sediment of the vein. Then tie off the vein of the sick person near its upper starting point above the swelling and below the ankle bone with a bandage, and cut it open in one or two or three places with a wide section, elevating the black blood with the tourniquet from the lower part of the vein upwards and downwards until as much blood as you desire has been removed. This is enough to relieve the sickness.
"And then bind that [wound], and command the patient to abstain from eating black bile-producing foods."
"And repeat the cure through phlebotomy when the veins are full, as desired by the patient."
"The elevation of their limbs should be done in this manner: you that raises the patient's leg, if it is bound by bandages, remove them and place the limb in warm water to heat it up until the veins become visible; or have them engage in vigorous exercise if bathing is not available, until the limb becomes heated."
"And then cut the vein on the right side with a scalpel along its length or at its end, as desired by the patient, or lower down, close to the ankle."
"And then open the vein with forceps and strip the vein from all sides until it becomes visible to the touch; this is how one recognizes that the wound has healed properly."
"Then, as you evacuate blood from the vein, you will see that white substance which is called 'cord' appearing."
"And then you should put a bandage around it to elevate and compress the wound, and suspend it with a splint or a stick."
"And then make another incision close to the first one three days later, and strip away the wound from above the vein until it appears."
"And then elevate the wound and make another incision further down towards the ankle; extract the blood from there and elevate it so that it drains through the second incision, and also extract it from the incision that is above it."
"And do this until you have extracted all the blood from the incision that is above or from all the incisions, so that it has all drained out; then stitch up the wound."
"If you are unable to extract and elevate it in this manner, then insert a strong double-threaded needle with catgut through the vein and tie it off, or put a bandage around it and twist it tightly until the bleeding stops." "And be careful not to cut yourself; for if you do, it will be difficult to stop the bleeding and this will cause further illness from that injury."
"And once all of it has been drained out, then apply to the wound area lanolin soaked in rose oil and olive oil, and cure it until it heals."
"And if the vein is constricted with no tortuosity in its path as we have described, then you must make incisions all along the course of the tortuosity and at the points where it branches out, and suspend those areas with forceps so that you can elevate them."
"And be careful not to cut into the vein itself or to compress the wound too much during your incision, as it will then be difficult to elevate that area; use your discretion in this matter."
Here is a description of how to perform an incision to expose a vein:
"It is not made like other ointments or with sharp edges so as not to harm the vein; and it is of considerable flexibility, for if it were too thin, it would cut into the vein due to its thinness; having some excess thickness above as we have said."
"Of extracting blood from the leg vein."
"This vein is generated in the buttocks, like that found on the ground in Arab lands and in dry lands with little tenderness where there is neither grass nor shrubbery."
"And it also originates in other parts of the body besides the buttocks."
"And its generation is due to putrefaction that arises from the spine, like venom spreading within the body causing serpents and worms, scorptions, and other vermin to breed between the spine and the flesh."
"And the sign of its occurrence is this vein that occurs in the buttock with intense inflammation, and around that location there is blistering; and from that location the vein begins to emerge like a root of a plant."
"And then when the tip of it appears, you should immediately wrap around it one weight of lead, whose weight is that of two dragons, and tie that and let the lead hang from the buttock."
"And whenever some cause comes from it towards the outside parts, wrap that in lead and tie it." "If it does not extend further, then you should cut off a part of it and wrap the remainder; but do not cut that part which is still inside, for if you do so it will contract and enter into the flesh causing an aposteme and putrefaction in that location with bad ulceration."
"So that it should be treated gradually and extracted little by little until it is completely removed from the body, so that there remains no cause of it within the body."
"And I have seen some men with veins that are as long as two or three palm lengths, and one has even come to me that was twenty palm lengths."
"If it is cut at the time of its treatment, then insert a thread into the tract of it and pierce it with a long thread through the body until all that is within it has been evacuated, and apply putrefaction to the location for several days with medications; and immediately cure it by the method of treating apostemes."
"And this vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears at the junction of the foot or in the foot, and many orifices come to it, and each orifice has its own branch."
"And then cure it as we have said in the division above with what has been mentioned above."
"Regarding the cutting of worms generated under the skin, it is called bovine disease."
"This disease is called in some lands 'bovine illness' because many times it happens to oxen and is a worm that is born between the backbone and the flesh, and goes throughout the body causing pain and discomfort, and it shows itself by its movement from member to member until it breaks the backbone and comes out."
"And its generation is due to putrefaction of certain humors, just as worms, serpents, earthworms and ascarids are generated in the belly."
"And it is feared for its maliciousness because when it goes into the body and rises to the head and reaches the brain, then it often breaks open in it and enters and destroys the brain, which happens many times."
"And therefore when you want to cure it and extract it, first observe its movement and appearance through the sensation, and then grasp what is above it and what is below it with linen and strong compression, and immediately dry it out over it and extract it."
"And if it is embedded in the flesh and cannot be grasped, then apply a cautery with fire to the location where it resides, for the greatest cause that is feared is corruption of it with which it corrupts the location as we have said."
"And if it reaches the head near the brain, then grasp above the eyebrow with strong compression and immediately dry out over it and extract it; and the patient should use medicines to purify his body by evacuating bad, putrid humors, and avoid foods that cause putrefaction."
"Regarding the cutting of the disease called nafir."
"This illness is named in our land as nafri, and is a pain that comes to certain limbs, and then moves from limb to limb."
"And you have already seen that one according to what I recommended." "You were called to a sick woman in a village, and when you uncovered her arm you saw a small inflammation on the vein of the forearm. And since it had been there for an hour, you saw that inflammation move like this way or that way, but more slowly than water flowing from one place to another, as if it were molten silver running from place to place."
"And then the pain went away from that place and settled in the muscle, and remained there for about an hour."
"Then it moved to the other side of her body until it reached the other arm."
"And then he told me to examine her entire body according to what I saw; and he was too amazed by the movement of it and the speed with which it moved from limb to limb." "And I had already seen something like that before in my practice, though I have never seen anything more clearly showing how pain can be transferred from limb to limb." "But I had not seen such clear examples of this phenomenon as with the case of this woman."
"And you thought that it was because the woman was elderly and had dry skin with visible veins, and therefore this wandering sensation could be felt more easily."
"And it is necessary that it does not appear according to this retrocution in those who are delicate and have moist skin with hidden veins."
"And when you want the pain to pass, and the patient feels it in a way that is not apparent to your touch as we have said, then you should press on it lightly and carefully where that wandering sensation has stopped, and cauterize the spot."
"But if you do not feel it with your own hands, then you should treat her by purging the body and using remedies that expel windiness, and give her pills made of stinking herbs and pills of serpentaria and similar substances."
"De extracció de saquetes."
"Saquetes són diversificades segons les espècies i segons les parts del cos on caiguen, car la seva diversitat és que hi ha aquelles que tenen grans puntes, petites, concaves i sordes, i també solides; i també n'hi ha amb tres angles, amb llengües o amb forma d'estel."
"Els senyals del cervell quan cau una saqueta i travessa l'os, i és vist al cispaç que està damunt el cervell, són: un sòd sobtat i violènt, escotomia, vertigen, calor als ulls, inflamació i calor de la llengua, espasmes i confusió mental, vòmits biliosos, una forta sensació de dolor que impedeix parlar i destrueix la veu, i hi ha una humitat blanca com a pols al lloc de la ferida, semblants a l'aigua de la carn."
"Per tant, si apareixen aquests senyals, haureu d'abstenir-vos del tractament i de l'extracció de la saqueta, si no és per força."
"Els senyals d'una saqueta quan cau en el cor són els següents: generalment es troba a prop del pits esquerre i s'atura en un lloc dur i no buit; el moviment de la saqueta és fort i similar al dels pols, i hi ha sang negre que surti de la ferida. També hi pot haver fred als extrems, sudor fred i sincòpi, i sabreu que la mort és imminent."
"Els senyals quan una saqueta ha colpitu els pulmons són els següents: hi ha sortida de sang espumós per la ferida i els vasos propers al coll estan congestionats. També es canvia la color del malalt, expira amb gran sopar o demanda aire fred."
"Si cau una saqueta en el vel·leït del pit (el diafragma), el dolor és propi de la zona de les costelles petites. També hi ha respiració ràpida i dolorosa amb suspiros, i tots els membres es queden sense musculatura."
"Si cau una saqueta en l'estómac, llavors hi ha un fort dolor per la ferida i hi ha alguna cosa que no està digerida."
"Si cau una saqueta a l'abdomen i hi ha una ferida, es possible que es produeixin lesiones a l'intestí o als vasos sanguinis i no es té esperança de guarir-la amb l'extracció de la saqueta."
"Si cau una saqueta en la bufeta urinària i l'orina és expulsada per fora, amb procesos al voltant dels marges exteriors, hi ha un dolor molt fort. Sabreu llavors que és una ferida mortal."
"Però els altres òrgans com ara la cara, el coll, l'espatlla, el maluc i els costats, les vertebres dorsals, la clavícula, la cua, la cambra i els seus semblants, es poden salvar segons les majors disposicions quan la saqueta no atorga cap vena ni artèria i no és venenosa."
"Aquí endedrec com a vostre amic i confidencial sòc disposat a revelar-vos els secrets d'aquestes saquetes perquè pugueu conèixer la seva cura."
"El motiu d'això és que quan un home va rebre una saqueta al canal lacrimal del seu ull i tu la vas extreure per l'altra banda, deixant el graó de l'orella del mateix costat, es guarirà i no hi haurà cap mal als seus ulls."
"En extraure una altra saqueta a un jueu que havia caigut en el graó del seu ull i va deixar la palpebra coberta de pus, però no va poder extreure-la perquè estava amagada. Només es va aconseguir una petita extremitat amb la qual adhèrieix al seu fust. Era una gran saqueta d'agulles agudes dels turcs, amb ferramenta lleona sense orelles."
"El jueu va guarir i el seu ull no va patir cap mal."
"Va extreure una altra saqueta a un cristià que havia caigut en l'espatlla. Era una saqueta àrab amb orelles i va ser incisa entre dues guies. Després de ser submergida en l'espatlla, es va extraure amb molta subtilitat i el cristia va guarir."
"Va extreure una altra saqueta a un home que havia caigut al seu abdomen i pensava que moriria per aquella. Després de trenta dies sense cap canvi en les seves condicions, va ser incisa sobre la saqueta i extreta, guarint-se i no patint cap mal."
A man is brought before you in whom an arrow has lodged itself in his back. The wound is festering and it has been so for six years, yet the arrow remains embedded in its shaft.
A woman comes before you who has had an arrow lodged in her belly. The wound has healed over and remains unchanged in appearance, yet she experiences no discomfort in any of her natural functions.
Another man comes before you with an arrow lodged in his face. The wound has healed over and the arrowhead is still there, but he feels no pain here, just as it seems to you.
And the arrow was extracted from the nostrils of the king's son who had it stuck in the middle of his nose and had already declined slightly to the right, and the entire arrow was hidden.
And you were called for his healing as soon as three days after the lodging of the arrow.
And therefore you found the wound of the arrow very narrow; and therefore you inquired therewith subtly, and did not feel it there; but he felt it piercing from behind his right ear, and therefore you supposed that this piercing was by reason of the extremity of the arrow.
And you enlarged the place with plaster in which there is attractive and digestive virtue, being confident that this place attracts to itself the place of the arrow, so that it appears before me and dries up upon it.
And there occurred no accidental accident that the arrow had reached that place; and you continued with the plaster upon it for many days, nor did any accident occur; and meanwhile the wound had healed up, but the pain of the extraction remained for the space of many days until one day he felt the arrow inside his nose and recognized this to me.
And therefore you put upon the wound a caustic corrosive medicine for many days until it opened up; and with your finger you touched that place, and you found the extremity of the arrow subtly adhering to its shaft.
And immediately you adjusted in the opening of the wound by that caustic medicine until I saw visibly the extremity of the arrow appearing to me; and after that time it took about four months.
And after the wound was enlarged and it became possible for me to insert forceps into it, I remained there and did not cease subtly to strive and devise concerning that with various devices until one day I began upon it with various devices to take hold of it with descending forceps made of bone, according to what shall come at the end of this chapter, until I extracted it; and immediately afterwards I restored that wound.
And some physicians judged that the cartilage of the nose was not restored; but I restored it and the wound was healed up, and the pain was entirely cured, with no remainder in any cause.
And I relate to you the manner of extracting certain arrows, which pause this rule and meaning over that which I have not said, for the parts of this art and their definitions are not understood with narration nor do they comprehend this book.
And the wise artisans compare little with much; and about that which is present they say more than about that which is absent. And they find new operation and novel instrument by the descent of the extrinsic causes of the art when it happens.
And therefore I say that arrows are not extracted from the members in which they are inserted except by two manners: either by attraction of the place into which it enters, or by the contrary part of the other.
And that which is shot through the place where it enters, either it is an arrow proceeding from a fleshy location and is drawn out and extracted.
And if it does not obey extraction at the time when it was shot, then it is necessary that you leave it for some days until the flesh which is around it may soften, and thus its attraction and its exit are facilitated.
Similarly if it is inserted into bone and does not obey extraction to you, then leave it for some days and repeat this with attraction and movement every day, and it will already be extracted.
And if it does not obey extraction even after several days, then it is necessary that you bore into the circumference of the arrow in that bone with a subtle borer until the place is enlarged by the arrow, and immediately extract it.
But if the arrow has already become hidden in the place of the body and is hidden from sensation, then you should inquire after it with a probe, and if you feel it, then draw it out with some instruments which are convenient for attracting it.
And if you cannot do it because of the contraction of the wound and the length of the probe, and here there is neither bone nor nerve nor vein, then work upon the wound until it is enlarged and it becomes possible to extract the arrow.
And if it is held by the ears with which it is caught, then deliver the flesh in which it is inserted from all sides with every means you can devise; and devise concerning this, whether you can do it without tearing away the flesh in the fracture of the ears and twisting them until it obeys.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in whatever place it is, then use turning of your hand with forceps at all parts until it makes that obey; and subtilize with great subtlety so that the arrow is not broken and that it may be done easily by its attraction and its extraction.
And if you cannot do it at that time, then leave it for some days until the parts which are around it may soften, and immediately repeat this because now it is easier. But if you encounter flux of blood to you, then administer that which we have said concerning cure in its chapter.
And guard your power of incision of vein or nerve or cord, and administer every possible means of avoiding the arrow with facility and tranquility and slowness and firmness as I have recommended to you.
And therefore do this in order to contract the arrow so that the disease may be according to the figure according to which it was necessary for the casting of the arrow into it, because it is more useful. But if this is not possible to you, then administer that which is possible to you according to the figures.
But the arrows which are discharged by the contrary of another part, or those which have already caused some wound in the parts outside, or they make swelling and hardness of the extremity of the arrow by sensation of the wound above the joint and towards that elevation; then you should search for it; and let the section be according to the quantity in which the forceps grasp it; and immediately draw it out, because it is easily extracted with ease.
If it is retained in the bone, then you twist the hook according to the contrariness of how the arrow entered the bone, and amplify it to itself, and then extract that.
And if not, leave that for a few days, and then try again when it's possible.
And if the shaft of the arrow is still in there, then you pull that out with it.
But if the shaft has broken off and you want to administer an impulse, then you insert this, if it is blunt, using a concave tool with such force that it enters into the concavity of the arrow's butt end and then pull that out.
But if the arrow is concave, then you pull it out with a tool entering into it forcefully, because the arrow will be eased by that.
And if the arrowhead is barbed, then it is necessary to cut away all the flesh around where it entered, if that is possible for you, and then treat the wound with whatever is appropriate.
And if the arrow strikes bone, or enters the belly, bladder, or side, and is close enough that you can touch it with your fingers, then carefully cut over it, being cautious not to injure a vein or nerve. Extract the arrowhead, and then sew up the wound if necessary, and treat the wound until it heals.
The form of forceps with which arrows are extracted:
Their extremities are like bird beaks that are made with saws when they grasp the arrow so as not to let it slip.
And there are many species of these saw-like tools, large, small, few and many, depending on the quantity of the size of the arrow and its thickness, and the width of the opening, and its tightness.
Like this: so that its entry into the concave arrow is eased and it is pushed in with it.
Of bloodletting from veins
The veins suitable for bloodletting are thirty-two in number, of which sixteen are on the head. These include two pulsating veins near the ears called "alhasisain", two veins on the two temples visible through the skin, two veins on the ducts of the tear glands of the eyes called "aspicientz", one vein prepared at the middle of the forehead and another at the tip of the nose, two veins at the neck, two veins above the upper lip, two veins below the lower lip, and — these are called "algelic" — two veins on either side of the tongue. The veins that are suitable for bloodletting in the arms are five:
"And in the foot and leg there are three veins: one of these is that which is located on the curvature of the wild boar's tooth; and the second is the saphenous, and its location is behind the thigh of the domestic animal; and the sciatic vein, and its location is behind the thigh of the wild animal; and in the leg there are other veins similar to these."
"The benefit of treating veins near the ears is for ancient headaches and migraines, and to prevent ulcers in the scalp from ancient evil."
"And the quality of bleeding those [veins] is according to what I recommend to you: it should be done quickly, and rub the patient's head with a cloth on the occiput at the location of both veins with plenty of friction; then press the patient's collarbone with a bandage placed underneath that covers both locations near the ears in two places on either side of the head; and bind it tightly with your finger, and if you feel the pulse of those [veins] with your finger, here is how to do it."
"Then take the lancet knife, which is inserted, and introduce it from outside the vein in the elbow until it reaches the bone." "And then raise your hand with the vein and elbow upwards and incise the vein with an oblique incision." "And let the length of the incision be about two fingers or so, and make the blood flow out as much as you wish."
"And then press with powdered frankincense and leave it there until it is healed."
"It has been preceded in the beginning of this book the incision of those and their cauterization."
"Excess of the two arterial veins that are located in the temples, useful for phlebotomy is ancient remedy and sad evil and frequent ophthalmia and excessive bleeding from wounds."
"And the quality of performing phlebotomy on them is according to what you recommend to you: constrict the patient's arm with a tourniquet until both veins appear visibly to touch, and then demonstrate the pulse of theirs before proceeding."
"And then you raise the elbow above the vein at the bend of the arm with your index finger, and insert the phlebotomy lancet into it, raising the vein slightly; cut it like you have done in the other two veins; let the blood flow according to the quantity you need."
"And then release the tourniquet from the patient's arm, and place your finger over the vein for one hour, and then press on that spot with cotton and powder and strengthen it above with a strong constriction, and leave it until it is healed."
"And already at the beginning of this book, there was mention of them, their incision, and attraction."
"And therefore the benefit of phlebotomy from the frontal vein is appropriate for the ancient illnesses of the face, migraine and headache and ulcers that are fetid."
"And the quality of phlebotomy from there is according to what I recommend to you: thus it is that the patient ties their arm with a bandage until the vein appears; and then takes the instrument called 'fossor', whose shape is as follows:"
"Place the point of the 'fossor' on that vein and strike it with a pen or another cause in the manner shown here, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you want; and then release the perforation from the patient and strengthen it until it is healed."
"And sometimes it is done with a broad phlebotomy, but it is not necessary that the phlebotomy have an acute extremity like the others, rather it should be of flat extremity, because the bone is close and a sharp phlebotomy would break it when it is subtle."
"But the benefit of these two veins that are at the corners of the eyes for itching and inflammation of the eyelids due to headache and discharge in the eyes, and for the illnesses of the face."
"And the quality of phlebotomy is that the patient ties their arm with a bandage and then performs it, and you should be standing above the head of the person."
"And let the phlebotomy be done horizontally along with a little phlebotomy with a small phlebotome because there is not much flesh in that place, and if the phlebotome is too sharp its tip will break."
"And then let blood flow as much as you need, and stop it there, and strengthen it for one night with cotton and plaster, and then remove it."
"But phlebotomy from the nasal vein is beneficial for acute fever and violent sneezing, and for the illnesses of the face and migraine and inflammation that occur in the face, especially when it is chronic."
"And the quality of phlebotomy from there is that the patient ties their own bandage and then places their nose with your left hand, and takes a subtle long phlebotome and places it in the middle of the head of the nose straight, because the vein does not appear to the touch here, and because the blood begins to flow soon."
"It is necessary that you withdraw your hand with the phlebotome little by little and let blood flow according to your need; and then tie it for one night because that wound heals easily."
"But the benefit of phlebotomy from both wrists is for the contraction of the intestines and the beginning of leprosy and many illnesses, impotence and corrosive ulcers such as herpes."
"And the quality of phlebotomy from there is that each patient ties their own bandage on their arm and lies down on their back; and let the operator be standing above the head of the patient, and the patient sits on a chair."
"And then phlebotomize the vein on the arm with an ample and subtle phlebotome little by little; and then extract blood according to a moderate quantity or according to what is necessary for that person; and then do the same to the other vein."
"And then remove the bandage and strengthen both veins with a median ligature so that the patient is not fainted, and let them rest until morning because the wound will be healed."
"But the benefit of phlebotomy from the veins in the armpits is for small abscesses and pustules in the mouth and corruption of the gums and corrosive ulcers and fissures, and for ulcers that are in the nose and around it."
"And the quality of phlebotomy from there is that you seat the patient in front of you and tie their arm with a bandage, and then turn their lips and look for two veins of which one is on the right lip and the other on the left; and the demonstration of each is by its blackness, and especially because around them are small black veins, and then incise each with an accidental incision."
"But if you have doubt and do not know which is the one from there, then choose the incision of the larger one, and from the evident pus of that one."
"And do the same to both veins that are in the upper lips."
"However, it is advisable to incise both veins that lie deep to the tongue for better lung function, especially in cases of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein at its junction with the facial vein during the treatment of uvula inflammation and mouth diseases."
"And the quality of phlebotomy is that which follows the disease between the little finger and the thumb, in front of the sun, raises the tongue of the patient, looks for the vein on one side of it and the other side of it, and observes the color of each as it darkens towards blackness."
"And then phlebotomize each one; be careful not to go too deep with your blade during phlebotomy of those who have arteries nearby."
"And the veins that are phlebotomized on the elbow are those which are usually found in all men, and their phlebotomy is performed in two ways: either by using a mirtillate or olive-shaped lancet with subtle declination; or by cutting with a scalpel-like lancet, which is called an 'incisor', and this is its method:"
"Be the point of it thus: that when veins are opened, it should be done by pressing firmly and apparently thick vessels, avoiding those containing turbid blood."
"And this lancet has lesser width and more subtle point, suitable for phlebotomy of thin veins containing clear citrine-colored blood."
"Therefore, the utility of phlebotomy of the basilica vein is one of three veins: for extracting blood from illnesses that are located on the left side of the neck and collarbone, as well as those which affect the chest and abdomen."
"And it is convenient for the phlebotomist, when phlebotomizing that vein, to carefully observe it and be cautious about it, since nearby there is an artery. If he errs and slips with his lancet point, he may incision that artery and cause profuse bleeding. Therefore, one should not phlebotomize that vein with a pointed lancet; rather, one must cut with an incisor."
"And if the basilica vein is not clearly visible, then one should leave it and look for another branch nearby. Or phlebotomize at the end of the arm where it is more visible, using an incisor lancet as described earlier."
"But if you wish to perform phlebotomy on the median vein, then you should first locate the groove of the arm near the pulse point. Then gently press down with your thumb and lift up the arm. Cut the vein convexly using an incisor lancet as described earlier. Be careful not to puncture too deeply towards the space where the artery lies."
"And when you press down with the lancet, if you feel pulsation at the place where you pressed with your thumb, then that is a sign of the artery. Avoid that area."
"And if blood flows during phlebotomy like a fountain of a child's urine and appears reddish, then know that it is arterial blood. Then cease and pause your hand over the place for a long period. Then remove your hand, and if bleeding stops, many times it does stop, then press down on the arm and leave off."
"And observe the wound of the vein and be careful about it for a few days until it is healed to prevent infection."
"But if bleeding does not stop and you realize that the medicine is not working, then you have probably incised an artery. If it appears to you, then apply pressure on the artery until bleeding stops. Then take some lint, wipe the wound clean, and apply a compress made of fresh figs. Leave it in place for one day with strict bandaging."
"And if bleeding stops, that is good. But if not, then treat the wound with the method previously mentioned for stopping blood flow."
"This task of stopping bleeding in that vein is difficult in many cases due to the small size of its opening and the possibility of slipping with the lancet."
"But phlebotomy of the dark vein is useful for extracting blood from conditions affecting the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body. This is because it is composed of branches of the basilica and cephalic veins, as we have mentioned."
"But the phlebotomist must be careful during phlebotomy of this vein since nearby there is a nerve. If he slips with his lancet point and touches the nerve, it may cause numbness and difficulty in recovery. Sometimes the nerve can be felt; however, at times it may be hidden, thin, and not visible. Therefore, one must pause while phlebotomizing with an incisor lancet to avoid touching the nerve with excessive force."
"If the vein is between two nerves, then cut along the length of the vein."
"The benefit of phlebotomy on the cephalic vein is that it helps to draw blood from the head and provides relief for disorders of the eyes."
"And it is appropriate here to note that if you wish to phlebotomize with an olive-shaped lancet or a myrtle-shaped lancet, then this vein is the safest of all veins since there is neither artery nor nerve nearby."
"But sometimes an aposteme (hematoma) forms in some people when phlebotomy is not performed during the first percussion, yet it does not appear afterwards."
"The first thing you should know is that phlebotomy should be performed only for the conservation of health and with hope of benefit and caution to prevent illness. It should be done on one of the veins located in the elbow area: cephalic, basilic or median cubital vein. Phlebotomy should be performed at the beginning of spring after a fast during spring and autumn, and after meals in winter when signs of repletion appear."
"And phlebotomy should be done on the third day or at least one day after the previous bloodletting, with an interval of three hours between them."
"However, phlebotomy that is performed when it causes convenience and necessity for the patient, whether day or night, at any hour and time."
"And it is not appropriate to phlebotomize a child under the age of 14. Women who are pregnant should not be phlebotomized until the fourth month has passed, and elderly individuals over the age of 70 should not undergo bloodletting."
"And when someone wishes to undergo bloodletting for any reason, they should cleanse their bowels beforehand with a lion's tooth laxative. If there is much retained feces, this should be done so that the veins are not obstructed during the phlebotomy of the cleansed bowels, which would otherwise harm the main limbs."
"Patients suffering from seasickness or gluttony should not undergo bloodletting until they have recovered from their illness and drunkenness. Bloodletting is particularly contraindicated for those with colic, vomiting, abdominal pain, excessive sexual activity, hard labor, exercise during fasting or vigil, or any cause that weakens the body."
"And in bloodletting, it should also be considered whether the humor is thick before performing the procedure. This can be determined by observing the consistency of the blood after consuming foods and drinks, or with medications if possible."
"And also, it should be done in a bath if there are no contraindications present. Or else, the blood should be subtiliated by some exercise beforehand."
"And pause bloodletting from the foot during the day, especially around the time of Terce, as we have mentioned before."
"And also be careful to keep this foot well protected throughout the day from all sorts of animal accidents, such as anxiety, anger, fear, and also all kinds of bodily accidents, like hard labor, excessive exertion, sexual activity, and similar afflictions."
"And at his seat let there be present the causes in the use of which men usually indulge with aromatics, odors, balms, and similar substances according to their ability."
"And let the bloodletter sit upon a cushion that is higher than the cushion of him who is to be bled."
"And first, let him withdraw his arm and rub it with his hand two or three times to make the veins stand out. Then let him strap on a bandage using a cord and wrap it around twice."
"And let the binding be moderate, for if it is too tight, or if there is excessive blood flow due to laxity of the bandage, this can hinder the flow of blood. But if it is too loose, this can also hinder the course of the blood itself."
"And then, let him who is to be bled rub his hands together between them until the veins are inflamed and distinctly felt."
"And then let the bloodletter anoint his lancet with a little ancient oil properly prepared. And next, let him place his left index finger on that vein where he intends to make the incision, so that the vein may swell out a bit and the percussion may be better seated. For it is necessary that the vein chosen for bleeding should resemble a cord running beneath the skin, and not one that is full of windiness or contracts when pressed by the lancet, so that the bloodletter may be deceived thereby."
"And thus it is necessary that the bloodletter be careful and attentive to all these causes."
"And then let him place the lancet on the vein. If it is punctured at once, that is good. But if not, he should repeat this action two or three times until it is punctured, either slightly away from that spot or directly upon it, if there is no inflammation."
"And if the spot is inflamed or the patient feels faint, then let him leave off for a day or two, and do not tighten the bandage too much, lest he draw out an ulcer, nor enter into a bath."
"And then let him repeat the bleeding if necessary."
"And if the incision is small and only a subtle flow of blood appears, and you fear that not enough blood will issue forth, then repeat the incision along the same line and adjust it slightly deeper. Do this with caution beforehand to avoid inflammation at that spot, for many people are sensitive even with a small opening."
"But if the spot is already inflamed, do not repeat the incision upon it, for there is no cause to excuse this. Rather, place some of the oil from the wound upon it, for this will relieve the flow of blood." "And it is better that oil should be used here than any other ointment."
"And similarly administer the oil from the wound in all bloodletting procedures where veins are opened to prohibit the flow of blood, and do this with treacle almonds and saffron when they are placed upon the one or the other over that spot, for blood is subtilized and turned when it is thick."
"And if a great inflammation arises at the spot of bloodletting, which happens frequently, especially in those who have not been bled before or whose vein has been slightly cut, then apply a poultice and place upon it a sponge infused in water and salt, lightly scalded, for this will dissolve it."
"And let him do this at the time of stopping the bleeding from that vein with a thread of cotton or of another vein."
"And if some blackness or greenness remains at the spot for a few days, do not worry about it. And if you wish, apply over that area some plaster of aloe and myrrh dissolved together, or some plaster of mint juice or calendula, or something similar."
"And many times apostemes and swellings occur after bloodletting at the temple."
"And then place your hand upon that area, and if you feel softness with your compression over it, then that swelling is evil and harmful. Therefore, guard yourself to apply some of the things we have mentioned over that area, for otherwise blood may flow from the artery."
"And make a plaster with something stypitic to toughen the spot and apply it afterwards with other treatments until it is healed."
"And let him extract blood from every person according to his quantity of strength and according to the prevalent color appearing over the blood."
"For if the blood is black, let it flow until it becomes red. And similarly, if you find it thick, let it flow until it becomes subtilized. And likewise, if it is sharp, let it flow until its sharpness has been alleviated."
"And let him who is full and robust and has need of bloodletting at one time have the incision made large on the vein and the lancet placed wide."
"But in those who are thin, let the opposite be done, and let such persons be bled often but with a narrow incision."
"The best thing to administer in bloodletting from a vein is a transverse section, not a puncture."
"And this manner of bloodletting saves from the flow of blood and from the incision of nerves, and it is more praiseworthy and safer than bloodletting according to latitude and longitude."
"And to those who are accustomed to faint during bloodletting, you should care for them beforehand with a little piece of bread infused in vinegar or simple vinegar slightly warmed. And let them bleed three or four times."
"And if there is coldness of complexion, then take beforehand bread infused in an electary of myrrh or an aromatic electary made with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and the like."
"If syncope occurs during bloodletting and is caused by the loss of much blood, then let him drink water of flesh and an aromatic electary. And let him use aromatics with aloe and apply it to his forehead."
"And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division in the chapter on syncope from evacuation."
"And whoever wishes to evacuate his arm and dissolve his blood according to the second opinion, let him be bled from that vein which is for great evacuation, and whose virtue is cold, evacuating blood little by little. And this should be done according to the quantity of virtue in continuous days."
"If one wishes to raise their arm and draw blood a second time, and their body is strong, then do this around seven or nine hours after the first phlebotomy."
"If one wishes to draw blood from their body in opposition to the parting at which it declines, then do this on either the second or third day after it has been raised."
"If one performs phlebotomy on a body in which there is already insufficient blood, and it becomes exhausted and causes fever, then one must draw blood from it at once and remove a large quantity; one must also amplify the aperture during the performance of the act so that syncope may occur, for you have conserved all the conditions of phlebotomy. And place your hand over the pulse of the body to prevent death instead of syncope, because many times this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent."
"And when you wish to release the arm and evacuate the blood a second time, if the orifice of the vein has already been closed and it is difficult to draw out the blood, then press on that spot with violence and curve it slightly, for this is very bad."
"Let there remain a little blood inside in case of a second phlebotomy; or remove that which has coagulated from the opening of the vein during phlebotomy; or place on it a plaster of myrrh and aloes, or of sage, and compress it with gentle pressure until the blood is fully evacuated."
"And if the vein is inflamed, leave that alone and do not touch it until the inflammation has subsided."
"And if there is a necessity to evacuate blood a second time, and there is no excuse for not doing so, then do it on that spot or on the other arm in another vein."
"And the vein called 'the funnel of the arm' is phlebotomized in place of the cephalic or basilic veins when these are not prominent or are hidden, for it is composed of those."
"And the quality of phlebotomy on him is that the patient immerses his hand in cold water until the vessel becomes rigid and the vein appears clearly."
"And it should be stretched out over that spot with a ligature having medium tightness; and phlebotomy should be done according to the transverse line, not latitudinally nor longitudinally."
"And let the opening be wide, and your phlebotomy should be done with such care that you phlebotomize that spot on the junction of the hand a little."
"And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then immerse the hand in cold water again and let the blood run into the water until your need is satisfied."
"However, if you are in the days of summer, then you are excused from immersing your hand in cold water, and it is prohibited to expose the body to cold water during winter."
"And phlebotomy of this vein is safer than that of all other veins, because it does not have a pulsatile vein nor nerves."
"And phlebotomy on the little finger of the right hand is conducive to diseases of the liver."
"And the quality of phlebotomy on him is that you strengthen the hand with a ligature or your hand, since you have placed it in cold water until the vein becomes inflamed and is clearly demonstrated at sight; and then phlebotomize that transversely; and if some of that is not necessary, do not worry about that."
"And be sure not to bind your hand too tightly during phlebotomy, because thereby the nerves of the said digits are denuded of flesh."
"And be sure to immerse the hand in cold water again and let the blood flow into that, because if you do not immerse it again in cold water, the blood will coagulate in the opening of the vein, and it is prohibited to flow."
"And when blood is extracted according to the quantity needed, then press on the vein with oil and salt so that it does not become consolidated too quickly; and do likewise in every case of phlebotomy."
"However, the benefit of phlebotomy on that spot of the left hand is that it is conducive to diseases of the spleen."
"And do likewise in the phlebotomy of him as you have done in the other."
"And the benefit of phlebotomy on the cephalic vein is for diseases that are in the parts of the body, such as diseases of the mother, and retention of menses, and for rheumatism and ulcers of old wounds and scars, and for similar diseases."
"And the quality of phlebotomy on him is that the patient immerses his foot in cold water and makes friction there until the veins appear clearly; and he ties it over the junction of the foot with a bandage, and the location of the vein should be apparent near the said toe, from which it branches out into many ramifications on the face of the foot."
"And then phlebotomize the most prominent ram or one near the scar on the heel below the aggregation of it, because that is better and safer."
"And if you phlebotomize that on the face of the foot, then be careful of the nerves which are near that on the face of the foot, and make your phlebotomy with such care that you phlebotomize it transversely, as if you wanted to incise it."
"And let the phlebotomy be willing."
"However, if the issuance of blood is prohibited, then immerse the foot of him in cold water again and let the blood flow into that until it is evacuated."
"And if the phlebotomist errs in his first attempt, then repeat the phlebotomy with caution, because the location is safe; and do not fear any malice, but rather be careful of the nerves as we have said."
"And do likewise for the cephalic vein of the other foot equivalently."
"And for the sciatic vein, its location is as we have said near the heel below the cavity of the external malleolus."
"And the benefit of phlebotomy on it is for pain in the hip when it is caused by heat and blood."
"And the quality of phlebotomy on him is that the patient enters into a bath and makes haste and strengthens the skin of his thigh from the side of the hip above down to the heel over four fingers with a long narrow bandage, because only through that it appears."
"And then when it appears, phlebotomize that according to each vein that is possible for you and transversely if possible, which is better; or incise that by incision or excise that by section, because its location is safe."
"And it is found in many men very abundantly. And if you cannot find that, phlebotomize some branch of it, and that which appears on the back of the foot near the said little finger and ring finger."
"And be careful of the nerves, and let the blood flow in the quantity that you desire."
"And then untie the bandage and press on the location of the phlebotomy gently and strengthen it, because it heals easily."
"Of veins and their qualities in using them."
"Veins are of four kinds: varicose, ramified, or venous."
"And phlebotomy is performed in two ways: the first of them is with scarification and extraction of blood, and the other is phlebotomy without scarification."
"And this phlebotomy that is without scarification is performed in two ways: with fire or without fire."
"And the veins that are administered with scarification and extraction of blood are fourteen locations in the body, of which one is where varicose veins are paused, and it is the last division of the head; and the middle location of it on both sides of the neck is equidistant; and veins of the chin below the jaw below the mouth; and veins of two spatulas; and veins of Alooster, and it is above the end of the coccyx; and veins of two buttocks, and they are of two thighs; and veins of two malleoli; and veins of two legs."
"Wounding should not remove blood except from small veins scattered in the flesh, and thus the virtue is not caught thereby, as it is through phlebotomy; nor is wounding to be done with fire or without fire in any illness caused bypletion until the whole body has been evacuated."
"If there is necessity to provoke wounding for illness or continual [condition], administer it at the beginning of the month and at the end of it, and in the middle of it, and at any time that seems fit."
"And therefore when the above-mentioned causes occur in any particular case, and especially if it is in the third or middle of the month, we command wounding to be done after the two or three hours have passed since that time."
"And the advantage of wounding the nape of the neck is that when it applies to heaviness in the head and falling down into the ears, it is necessary for this to be appropriate evacuation of the whole body."
"And this wounding is in the place of trepanation of the cephalic region."
"And it is not permissible to use it for those who are of hot complexion or in whom there is catarrh, because this would cause great harm."
"And therefore it should not be used for the old, nor for those whose heads are hot and sick."
"But on those on whom it is continued after that, oblivion occurs; and therefore you should command the one doing the wounding to pause his hand for a little while at the partitions of the sides, so that generation of oblivion may be avoided."
"But wounding of the nape of the neck is in place of trepanation of the black vein and of the basilica: and therefore it causes asthma, and constriction of the lungs, and splitting of the instrument of flight, and coughing, and fullness."
"And therefore it is necessary for wounding of the nape of the neck to be done quickly, because if it is paused at the sides it generates weakness in the body and stomach."
"And wounding of the temporal region causes accidental pains in the head and ophthalmia, migraine, and prefrontal headache, and pains in the roots of teeth; and it is in place of trepanation of the basilica."
"And you should command the one doing the wounding not to press his hand at the scarification lest he incise the artery and cause flow of blood."
"And wounding of the sides of the chin causes dryness in the mouth, corruption of the gums, and symptoms like those of diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in place of trepanation of Aleph which is on both lips."
"But wounding that is done on the two cheeks causes headache, which is caused by fullness of heat."
"And wounding of the two partitions between the teeth of the cheeks causes benefit from trepanation of three veins, that is, the basilica, black and cephalic veins; because that attracts blood from all those thick veins that are in the flesh, and those thin veins of the other thick veins through which the attraction reaches to the three veins."
"And command the one doing the wounding not to proceed with scarification because the place is denuded of flesh and has nerves and arteries near it."
"And it is a wounding with which one wounds on the buttocks, and causes hemorrhoids of the anus and ulcers near them."
"And you should command the one doing the wounding to make it a large wounding and of iron because the place needs a strong section; and many subtle woundings are drawn out and it is scarified with scarification."
"But woundings of the calves diminish pain manifestly by diminution because they draw blood from all the body and cause old pains of the kidneys and belly, and of the bladder; and provoke menstruation and cause boils and ademoma; and they are in place of trepanation of two sophenes, alar-cohen, and two cavillas."
"However much they debilitate the whole body and cause syncope in many people."
"And from woundings of Alar-cohen, the benefit is near to the benefit of woundings of two calves."
"And the quality of the position of woundings is that you pause the wounding at the beginning and follow it by temperate suction, and do not prolong the position of woundings, but pause them gently and remain them carefully, so that the humors may come to the place by equal advent." "And do not cease iterating this and continuing until you see the place already reddened and swollen and that the color of blood appears."
"Then scarify and iterate the suction little by little, and carefully consider the disposition of bodies."
"Because that person who is of tender flesh and many pores should you scarify once only, not more than once, lest the place be ulcerated."
"And command the one doing the wounding to amplify the scarification a little and proceed gently with temperate suction."
"And if the blood is thickened, then you should scarify twice because in the first time the way of subtiliation to the blood and humidity of it is opened." "But in the second one, percussion and acquisition of the extraction of thick blood are achieved."
"And if the blood is very fetid, then let there be a third scarification to achieve the final result."
"Finally, when we want to extract blood little by little or a little bit, one scarification suffices us."
"And if we want extraction of much blood, we scarify with much scarification; and if we know that the blood is thick, then we should scarify with prolonged scarification."
"The term of scarification in which there is only the depth of a thread."
"And if that of whom the thread is thick, hard, black, and his pores are narrow, then the places for woundings should be anointed with lenient, aperient, resolvent oils; if it is in summer time, thus as olive oil or violet oil, or oil of almonds dried, or oil of cumin; and if it is in winter time, then narcissus oil, or lily oil, or camomile oil, or blood oil, and similar ones."
"And if the superfluity is thick and greasy, then let the oil be amaranthine, or balm oil, or olive oil, or neat oil, and similar ones."
"But if the wounder is of large pores and tender flesh, then let him be prohibited from oil, and let those places for woundings, near to the wounding, be washed with hot water or warm water of salt, or water of cumin, or water of borrage, and similar ones to those."
"Those whose blood is overly moist should wash their nostrils with sour wine or water containing myrtle and sumac."
"For those whose secretions are thick, wash their nostrils with old wine or water containing savory (satureja), parsley, coriander, or chamomile flowers."
"Let vomiting be prevented before bathing; sometimes it should be administered near the time of bathing for one or two hours beforehand, and sometimes it should induce sleep."
"What is necessary so that a phlebotomized patient may regulate their breathing before vomiting?"
"If the ventosator or phlebotomist is choleric and vents upon their blood being hot and inflamed, they should take cooling causes, such as sour apples, endive with vinegar and lettuce, secanol, and julep."
"And pause their foods thus: poleta, roasted birds, highly seasoned foods, and the like."
"One whose complexion is cold should take in drink that is hot and sweet, such as syrup of aloe or syrup made from cannabis seeds, sumac, and mead with a stronger smell between old and new wine. It is recommended to him that he use restraint in drinking and eating, avoiding foods of poultry, cannibalism (likely a typo), fish, small birds, and pigeons."
"On the day of venesection or phlebotomy, drink should outweigh food."
"It is necessary to give certain men triaca alharanza or musk medicamentum, that is, muscated wine before venesection or phlebotomy or appropriately, so that the principal members may be comforted and the blood may be subtiliated; and it is not necessary for them to take that drink."
"Venesections that are not scars should be venesections made pausing the liver, and on the spleen and gout, and on the navel, in the locations of the joints, and the sole of the foot, because these members do not withstand scarification upon them."
"And it is not desired by those except attraction of blood from member, as such pause of venesection on the nipple in illness of flow of blood from nose; and they use that one for that blood vessels may be dissolved and thickened ones of the member, as such pause on the belly and navel; because that rarifies the member and scales it and removes the pain because it resolves ventosity."
"And it is already paused on the temples when there occurs in their obstruction or plethora, because by virtue of strong attraction it draws out obstruction and eradicate plethora from its place."
"And similarly it does when it is paused on the liver and spleen for removing ventosity in those enclosed."
"These venesections are administered alone with suction; and sometimes they are administered with fire."
"Sometimes remedies rich in water are administered in cases of intestinal illness."
"And this is why the stomach becomes full and larger: it is water that has been swallowed alone or water in which certain herbs have been cooked."
"Form of stomach administration over fire: the diameter of the opening should be that of two fingers as we have formed it; the quantity of fuel used should be about half a palm; and on the side where it is located, about halfway up, the track should be small according to the amount that enters into it like a needle."
"It should be made of iron or earthenware, with thick margins, lion-shaped, round and flat on top so that it does not slip from its position over the fire."
"And there should be a transverse iron or steel hook in the middle of it, where candles are placed while cooking over the fire."
"And already this stomach should be much larger than that which we have recommended; and the opening smaller according to the illness and condition of him who uses it."
"And the cupping glasses for infants and emaciated patients are different from those used for young adults with robust constitutions."
"And the method of placing this stomach over the fire on the limb is as follows: spread out a suitable amount of burning wood properly in front of a small wax candle and place that on the transverse hook in the middle of the stomach, so that the fire surrounds but does not directly burn the sick person's skin."
"And then it should be placed on the limb of the sick person and held there over the track that we have described until when we see that the skin becomes reddened and begins to perspire, at that point the cupping glass will quickly dissolve."
"And then gradually increase the fire according to its nature, and repeat this if necessary until complete satisfaction is achieved."
"However, in the case of cupping used for treating pleurisy with water, which does not have a transverse hook or track and is only filled with water, it is placed on the limb alone."
"And this is how it should be done: The larger the cupping glass used for pleurisy with water, the better, because it can hold more water."
"Chapter 97."
"Bloodletting is not performed on most limbs except those where it is impossible to apply cupping glasses due to their small size, such as the toes and gums, or on bare skin like the fingertips and nose."
"And it is recommended to use those bloodletting devices that have been found in the water of muddy puddles."
"And then they should be left in muddy water day and night until they become hungry, ensuring that nothing remains inside their bellies. And then the body should be evacuated at the beginning with phlebotomy and cupping glasses, and the limb of the patient should be rubbed until it becomes reddened, and then the leeches should be placed on top."
"And when they are full and satisfied."
"If it is possible to suck out the location with a cupping glass, it is better in healing."
"But if not, then wash the location with sour wine and hot water, and rub and squeeze it out."
"And if the blood remains in the wound after the leeches have fallen off, then take a cloth dipped in hot water and place it on top to absorb the remaining blood."
"If the blood is profuse, then sprinkle on it trisulfate of vitriol or powders made from adhesive herbs such as tragacanth and similar ones that are styptic, until the bleeding stops. Or place cooked broad beans on the location and leave them there until they adhere to the wound, and then the bleeding will stop."
"If necessary, repeat the leeching procedure when it is possible to change the leeches."
"If it is forbidden to suspend the leeches, then rub the location with fresh blood or insert a needle into the location until blood comes out. And then place them on top, because they immediately attach themselves when they sense any blood."
"To make the leeches fall off, sprinkle a little powdered alum or salt or ashes on them and they will immediately detach."
"And so begins the prologue of the third part: On Restoration." "This chapter is very often necessary in the art of medicine, and it concerns the restoration of fractures and accidental dislocations of bones."
"Oh son, know that those foolish physicians and common people who have never taken the time to study the works of the ancients or even read a single letter from them boast about this chapter."
"And this is why the method of the ancients has been abandoned in our land. And I have not forgotten this at any time, and I have not included what follows except for the purpose of encouraging reading of the works of the ancients and study of their meaning, so that knowledge may be extracted from them."
"And also direct your efforts and studies towards this throughout my lifetime."
"I have already described in this chapter everything that my knowledge contains and on which I have experimented. Since I have abbreviated it for you others and delivered it from the occupation of lengthening, and abbreviated it at the end of abbreviation, and shown it at the end of explanation, and formed many forms of instruments used therein, as is done through addition to explanation, as I have done in two preceding chapters."
"Chapter One"
"A summary and collection of the essentials of bone fractures, from which a necessary introduction must be made before beginning a review of the various members that are broken." "Therefore, I shall begin this chapter by stating the main points of my discourse, and the chapters that require explanation at the outset for the craftsmen and their apprentices who are eager to learn or understand this noble art."
"And so I say that when there occurs a fracture or dislocation or torsion or wound, then you should begin by performing phlebotomy on the patient or applying an emollient to them, or both at once if no contraindication exists, such as debility of power or if the patient is an infant or elderly or during extreme heat or cold."
"And also ensure that they are fed a suitable diet of hot herbs and poultry and crabs. Avoid fatty meats and foods that cause fullness, and especially avoid foods that fill the veins with blood to prevent cautious inflammation, and to avoid fear of excessive discharge in the limb."
"And then return the patient to their usual routine as soon as they are able to tolerate it."
"And so when the broken bone begins to heal, then the patient should be fed nutritious foods rich in nutrients and viscous, such as dishes made from wheat cooked with water, rice, chickpeas, fish, beef liver, eggs, fresh cheese, thick wine and similar foods. And with this diet, coagulation of the fracture occurs more easily and gently."
"And know that bones which are broken in men who are elderly or frail cannot be joined together and consolidated according to their nature due to the dryness of their limbs."
Nature adjusts and connects the broken bone with any similar cause, like glue, where swelling adheres and strengthens that which is conglutinated together, that which comes to an end of its strength and firmness, as fire at the beginning, unless some cause prevents it from its work.
Therefore, it is necessary to pause the meals of the sick person, foods which are heavy and viscous and thick, as we have said.
You should know that the species of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of limbs, for a fracture of the bone of the leg is different from a fracture of the bone of the head; and a fracture of the bone of the foot is different from a fracture of the bone of the hand; and similarly all other members are diverse among themselves.
And you will find with remembrance all species of fractures, explained in their own chapter, distinguished from the others.
Great diversity even within the same fracture. And the species of fractures of bone are diversified within themselves; for there is an arched fracture, other than that which occurs in stars; and sometimes it happens that there is a fracture according to the length of the bone: and these are fractures of the satire and astragalus and additional ones that do not proceed, as is done in the pen when it is prepared to write, and there is a fracture with swelling and disruption at the head, and there is a small fissure fracture.
And in each species there is a special torment proper to its restoration, which will come to memory with its distinct location in their places.
Many signs of bone fracture And for this reason bone fracture is known by its crookedness and by the prominence and sharpness of it to the touch, and also when you compress that with your hand.
And therefore when there is no apparent crookedness in the place nor is it done with your touch when you touch the bone with agitation and the illness does not cause much pain, then it is not a fracture.
It is possible that there may be tortuosity or a small fissure, so you should not move it with your hand nor compress it at all; but pause over it and consider the medications of which you have remembrance at that moment which are suitable to the place; and especially if it is narrow for narrowing.
And know that the place where it is arched and not cut in two or otherwise than in the satire, when the whole part is removed from its company, then you should begin immediately with the correction of that having regard to what happens afterwards, for fear of apostume cauterization.
And if it happens that there is cauterization of the apostume, then leave that alone for a few days until the aposteme stops; and meanwhile treat it according to every possible manner that you can devise to alleviate and cure.
And know that the restoration and healing of that is easier than that of the bone in which a satire occurs.
And moreover strengthen it according to what you remember of it.
But if there are satiriasis in the bone, then it is necessary to extend this broken member from both parts, if it is the hand or foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two cords or with one cord and your hand.
And let your position be such that you hold the member in its natural place while the parts of the broken member are extended; then make sure to bring back those additions with healing and according to every possible manner in their places.
And take care according to your ability that you do not cause any harm or injury to the illness through your operation on them; and make sure that you apply one bone to its companion in the best possible way.
And it is necessary that at that time you should touch it with your hand profitably; and if there is any different cause here, correct it and treat it according to the amount of your power.
And avoid violent extension and compression, as many foolish physicians do who often cause cauterization of the aposteme through their operation or cause contraction in the member as we have seen many times.
And the quality of the healing of the broken member is that which I recommend to you; for you should know that broken members are diverse in their smallness and greatness and in their shape.
And of those which are small, such as the arm, hand and foot, etc., then the wrapping should be made with very fine cloth.
But those which are large, such as the thigh or leg, then for these there should be a wrapping that is thick and hard, because a tight binding connects the large member and strengthens it from all sides with healing, so that nothing enters inside.
And then begin your treatment of pressure, with suitable bandages according to the case on the site of that fracture with three wrappings or four according to how much the member deserves it; and strengthen your hand a little with the bandage.
And then go with that to the upper part of the site of the fracture, and strengthen your hand more than before in order not to weaken your healing with which you have strengthened the site of the fracture. And then extend yourself with wrapping from the site of the fracture somewhat and gradually soften the pressure little by little until you take one large part.
And then take another bandage and wrap it again over the broken site with wrapping, and then go with those wrappings to the part lower than the fracture; and your operation should be in the tightening of the wrapping and in softening that according to what we have said about the first wrapping above.
And then place between the wrappings of wool or cloth with which the crookedness of the fracture should be straightened if there is crookedness in it; and otherwise do not place anything in it.
And then place another bandage over it and then wrap those wrappings decently with suitable stitches so that the site does not become inflamed or cauterize with an aposteme; and if there is inflammation or aposteme there, then place over it what will heal the aposteme and remove the inflammation; and leave it like that for a few days; and then strengthen it with those stitches.
And let the stitches be made of thick linen thread, well-formed; or of pine wood; or of palm branches; and let the width of each stitch be according to this shape and form:
However, it is necessary that the stitch which is placed over that fracture be thicker and wider than the other stitches, and the length of the stitch according to how much the member is large or small; and then strengthen those stitches with another bandage according to your first tightening; and then tie up above with thread decently as we have said about tightening, and so that your tightening should be according to the place of the fracture, and the more it is extended from the fracture, the less tight it should be.
"And it is necessary that threads be medium in thickness and fineness, and be of linen; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen in some operations where foolish people used cords of tow, it is a great mistake, when they cause inequality in the stitch."
"And very fine threads are not suitable, because with them you will not achieve the desired narrowing, and it should not be less than a finger's width between each stitch."
"And if the illness affects the ends of the threads near the stitch in the area without skin, then pause those made with tow or combed wool between them so that it does not cause injury."
"Sometimes breaking occurs with plague, and disruption happens in the thread, as I recall in that one in Chapter Two on peculiarities."
"And know that not every broken member is immediately closed with stitches on the first day; the reason for this is that when the member is large, it is necessary to wait several days or even more, according to your certainty of the arrival of a dry crust."
"And this is the manner of the emplastrum with which the Ancients restored them, which were applied over fractures, dislocation and torsion."
"Common method of emplastrum for the restoration of fractures, convenient for many complexities and especially for women and children, because it does not cause heat or rubbing: take some powdered mortar, which is the flour's marrow that remains when you remove it from the walls of the mill."
"And prepare it thus as it is, but sieve it with egg white and make the mixture neither too thick nor too subtle; and use that."
"Another method of emplastrum for the restoration of fractures and dislocations and torsion: take asafoetida, laudanum, acacia, enula, and millet grain, which is wild radish, all in equal parts; myrrh five parts, aloe twenty parts, all ground and sieved and mixed with clear water or egg white if the condition is scaliness; and use this emplastrum, because it is of good composition and restores lightly broken bones, and benefits many people."
"Another method of emplastrum which benefits fractures and torsion: take millet grain and white lead five parts; myrrh and aloe five parts each; acacia six parts; tragacanth twenty parts."
"All are ground in a mortar with much contrition, and sieved, and made into an emplastrum with water or egg white, and applied."
"Method of emplastrum for joints and separated bones from their places, and for pain that occurs in those parts and for fissures and fractures: take clean wool and immerse it in vinegar and hot oil, and apply it to the place."
"But in this emplastrum there is not virtue of restoration, nor does it draw out apostemata nor properly expel pain."
"Another method of emplastrum that restores broken bones: take leaves of fig and leaves of wild poppy; count all together and make an emplastrum of them."
"Method of emplastrum abbreviated administered for the restoration of bone fracture and when you want resolution of the remnant apostema: take roots of althea, camomile flowers, violet flowers, oatmeal, all in equal parts; all ground and made into an emplastrum with wine, if the member is not scaleless."
"But if it is scaleless, then use that with water of humid coriander or simply with water."
"Another method of emplastrum even stronger in resolution than the first one when hard apostema occurs during the restoration of the member: take roots of althea and its seeds, and of balm, melilot, marjoram, violet flowers, camomile, all in equal parts ground; all ground and made into an emplastrum with water of willow or sweet water or wine, everything according to the quality of the member and the color of its skin."
"But Hippocrates does not specify in his book that it should be applied to the broken member for its restoration, but cerot made of wax and oil and nothing else; and he recommends that it be midway between thickness and subtlety."
"But it is seen in Galen that they are applied to the broken member for its restoration and the causes of siccation with little heat are such as myrrh, incense and similar ones of those causes which we have recommended."
"Method of emplastrum that benefits injury and pain: take myrrh, of wax, of skin of a man cut or bird's feather, and althea, salt, all in equal parts; ground and sieved and made into an emplastrum."
"But the quantity according to what remains of the fracture and properly should be removed, is that you consider if there is no pain or pressing nor the bone is broken it is not necessary to remove from its place, then you do not release too soon." "And if there occurs at the place vehement pain or pressing or inflammation, then you cut or release it immediately, and remove the emplastrum from it."
"And take cloth of it and marine sponge moistened, and immerse that in hot water, and with that wash the inner place until that pressing ceases and the pain is sedated; then let the member rest for an hour; and then apply over it clean wool immersed in vinegar and oil or sweet oil, and lay it on it for one night ensuring apostema caut, and that the inflammation of the member has passed, and the pain from it has been removed."
"And then reiterate that subtle restriction and small emplastrum not too tight at the beginning, and subtly with that until it is healed."
"And if sometimes when the apostema and the heat and pain and inflammation and all accidents are already removed from everything, you need an emplastrum and restriction, then repeat that as you have done at the beginning equally."
"And if there occurs no cause in the member of those that we have mentioned, then you do not release it but let it rest for three days or four or five or seven; and sometimes all this is left for twenty days according to what you see by the release of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres and approaches the coagulation of the flesh on it."
"And then tighten in the restriction more than your first restriction entirely, and adjust to the growth of the flesh of the sick, according to what is preceded by its remembrance."
"But if you see the place of the fracture already dried and exhausted more than it should be, then know that nourishment is prohibited from reaching it; therefore immerse it in hot water every time you release it; and do this for all three days; and relieve the restriction a little, and by this operation bring nourishment to the member, and it will heal easily."
"But what foolish restorers of the fracture of the member do sometimes when it is not restored at first as it should be, and is restored crookedly, is an error according to their operation; great fear, and if they were right it would have been enlarged by the Ancients in their books, and agreed with that operated."
"And I have not seen anyone of them do that, so it is more reasonable that they do not do it."
"Chapter Two: On fracture when it occurs in the head."
The types of fractures are many, and their forms are diverse, and the causes are distinct. For some fractures occur from a blow to the bone, which enters entirely within the head, leaving the bone behind, thus this type is named comminuted; or the blow cuts through part of the bone but does not pass beyond it into the marrow; and this type of fracture is called impacted.
"The severity of these two fractures is either great or slight, and the fracture may be complete or incomplete; their cause is typically impact from a fall or blow."
"In this fracture, it is either penetrating and approaches the muscle layer of the bone's surface, or it is located on the bone's face; likewise, its severity may be great or slight."
"This fracture is one that is blended into the bone itself, within the fineness of its hair-like substance, and therefore this species of fracture is called capillary."
"This fracture occurs either due to impact or fall, causing some bone fragments to enter the internal parts, and it typically happens in concave areas, such as when chickens strike their breasts during flight and suffer an internal fracture."
"This commonly occurs in the bodies of human bones, particularly at the ends of long bones like the elbows and knees."
"All these species of fractures should be examined, as they are similar to stars with separated points." "And he will receive remembrance of all this in its place."
"And we know all these species of fracture by detection on those and by inquiry of their internal organs and outward signs of putrid flesh."
"And capillary species is recognized by this: it is uncovered on the bone, scraped away, and then rubbed with tincture, because the fracture appears black."
"In the treatment of fracture, consider first the accidents of illness. If you see any that mean something manifestly obvious about pain, such as vomiting from cholera, extension, loss of consciousness, fainting, acute fever, discharge of the eyes and reddening of those, and similar appearances in greater conditions, it is not treated."
"And if you see non-current accidents, then hope for health. Then begin the treatment of it."
"Which means that if it has come to you suddenly at the beginning as it happened, and this is in the days of winter, then you should study the bone of the leg before the 14th day according to every disposition."
"And if it is in the days of summer, then you should remove the bone before the 7th day, ensuring that what remains of the bone is corrupted by the panicul and that the accidents that we have mentioned happen."
"And if the fracture has already reached the panicul covering the brain and is in many small parts and ground down, then you should insert the comminuted and crushed bone piece according to what I will tell you."
"And when the head of the sick person is shaved and you uncover the bone according to your custom and manner as much as possible following the figure of the plague, ensure that it is light upon the sick person."
"And if you detect the bone, there are fluxes of blood or a hot abscess, then you should pause at that which is necessary and it is that you place on the location cloths infused in wine and rose oil to make the plague rest until the abscess is sedated and you are sure about the fluxes of blood; and then begin with the circumcision of the bone and its ablation."
"And this is according to one of two operating methods."
"And the first method is that you insert the bone with a straight narrow incisor and this is its form: And then administer another incisor somewhat wider than the previous one."
"And then administer even more of the incisor that is wider than the second one."
"And it is necessary that you have a number of different incisors, some of which are wider than others; and some of them should be shorter than others and sharp at their ends, and they should be made of iron or steel."
"And use them with facility in percussion on the incisor so that you do not strike the head and harm him."
"And if the bone is hard and strong then it is necessary that you pierce around its circumference before administering the incisors with their handles, which are called non-penetrating handles."
"But they are not called thus but rather those that do not reach the end of the bone near it so that at the handle there is a round extremity or margin on which the head of the incisor rests similar to a small margin or circle, which prevents being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone."
"And it is convenient that you take of these handles many ones which correspond to the thickness of each bone so that there are present in all tests of the brain the extremity of which is sharp and its quantity in length and width is according to the quantity of thickness of this test."
"And this is the form of three types of handles: The quality of piercing around the broken bone is that you place the handle on the bone and turn it with your fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then change the handle to another location and pause so that between all tracks there is the quantity of the thickness of the ray or approximately that."
"And then cut with incisors between each track of the bone and make it as subtle as you can at the end of its elevation so that you eradicate the bone either with your hand or with some other cause by means of certain instruments which you will have prepared for this, such as tongs and fine forceps."
"And it is necessary that you guard with all caution that the incisors do not touch any part of the brain."
"And then when you have pierced around the bone and it is separated from the brain if it was continuous with it, you will extract it, being careful to rasp and smooth its roughness where it was in the bone with another instrument similar to an incisor but which should be more thin and subtle than the others."
"And if there remain any fragments of small bones and you try to remove them, then take them with ease using what is necessary for you among the instruments; then clean the wound with linen cloths and dressings which we have mentioned."
"And another method of operation is easy and far from fear which Gaulicus and Laelius praise greatly; and this is their discourse: It is necessary for you at the beginning that you begin to uncover the fracture of the bone in the place where it is most violent and manifest, until when you have uncovered that fracture and placed away from it the extremity of this long and light incisor which has this shape:"
"And it is that the lenticular opening is lion-like and does not cut any part, and the sharp opening is of this length before in two sides in length such as these: so that the lenticular opening is adjusted to the brain with the face of its sharp side on the bone."
"And then strike on the incisor of one opening with a small hammer until you cut all the bone with ease as it rotates and you are sure that no accident happens in any manner, even if the patient was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, even if he was asleep."
"Then if some part of the periosteum remained attached to the bone in certain places, cut it from there with the extremity of this lenticular incisor and detach it from there with ease because it is detached from there without damage and without fear."
"And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the periosteum, and what is cut off or scraped from the bone remains rough and subtle satagias, then it is necessary to rasp that roughness and eradicate those satagias with fine rasps which you have prepared in various quantities so that it is possible for you to administer them in all places according to their convenience and their straightness according to how you proceed in your operation on this broken bone and its figure."
"And it is necessary that you use in your operation with which you rasp the bone at the beginning the widest of those rasps, then use also the subtlest of them and do not cease doing so continuously until you arrive to administer the thinnest and most subtle of all of them."
"But in each of the other small capillary fractures and subtle fracture, it is necessary to administer care according to what you find for its rectification."
"And this is said not only about all those who have studied that art." "And what we have shown in great fractures is also valid for small ones."
"And if the periosteum is retracted when you eradicate the bone, then it is necessary that you take cloth according to the quantity of the wound and immerse it in rose oil and place it on the opening of the wound; then take another doubled or tripled cloth and immerse it in wine and rose oil and place it on the first cloth and do this as lightly as possible so that you do not hurt the brain, and then apply to it a wide bandage, and do not stretch it except according to the quantity that the wound has alone."
"And leave it with this dressing for one or two days until you are sure of cauterization; then untie it and apply medicines that promote dryness, such as linen rags and barley flour, powder of hyssop and aniseed, and similar things."
"And when you make these medicines into powder, let them be finely powdered and applied to the wound as they are dry; universally, administer in that all medicine whose property it is to cleanse and not burn."
Guard thy virtue that the plague in thine cure be pure; and not in its surdity of unguent nor other, lest thou shouldst allow virulence to augment therein. For when it is adjusted upon the panniculus of the brain, it corrupteth and poureth out thereupon, and causeth forthwith such malicious mischief unto the patient.
And if it happens in the cephalic region of the head, after the bone has been cleaned and especially when the cure is neglected, a blackness appears on its surface; hence consider then whether the patient presents any of the accidents mentioned before, so that thou mayest know that it is mortal without doubt.
And if there is no blackness but from the medicine placed upon it, and that blackness is caused by the virtue of that medicine, then thou shalt take of honey one part and of rosat oil three parts, and with those liniments a cloth, and place it upon the cephalic region; and forthwith cure it with the species of cure that are convenient until it be healed.
Chapter .iii
Of the restoration of the nose when it is cut.
Know that the nose is not broken except when two parts are torn away together or one of them is viewed thus upwards, because there are two bones in it. For the cartilage of the lower part is not broken, and no harm comes to it except friction, twisting, and bending.
But if one of the two parts of it is broken, then thou shalt insert the little finger into the nose and bring together that fracture within with thy thumb, and without with thy hand, until the nose return to its natural shape. And this thou shalt do with facility; but take care that thou dost not hurt the patient thereby.
"However, if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and the patient cannot reach it, then it should be treated with the tip of a rod with a small thickness."
"If the fracture is on both sides, then you must do this."
"Make an attempt to restore it on the first day after the fracture, if possible; otherwise, about seven or eight days later you must remove the hematoma by cautery."
"And approximately insert a wick of linen into the tip of the nose if the fracture is on one side, or place two tampons there if it is on both sides, and they should be of such thickness that they fill the cavity of the nose."
"Some of the ancient restorers say that the tampons should be wrapped in edges and changed every day, but I have not seen this done. However, it is necessary that the wick be wrapped in cotton wool mixed with powdered myrrh; and approximately place the tampon inside so that the bone is fixed and the cartilage is strengthened."
"Sometimes a linen cloth soaked in hot water is inserted into the nose instead of a tampon, especially if there is much pus enclosed in the linen. And even if the fracture of the nose is severe and the illness does not prevent inspiration."
"And this method is not necessary for you; so if you wish, do this, and if you wish, use tampons."
"And if it happens again that there is a hematoma after cauterization, plaster the nose with wax or pitch mixed with vinegar and rose oil, or with diachylon."
"But if there is no hematoma after cauterization, then you should plaster that place externally with flour of sesame and powdered myrrh mixed with cotton wool; and approximately pause on the tip of the linen, and do not lie down with any cause."
"But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or crushed, then you should bind those places and extract them with instruments that are appropriate for that; and approximately close the split, and treat it with something that heals and strengthens, and with plasters that are appropriate."
"And if there is an ulcer inside the nose, then you should treat it with tampons and administer lead cannulae until it is completely healed."
Chapter IV
"On the restoration of the jaw when it is dislocated."
When the jawbone is broken and the fracture does not heal properly, look closely if the fracture is only on one side, and not split into two or bent inward.
Then do this: if the fracture is on the right side, insert your left index finger into the patient's mouth. Similarly, if the fracture is on the left jawbone, then insert the said index finger of the right hand. And press gently with that same finger the prominence of the fracture inward while keeping it straight outward with your other hand placed on the outer part of the bone.
And if the jawbone fracture is already separated into two pieces, then you must apply traction to both parts according to a straight line so that it may be possible to achieve approximation.
And if teeth displacement or luxation occurs, then strengthen those that are expected to break with gold wire or silver wire or thread. And place padding on the broken jawbone and also on top of the doubled cloth, and place a large Sterile drap made appropriately or a roller gauze along the length of the jawbone. Then tie it up according to how you have prepared the ligature and what is convenient for its application, without damaging anything.
And instruct the patient to rest quietly and avoid chewing solid foods.
And if you estimate that the figure has been altered in any way, then on the third day remove and replace it with a new one. And correct whatever is altered from it and apply a paste made of powdered myrrh, egg albumen or wheat flour, after having removed the cerate from it, and place a linen cloth over the plaster.
And once the appliance is attached and the plaster is adjusted on it and the position of the bone is not altered, then leave it in place until healing and strengthening of the fracture occurs. For many times this fracture heals in three weeks.
And if an abscess occurs afterwards, then administer what has been said many times in the treatment of it until it is healed and the abscess is removed.
And if the fracture is complicated with infection, then consider whether it is a separated or compound fracture. And if there are sequestra, then use appropriate means to remove those sequestra using suitable instruments.
"If the opening of the wound is narrow, then widen it using a dilator according to your need."
"And when you have finished those procedures and there is still nothing removed from the wound, then close the opening of the wound if it is large; otherwise place one of the plasters that are convenient for this purpose and cover it until it heals."
"Chapter Five."
"How to treat a fractured clavicle."
"Very often the clavicle is broken at its midpoint in front of the muscle, and this fracture occurs in one of three ways."
"This break can occur in three ways: either it is separated but not displaced, which makes its reduction easier; or it happens as described above with displacement, making its reduction difficult; or the fracture is comminuted."
"And the operation in this case, when the fracture is simple, consists of having two assistants present: one to hold the clavicle with an instrument and follow its movement, and the other to extend the neck on that side."
"And then apply traction with these fingers to reduce the fracture into its normal position, ensuring that it does not remain in the prominence or concavity of the sternum."
"And if more extension is needed, then place a bolster made of wool or cloth under the patient's shoulder on that side, according to how much extension is necessary; raise the clavicle and compress the bolster with your hand while reducing the fracture into its normal position."
"And if you cannot bring the end of the clavicle out to its normal position due to swelling around the wound, then have the patient lie on their back and place a bolster made from the palm of your hand under the fractured side."
"And then one of the assistants presses on the muscles around the wound while the other elevates the clavicle until it is in its normal position. Then you reduce the fracture and maintain it with your fingers."
"But if there are loose fragments of bone around the clavicle causing pain or interference, then make an incision over that area and remove those fragments with ease."
"And if it is retained within the bone, then make an incision through the bone with one of the chisels that you have brought along for this purpose, as you had placed the instrument called a ciphac over the clavicle; this instrument is made of wood or iron and has the following shape:"
"And it resembles an awl with this concavity; and its width should be according to your need, according to the thickness of the bone or its thinness."
"But the length of it should be according to what is possible for you in this operation; it should have two ends like this, with one end broad and the other narrow."
"And if the disruption of the periosteum that you incised when extracting the bone fragment is wide and you are concerned about the possibility of an abscess forming, then approximate the edges of the wound with sutures."
"And if the disruption is small or you fear an abscess forming, then fill the wound with wool and dressings according to the size of the wound."
"And if an abscess forms, then soak a cloth in a mixture of vinegar, rose oil and wine, and apply it to that area."
"And also, make sure that the splint does not press on the broken bone; and for this reason, you should examine the patient every day to see if the dressing becomes moistened or if the splint has become loose, then correct it and tighten the bandage."
"And also, have the patient sleep with their head elevated on pillows, and place a small pillow on both sides of them at night so that their arms are raised above their chest and thus elevate the fractured clavicle away from the muscles or keep their arms tied to their chest."
"And do not remove the dressing unless it becomes moistened in that place or an abscess forms, after about twelve days."
"And also renew the plaster if you see its surface become moistened in that place, adjust it to fit the tightness and restore it until it is restored and the fracture of the clavicle has healed."
"And it becomes strong and comfortable in about twenty-eight days, although sometimes in some men it may happen even sooner."
"Chapter VI:"
"On the treatment of fractures of the shoulder."
"The spatula used on his side was broken there and only its edges were broken."
"If the break is on his side - and it is broken in the middle of him - and is not known except by touch, then according to the shape of the fracture you should prepare it and reduce it according to its natural figure in every way that you can."
"And first sprinkle on the powdered bone with albumen of egg and stop it with linen; and also sprinkle powdered linen doubled; and also sprinkle over him a little of fine table salt according to the quantity of the whole spatula or a little more."
"But if the bone is concave in some places of the spatula, then you should fill those concavities with linen stops, and also place the bone according to equality."
"And next bind it firmly above with a long bandage with proper constriction and with firmness of the bone within its place that it may not be moved from its position."
"And examine the bandage every day. And whenever it is softened, change it on another day and bind him again and equalize the bone if it has been moved from its place."
"And put him to bed on his side with a pillow under his armpit."
"And the splint will be restored in 20 days or in 25."
"And when this number is completed, then you should remove the bandage and know assuredly which are those bones of which neither their union nor their dissolution is feared."
"And if you proceed with the place of the weight-bearing bone and put aside the shoulder, then you should incise over it and open it up, and do according to what we have said in the fracture of the collarbone concerning the treatment of pus if it happens here."
"Chapter VII."
"Of the restoration of the fracture of the foot."
"The foot sometimes breaks in its middle part and that part heals slowly, but the extremities of it heal quickly because they are cicatrized and comminuted."
"And the accidents of it when its middle is broken are that it declines toward its inner parts and great pain occurs to him, difficulty in walking, coughing, strong fever, and vomiting blood. And it is declared in the cavity of the bone broken and not hidden from sensation."
"And the restoration of it is that the patient should lie on his back with a pillow between his hips; and he should press his muscles together, adjust his legs together with two blankets, and be careful in the operation and equality according to all manner possible and necessary so that the figure of the bone returns as it should."
"And then apply over the splint and cotton, and place over it a thin table of linden wood or chalk and their like in levitation, because you wrap that in cloth; and be careful to bind that on the broken bone so that it may not move; and go around the back sometimes with bandaging according to its rotundity, and strengthen him with proper constriction; and be careful about the bandage at all times, and when it is softened, tighten it."
"And if there is need for removing that because of corruption or pressure or pain or abscess which happens in the place, then you should cut and untie that and remove the splint and correct what happened through it with the manner of its treatment; and then replace the splint, sometimes on its face; and adjust the constriction until it is healed."
"Chapter VIII."
To restore the ribs when they are cracked.
Did you know that rib fractures usually occur in large locations on the back; and at the ends of the ribs near the sternum, such damage rarely occurs except where they are cartilaginous? "His condition is not concealed from our senses through inquiry."
"And the reduction should be done as gently as possible according to his manner, until it is completely reduced, then plaster and splints should be applied to the broken bone if necessary."
"And if the fracture of the ribs is inclined toward the inside, then severe pain and piercing occur to the patient, like the pain that occurs to someone who has been pierced by something, and because of this the lung becomes covered; and difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting a lot of blood occur; and this is difficult to treat."
"And already the Ancients knew how to treat that with many remedies."
"And it is said of them: Whenever food is placed near the patient that generates flatulence and windiness, so that the belly becomes inflated and extended, and the fracture is pushed outward."
"But we would not have this for it to be a light cause of generating an abscess, if it were not to happen; and if it should happen, then help may come from this."
"And some of them say that it should be placed upon windiness and approved so that it may succeed with great strength; but nevertheless, it is feared that the windiness draws the impurities to the place due to weakness."
"And some of them say: Whenever the place is covered with wool that has already been submerged in hot oil, and powders are placed between the ribs until it is filled up, then the bandage should be wound around it according to its roundness; and then let the patient be cured with pleurisy remedies and medicine."
"And if the disease causes violent constriction that cannot be borne, and the bone pierces the velvet with a wound point, then fear is entertained over the disease. Therefore it should be cut open upon the place, uncovering the broken rib, and then placing upon it the instrument that preserves the cypha, of which the memory has been previously given, and gently striking the bone until it is extracted."
"And then let us join together the two lips of the wound if it is large with sutures, and let us dress it with plasters until it heals."
"And if an abscess should form inside, then quickly take powders of roasted oil and place them upon the spot, and let the disease be treated with whatever is suitable for internal abscesses."
"And let him be propped up on pillows while he sleeps until he is healed."
"Chapter ix."
"On the restoration of fractures of the spinal column and neck."
"Occasionally, fractures occur in the bones of the neck, and sometimes they cause friction, similarly in the vertebrae of the back." "If water has collected around someone and you want to know if they will recover or not, observe this: if their muscles are already softened, stunned, and lifeless, and they cannot move those parts nor extend nor stretch them; and when you press on those parts with your fingers or prick them with a needle and they do not feel pain in those parts, then you will know that they will not recover. In cases of such conditions, it is mortal."
"And if they can move those parts and feel constriction with pressure or puncture, then you will know that the spine of the bone is saved, and that the illness will improve with treatment."
"And if water is seen around the vertebrae of the neck and you want to know if it will heal or not, then observe its weight."
"Now if you find that the muscles are already softened, it is because this has happened in many cases. And especially when he lies on his back, there is panting and evacuation without his will; and sometimes he suddenly falls backwards, wanting to urinate but unable to do so. Then you should know that it is mortal, and then do not try to treat him."
"But if none of these causes occur, the case is better and easier to handle."
"And the treatment of it is that you make an opening in the abscess caused by the displaced and broken bone, whether it be on one side or both, smeared with oil or dough made from boiled barley groats; place a poultice on that part several times a day until the abscess is sedated."
"And then apply one of the comforting and warming emplastes, and press it on with a bandage. And order the patient to take rest and quietude, and not sleep on the part where he feels pain until it is healed."
"And if the breaking of the bone happens suddenly or any cause that is already separated from it occurs, then you must set upon the collarbone and reset that bone. And especially join together the two lips of the wound with stitches if it is large; and also treat it with some ointment made from incense until it is healed."
"But if the end of the bone is broken off and it is the final outcome of the illness, then you must insert your left thumb into the anus, and grasp the broken bone with the other hand as much as possible according to the equilateral proportion; and also apply a plaster and bandage on that part."
"And if you feel broken ends in it, then you must make them meet and reset that bone, and treat the wound with the treatment that is mentioned until it is healed."
Chapter .10.
Of restoration of breath.
The bones of the broad thighs are broken, and if they break, then the fracture is merely a communion in the extremities, lying along their length and inclining toward the inner parts; thus, pain occurs at the site of the fracture and puncture. The limb becomes numb when there is a fracture.
The restoration of it (the bone) is that you stretch your hand over that area which lies above the fracture, in order to grasp its shape.
If the fracture is only at the end of it (the bone), then grasp that which appears equal to you by equating its shape with an appropriate one that resembles its natural figure.
But if the fracture is in the long bone or one that already declines toward the inner parts, then place the affected area on its belly so that you may prepare for the restoration of that fracture. And then when you have grasped that (the bone), pause upon it with plaster and also pause on that splint made of wood or metal; strengthen it by tightening the bandage without fearing puncture from the fracture or displacement of the splint.
And grasp the concavity with whatever fills that area which has taken on the tightening according to equality; command the affected person to sleep on their back or on their side.
But if gangrene occurs suddenly, then cease the extension and restoration of it (the bone) until the gangrene is sedated. Pause upon it with whatever sedates that according to what has been prescribed; then return to its restoration and tighten it accordingly as necessary.
And if this happens in the marrow of the bone or they are crushed, then remove them.
Chapter eleven
Of the restoration of the fracture of the collarbone.
The collarbone is what is between the chest and the top of the shoulder.
And if it is broken, then its restoration can be done in one of two ways. The first way is for you to take a piece of dry plaster of medium thickness cut into this shape:
And there should be two strips at both ends, and it should be suspended from an elevated place.
Next, have the patient sit on a chair and place their broken arm outstretched on the plaster cast so that it reaches to the middle of its length where the curvature of the cast is attached.
Then hang some heavy weight on top of it or have the nurse stretch it towards its edges until the fracture becomes aligned according to how it should be. And then the doctor will gently hold the fracture in place together while ensuring that the fracture is realigned properly.
The other way is for the patient to lie on their back and hang their arm with a sling, with one nurse holding above the fracture with both hands and another nurse holding below it. Each nurse will then stretch their side gently.
And if you want more force in the traction, then place one sling above the fracture with a rope and another below it with another rope. And each nurse can then pull at both ends gently.
And if the fracture is close to the end of the bone, then it's necessary to place half of the sling above the knuckle and the other half below the fracture at the elbow.
Similarly, if the fracture is near the wrist, then the sling should be placed on that location and around the wrist.
Apply this gently and without difficulty until it's well applied according to how much traction is needed. And once it's properly applied, then hold that traction in place unless there is an infection at the site of the fracture.
But if there is an infected wound at the fracture site, then leave the traction in place for about 7 days. Then apply a clean dressing with vinegar and rose oil on it to help heal the infection while keeping the traction in place.
And the way to hold this traction in place is to put plaster on the fracture and then wrap a clean cloth around it. Then adjust the arm into its correct position using the sling and have the patient keep their hand covered over the muscle while keeping still.
And then fix the cloth in place and hold onto the sling to ensure that the arm remains in the correct position until the bone has healed properly, unless there are any other reasons preventing this.
Then use splints
And when placing splints on the fracture, make sure they are well-padded and provide firm support compared to other splints. Place them between each finger and ensure their length is equal to the length of the fractured bone plus three fingers' width on either side.
And then secure the splints in place with the same traction device mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
And ensure that your traction is as tight as possible on the fracture site. The tighter the traction, the more quickly the fracture will heal.
And then if you want to remove the splints and traction when restoring the limb to its original position, do so gently.
If there is concern about infection at the fracture site, leave the traction and splints in place for 7 days as mentioned earlier.
And also consider the sling in all cases for three days so that there is no pressure or swelling at the site. Or if it's necessary to restrict food from reaching the limb due to excessive traction, then adjust accordingly as mentioned earlier.
However, if you're confident that nothing will go wrong, then leave the dressing on for at least three days or more.
And let them sleep with their affected side up and their hands on their stomach
And place a full bolster made of wool behind the elbow and ensure at all times that the fractured limb maintains its shape without any shifting or loosening of the sling. If you notice it becoming loose or wet, then tighten it again using your discretion.
And feed the patient according to the order mentioned earlier. Ensure that their diet is soft at first until they begin to regain strength, and then gradually increase the size of their portions as they improve.
The usual duration for the use of a splint and sling is 40 days. After this period, they should be removed, and the patient given a bath and treated with ointments that will help restore movement in the limb.
If the fracture is slow to heal, do not remove the sling and splints until at least 10 days or up to two months.
Chapter XII
On the restoration of fractured arms
The arm is composed of two bones called the "two forks". One is small and lies under the thumb, while the other is large and lies diagonally above it.
Sometimes only one of these bones may be fractured, either the larger or the smaller one, but they can also both be broken at once.
When only the small bone is fractured, its restoration and healing will be easier.
However, when the fracture occurs on the outer side of the arm, both the restoration and healing are difficult.
It is even worse when both bones are fractured at once.
Therefore, if it is the small bone that has been fractured on top of the arm, it is recommended for the doctor to restore it with ease and without difficulty until it heals properly.
But if the large bone has been fractured, then traction should be applied more forcefully in order to restore it properly.
And if both bones have been fractured together, then you must apply very strong traction
When restoring the arm and applying traction, it is necessary to maintain the shape of the hand. The palm should be placed on a pillow, with the thumb higher than all other fingers and the little finger lower than them. The patient should lie down on their side facing the ceiling.
And place a pillow either at the height or to the right of the arm so that the patient does not have to strain themselves while lying down.
Then one assistant should extend the arm from the elbow joint using their own hand or a sling, and another assistant should do the same from above in a similar manner.
Then the doctor should gently manipulate the bone until it is properly reduced and aligned as best as possible.
And if there are any displaced fragments of bone, then use your skill to manipulate them back into their proper place with gentle force.
If any displaced fragments appear that cause the elbow joint to lock and cannot be reduced during restoration, then proceed as described earlier.
But if the fracture is accompanied by infection, this has already been discussed in Chapter IX, so follow its treatment accordingly.
If an abscess forms at the beginning of treatment, take a cloth with cerote made from rose oil and white wax, medium thickness between thickness and thinness. Place it on the abscess with gentle pressure until it opens. Then remove the cerote and apply a plaster prepared from ground mallow with egg white, and also apply splints; use the one that is placed over the fracture more often and stronger.
You should know that there are six splints for the arm in the majority of cases, or seven if both bones have been fractured.
Apply pressure gently and firmly over the fracture site using traction, and adjust it according to where the fracture is located. If the traction is applied above the fracture site, apply gentle pressure afterwards following the principles outlined at the beginning of this chapter.
"Ensure the bandages wrapped around the fracture are soft and moist, not hard or rough; the plaster used should be medium in consistency between fine and coarse, as previously recommended."
"Consider the limb and allow some days to pass." "And if some cause arises that requires correction, such as swelling of the limb, then you should immerse the limb in cold water until the swelling ceases."
"Allow the member to rest without constraint until it resumes its usual state and then gradually return to its original position."
"And if the swelling has softened and the bone appears sound, then set it correctly with your own hands."
"And also consider if there is an excess of swelling preventing nourishment from reaching the limb; in such a case, you should gently mobilize it and allow it to rest for some days until proper nutrition can reach it, then strengthen it."
"But if the condition does not improve due to any of the causes mentioned above, then it should remain immobilized for approximately twenty days or thereabouts."
"And then lift up the arm of the patient with your own hand by its natural movement, and make him sleep on his back."
"Know that this fracture will heal in thirty days or thirty-two days, but it may take twenty-eight days to fully heal, depending on the body's complexion and virtue."
"What is said in Chapter Thirteen?"
"Concerning the healing of fractures of the hand and fingers."
"You should know that fractures in the hand and fingers often occur only on the outside surface of these bones, with many instances being merely contusions rather than true fractures."
"And when the hand suffers a fracture or contusion, it is necessary for the patient to keep their arm elevated and supported in front of them, with the affected hand resting on the unaffected one."
"And then the minister will extend the broken bones, and the doctor will realign them and join them together with good congruence."
"And then it is necessary to apply a plaster and bandage, unless there is no wound from which pus can flow. And then apply a splint above according to the size of the injury, with that already wrapped in linen cloth."
"But if the fracture is in the palm of the hand or wrist, then make a kind of bandage like a sling from cloth, and instruct the patient to hold their hand folded against their chest with that sling wrapped long around it."
"And let the splint be made of wood covered in cloth to allow for adjustment, so that the splint can be applied closely to the palm. And then wrap it according to what is necessary."
"But if the fracture is on the outside of the hand or wrist, then apply a splint above and another below the fracture on the palm side, so that the hand is kept open and straight. And then wrap it with bandages, as one would do for a hand turning towards the thumb between those said ligaments."
"And if there is a fracture of one of the knuckles of the fingers, then if it's the thumb, align it as necessary and wrap it with the palm. And if you wish, apply a small splint on top to elevate the fracture and prevent movement."
"But if the fracture is in one of the other fingers, such as at the middle joint, or in the index finger, or in the ring finger, then align and bind it with the finger next to it that is not affected. Or they can all be bound together continuously, which is better; or apply a small splint over that one, as we have said for the thumb."
"And note, in your treatment and especially for this one, the position of the wound and its opposition, as well as what is necessary to do if any cause arises from it, according to what is narrated above."
"Chapter XIV."
"On the treatment of fractures of the hip bone."
"The hip bone is often fractured, and it is felt according to how it turns towards the front of the fracture and towards the pus above."
"And its treatment is done in this way: a ligament is wrapped above the fracture and another below it, and the patient lies on their stomach with their face turned down."
"And when the fracture is in the middle of the bone, extend all the ligaments to their own place according to their quality."
"But if it is displaced at the root of the hip, then extend the ligament on the inner side to the place where the penis hangs, so that its extension goes upwards. And another ligament below the fracture."
"And similarly, if the fracture is displaced downwards, then extend the ligament on the inner side and its extension should be towards the places below."
"And then the physician aligns the bone with both hands from inside so that it reduces according to its natural shape and the bone is united by good union. Then apply plaster and bandages if there is no inflammation of the member." "But if an inflammation occurs, then leave it alone for a few days until the inflammation subsides, and then return to your treatment."
"The bandaging of it is done like this: wrap a hard bandage over the fracture and fold it two or three times, and remove its excess. And then wrap the blanket so that it reaches the ankle and the root of the hip."
"And insert a long splint between the hip and the blanket near its lower end. And bring the ends of the splint up from both sides above the hip bone. Then wrap what is left over of the bandage around the blanket and the hip."
"And then apply splints over the hip bone at the location of that fracture, and apply two splints over the shinbone."
"And then fill in the spaces between the shinbone and the hip bone with soft cloths so that the bandage is firm."
"And then begin with a firm bandage from above the middle over the location of the fracture with three or four wraps. And as you approach the area of the fracture with ligaments, your bandage should be lighter and softer."
"And then extend both ends of the splint downwards until they reach the ankle bone. And tie both ends of the splints on the other side to prevent the ligaments from being removed from their place."
"And then leave the bandage on him until it is removed according to what we have said many times above without any corruption of the member or inflammation or swelling appearing. And if anything else happens, then pay attention to that and correct it immediately."
"But if the bone is pushed out of place by something, then you should align it according to what is possible for you. And if not, leave it alone and remove it, and treat it with whatever is remembered from above until it is healed."
"And sometimes this fracture of the hip bone is treated with splints other than those mentioned above, as we have said in the adjutator and the arm."
"But nevertheless, if the treatment of it is done in this way, it does not cause the patient to limp. And if it is treated alone, without the other leg being applied to it, then it is necessary that he limp all the time."
"And know that the hip bone is strengthened in forty days or a little more or less, depending on the diversity of complexions and other dispositions."
"Chapter XV"
"Of the treatment of the fracture of the kneecap."
"Know that a fracture of the patella is rare, but it often happens with contusion."
If fracture occurs in him, then it is nothing but break or tear in its parts, and this is with pain or without pain, and overall it is considered with sensation.
The repair of it is to be done in such a way that what is broken of its parts with the said intestines should be joined and united as much as possible by means of stitches and ease of fabrication.
And then apply plaster and bandage over that round wound, if necessary; and strengthen it with a proper binding according to what is needed.
And also consider all the dispositions which we have recommended in other fractures, such as pus drainage and similar things, so that it may be applied to any accident according to what is convenient until it is healed.
Chapter XVI
On the repair of a fracture of the humerus.
Know that in the arm there are two bones, one of which is thick and is called by the name of the arm (humerus); and the other is thin and is called the radius.
And it happens that in some cases of fracture one or both of the bones of the arm are affected, and for this reason the repair of it is made like the repair of the arm generally, with one operation.
And if both bones are broken at once, the arm becomes completely useless.
And if only the thinner bone is broken, the arm remains usable but with limited movement.
"And if the bone is firmly set, do not disturb it, as this may be due to causes that are not your concern."
"And therefore administer extension and traction and fixation of the limbs according to that alignment."
"However, note that if there is a fracture of the leg with little displacement, then traction should be lighter and gentler, acting with care."
"And when operating on the arm due to some cause, and you have aligned the bones and completed your operation, then you will take splints of wood that are placed there previously, made from branches of palm; choose those which are not too thick or too thin, and their length should be according to the length of the arm, from the elbow to the wrist."
"And therefore wrap it around each limb in two wrappings according to its length, and place one on the elbow of the arm on one side and the other on the other side, and they should be from the elbow to about halfway up the forearm."
"And therefore bind the two bones together in three places: at both extremities and at the middle, for with this traction the limb is prevented from bending at the elbow joint, and thus it stands firm."
"And now a splint of wood has been prepared according to the length of the limb; and the limb should be placed upon it so that it may retain its position."
"And especially this should you do in case of fracture, when it is properly united."
"And also examine the limb every day and study it with care to ensure that there is no inflammation or swelling or other cause of similar kind occurring; and whenever any such cause arises, then you should apply this treatment until it is healed."
Chapter XVII
Of the fracture of the heel bone and of the bones of the foot and toes.
A fracture of the heel bone does not occur in full; but fractures of some bones of the foot do occur from time to time; and among the toes, few fractures occur, and they only when there is some deformity of position.
And if among the bones of the foot there is fracture and some of those bones are elevated above others, then the patient should rest his foot on the ground prepared thus as he walks.
And therefore place one foot upon that which is elevated by those bones, and also press upon them, compress them, and draw them in until they return to their proper places.
And therefore apply plaster and bandages above it, and place underneath the sole of the foot a small table with two flat surfaces.
And also extend that with the foot in extension, since you have wrapped it with cloths and other things of which there is need.
And when three or four days have passed, then you should untie the bandage, for you will find the bones reduced, either pressed together or firmly united or relocated; and the operation in such cases is as you know.
But if some are adherent, then reduce them and apply traction to them thus with the help of your hands, as I have taught you in the reduction of the fingers. And also place the adherent finger on a splint according to its length, and let it lie alongside of it a little; and also place underneath the foot that table which I have recommended to you, and extend that with gentle traction in extension.
But if that which is adherent among the bones are two or three or more, then place upon each finger a splint according to its quantity wrapped in lion's skin cloth, and place the table beneath the foot at its lower part, and let it stand on one of its flat surfaces under the sole of the foot so that it may have good retention.
And it is also necessary for you not to forget that you should not disregard all the causes which I have mentioned to you concerning other fractures of those accidents which we have spoken about; and you should apply this treatment to every accident according to what is necessary.
De la fractura de las costelas e de las vergas del cor.
"Regarding fractures of the hip bone in women and the bone of the pelvis and the penis in men."
"When the hip bone of the woman is broken, then immediately apply that plaster in this manner: gently incline her to the side of the unaffected hip and hold her firmly from behind."
"And then the midwife applies pressure to the hip joint and makes it as level as possible; and then the woman is placed on her back, raising the uninjured hip little by little, so that everything is positioned in front of the hip joint and the broken bone returns to its place."
"And then gently sprinkle powders on the back of the hip. And when she wants to urinate, raise the hip with ease and let her urinate, and reduce it again afterwards, returning it according to the manner in which you first moved it, and then return her to her original powder."
"And do this for seven days or so until that bone is healed."
"And if you wish, take a bladder of sheep and stretch it over the trochanter of the hip; insert the entire bladder into the hip joint, and then blow air through a reed into the bladder with force until the bladder is inflated inside the hip joint, for this will cause the fracture to return."
"And then fill it with plaster and let it rest for some days as we have recommended until it is healed."
"And when the bone of the pubis in a man or woman is broken, then apply to its restoration and treatment whatever we have recommended for the hip joint."
"And what is correct is not hidden in these nearby fractures and those that occur less often, especially to those who study this book carefully. For this fracture signifies to you the greatest arrangements in the restoration and tightening of the joint."
"In the case of a fracture of the penis in a man, take a gourd of cucumber and insert the penis into it; then wrap it with cloth wrapping and let it rest for three days or so until it is healed."
"**Chapter XIX**"
**On the restoration of fractures when they occur in plague.**
"It is convenient for those who have fractures during the plague, especially if it is a large bone such as the thighbone or humerus, etc., that you immediately perform phlebotomy on them if the conditions indicate it, as we have said above."
"And if the plague flows away and it is healed, then you should take care to retain it in such a way that you sprinkle powdered mallow seed on it when it is beaten three times, unless there is another cause present."
"And then begin to restore the fracture that same day and do not delay this if you do not want an abscess to occur."
"But if an abscess occurs, then delay the restoration of it until the ninth day, until the abscess has decreased. And do not approach it in the third and fourth days altogether, for you will cause bad accidents to occur."
"But if the broken bone protrudes beyond the elbow joint, then it is necessary for you to reduce it and align it with your hands easily and without too much extension."
"But if you are not prepared for extension and the reduction of it with your hands alone, then reduce it using this instrument: it is made of iron, its length is seven or eight digits, and its width depends on the amount of plague; and therefore it is necessary for the physician to take three or four of them according to what is needed in the treatment of all kinds of fractures."
"And when it is reduced, place a small splint on it so that it does not bend again during the operation, and press it with some weight."
"And have its pointed end with margins at both extremities; let the upper part of it be thicker and the lower part thinner, entering into the parts."
"This is its shape:"
"And in Greek it is called 'labre volentz atelarem', that is, small spatula."
"So that the pointed end of it may rest on the protruding end of the bone."
"And then insert it into a hole made beforehand so that the bone returns to its place and is aligned with some equitation."
"And then carefully align the extremities of the fracture between them; and if the end of the broken bone is thin and does not receive the instrument well, then insert the end of that bone into the instrument so that it has power over it."
"But if you cannot reduce the bone completely with what we have recommended, then cut it with one of the saws that we have mentioned earlier; or cut it with any saw in whatever manner is possible for you."
"And then rasp away the rough parts and small scales that remain on the bone."
"And when the bone is reduced and the patient feels a severe pain at that time, know that the bone has not returned to its proper place; and therefore do this because you will greatly relieve the patient's suffering."
"After you have finished your reduction of the bone, then immerse it in hot water mixed with black pitch. And especially if it is in summer and there is no ointment or oil on the wound for any reason, so that it does not cause putrefaction and corruption afterwards."
"And then give stitches at the time of your completion of the bone's reduction, and leave the wound open enough so that you can insert a bandage with tweezers and use wrappings according to the amount of plague."
"And be very careful that you do not stretch the wound with the fracture, for many times foolish physicians have done this and caused death or rotting corruption or sudden death to their patients, which is a great shame." "And if your stitch is loose, soft, different from the stitches of other fractures"
"And if the wound is large or it is a bad wound and you fear some of those bad accidents that we have mentioned might occur there, and you feel pain in that place, then do not use stitches but make this bandage of hard cloth there instead and stretch it with them."
"And when the wound begins to heal after one or two days, then remove the cloth that you had placed over it with wine. And then apply dressings as is our custom for dressing wounds, such as tetrafarmacum and similar ones."
"And it is necessary for you to remove the bandage and examine the wound every morning and evening until it is consolidated and healed. And the limb must be positioned in such a way that putrefaction runs out of it towards its extremities with ease."
"If many days pass and the wound is not consolidated nor does it separate from the bone, then know that here are small bones for which you must explore the wound with a probe." "And remove and extract those separated ones first, then examine those that are not separated and put pressure on the limb causing pain. Then insert them according to what is possible for you."
"And if pus or foam occurs in the wound, it is called erysipelas, or some other species of corruption and putrefaction. Then you must apply one of these according to what is said about its cure in its chapter."
"And concerning that in which my speech should stand out and you make your judgment: when the bone is crushed, do not elevate it above the limb like the bones of the wrist and elbow and similar ones from large limbs. And do not attempt to attract or extract it because many times death has occurred because of this; let it be there until it rots away by itself, for it will fall out by itself in about twenty days or thirty. Then treat the wound if you see fit, otherwise leave it alone."
"Chapter Twenty."
"About treating an infection that occurs at the site of a fracture."
"Very often this infection occurs during the healing of a fracture, especially near joints, and it becomes disfigured by it; moreover, it greatly hinders the member from its natural operation."
"Therefore, consider if the infection is recent and apply to it medicines that have astringent properties like aloewood, senna, saffron, myrrh, and acacia, etc.; thus you should take some or all of those and mix them with stiptic wine, egg white, or vinegar, and place them on the infection wrapped in gauze, applying pressure with a good bandage."
"And let the bandage remain without removing it for several days; then remove that and apply another, until the infection is removed; or place on it a lead sheet, since lead has the property of drawing out all that is swollen in the members."
"But if the infection has already turned into bone and is hard, it may be necessary to break that carefully, and then split it with a chisel along its highest part, and cut off the excess and prominence, or draw it out with some tweezers until it is removed; and cure it until it is healed."
"Chapter XXI."
"For restoration of fracture when it has been restored, if then the limb remains delicate and does not follow its natural course."
"When a bone fracture is restored, if then the limb remains delicate and does not follow its natural course, it happens for many reasons: one of which is excess solution of the ligament and improper union; or due to excess tightening of the ligaments preventing proper nutrition reaching the limb; or due to excessive broaching; or due to excessive movement out of time; or due to lack of blood in the patient's body and weakness."
"The cure for this is to feed the patient and make their heart tender so that blood is multiplied in them, and apply baths; and introduce joy and comfort upon them."
"And also apply pressure above the limb so that the pressure draws proper nutrition to it, or continuous broaching of it with warm water until the nutrition returns to its natural form."
Chapter XXII.
Chapter XXII: Concerning the treatment of bones that are crushed and restored crookedly, and the prevention of their operation from being necessary.
"If it happens that after the restoration of a limb has been completed there is still deformation and prominence at the site of the broken bone, but the limb remains usable in its natural operation, then you should not listen to those who claim that the limb has been recently re-broken."
"But there are many foolish doctors and healers who have performed this operation in our land, and it is highly blameworthy as it leads to great fear for those who bear its mark, which is deadly."
"But if the limpness and deformity are recent, then it is necessary to broach them with warm water in which are cooked mollifying herbs such as althea roots and rose hips, mallows, and similar ones; and let a poultice be made with a mollifying plaster such as treacle well-made, or let the root of althea be pounded into mucilage and mixed with grease from goose feathers or wax from cirami, and let it be applied as a plaster; or let figs be cooked until they are thick and then ground with pigeon dung, using similar medicines that are called 'amermans consolidatio'."
"And sometimes it can be dissolved with persistent light friction using the most humid hands, and movement of the limb should be administered in all parts at all times."
"But if the deformation has already hardened and turned into bone, and surgery is necessary to correct it, then it is necessary that the bone be cut as high above the deformity as possible, and the continuity of the bone be dissolved with scalpel incisions made with subtle care, and facilitate ease in that area through diligent study."
Chapter XXIII
Concerning dislocation.
"Dislocation is the displacement of one of the joints from its proper place, causing it to lose its movement and altering the shape of the limb, resulting in great pain and severe injury."
"So when a dislocation occurs, it is necessary that it be reduced immediately, and not delayed, for if it is delayed the joint becomes inflamed and hardened, making reduction of the dislocation difficult."
"And for this reason, it should not be moved or stretched during the inflammation phase, for often times it causes spasm and severe pain."
"But when this happens, then you should apply a plaster to the affected area and allow it to rest until the inflammation has subsided; and then bathe the limb with warm water and oil, and reduce it gently."
"And every limb should be treated with that which brought about its dislocation."
"And I have already arranged the chapters on dislocation according to what was previously said concerning fracture, starting from the most superior part of the body and going down to the most inferior."
Chapter XXIV
Concerning the treatment of dislocation of the lower jaw.
"So when both mandibles are dislocated but not torn apart; and the dislocation of both is done in one of two ways: either they are moved slightly from their places and somewhat mollified; or they are completely dislocated and softened at the joint where saliva flows, so that he cannot close his mouth nor speak, and his tongue sticks to his palate."
"But when the dislocation is slight, it usually returns to its place on its own with little cause."
"But if the dislocation is complete and full, then it is necessary that reduction be administered gently, and not delayed at all."
"And the minister should hold the patient's head, and the physician should insert his thumb into the depression of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is on one side; or he should insert both thumbs together if the dislocation is on both sides, with the other fingers outside to support it; and he should command the patient to cease moving his jaws and open them on each side; and the physician should guide the jaw back into its proper place."
"And if reduction is difficult and especially if both jaws are dislocated together, then apply evaporation with hot water and oil until gentle reduction can be easily accomplished without delay."
"And when they have returned and are engaged, if the patient's mouth is closed tightly without being softened, then apply powders of linen with wax, and make them of wax and sweet oil, and bind it gently with soft bandages."
"And have the patient sleep on his back with his head supported between two pillows so that he does not move his head to the right or left; and do not force him to open his mouth for any reason. Until the pain is relieved and his jaws are comfortable, let him eat soft food."
"And this should be done gently and do not work the mouth open for eating and drinking and speaking until the jaw is comfortable and healed."
"And if reduction of both jaws is difficult when they are dislocated and do not return to their places, then often times fever and constant thirst occur, the abdomen becomes distended, and violent vomiting of pure bile occurs."
"And when this happens, then you should know that it is a fatal condition; for often times the patient dies within ten days."
Chapter XXV
Concerning reduction of dislocation of the collarbone and the extremity of the muscle.
"The collarbone is not dislocated inward from its attachment to the sternum; but sometimes it is dislocated outward, and this can be felt."
"And the reduction of it is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms." "And then press the location with your palm with firm pressure, for it will return to its place."
"And then apply a plaster and powders and bind it firmly."
"But the extremity of that which seizes the neck and is attached to it does not become dislocated on any day. Therefore, it should be reduced and bound according to what we have said and according to your ability."
"And then apply plaster, powders, and dressing, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until he is healed."
"The extremity of the muscle is reduced during this same treatment when it has been separated from its place."
"Chapter 26."
"Of the reduction of dislocation of the muscle."
"You should know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, one of which is that it has been dislocated at its insertion."
"And the second is that it has been dislocated at its origin above the muscle; this hardly happens; and it does not get dislocated at the parts behind by the shoulder; nor does it get dislocated at the parts in front by the nerves."
"Rather, the muscle is more easily and often dislocated at its insertions near the tendon, especially in those whose flesh is scant, it gets dislocated lightly; but in those with much flesh, it comes out with difficulty."
"And sometimes, by a blow or fall, some men get a hematoma on the muscle that is cured by cauterization, and the muscle gets dislocated due to this."
"So then you should speak about what you are well informed of concerning this, and afterwards proceed with its treatment."
"And the dislocation of it is known when it happens at its insertions near the tendon; for you can distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the healthy one because there is a clear difference between them. You find concavity in the head of the muscle near the tendon, and in the sick person the hand cannot reach the ear due to the contraction of the muscle, nor can he move that arm."
"If it is dislocated from the foot or above, and you afterwards find a clear touch, and it is not hidden."
"And of this dislocation, easy reduction is made when it is fresh and the patient is a child."
"And the reduction of it is that the physician lifts up his hand above it; and approaching pauses the ends of his fingers near the tendon of it, he elevates the joint with strength to its place, and the physician lifts up his hand, extending that in an elevated position; and he approaches it from below while it returns lightly."
"But if it does not return by what we have said, and if from the beginning when the dislocation happened many days have passed, then the patient should be bathed in warm water, and afterwards an ointment that softens and lubricates like hot coals of almonds and fenugreek should be administered to him."
"And then the patient should be made to lie on his back and pause near the tendon of it waiting for it to be loose between elevation and tension, and then the physician places his heel on the sphere, lifts up the head of the muscle with strength, pulls the hand of the patient so that it is not hidden at its insertions, and another assistant holds the head of the patient so that it is not hidden at its insertions because it returns to its place soon."
"And if you want to reduce it in this way: have present a man who is taller than the patient and let him stand on the same side as the dislocated arm. He should insert his muscle near the tendon of the patient's arm, lift up the tendon of that above its insertion while the patient is suspended in air, and another assistant pulls the hand of the patient from below its belly." "But if the patient is light, then have another cause suspended to him so that he may weigh him down because the dislocation returns soon."
"And it is reduced in this way: take a long staff with the head of it round like a pestle which should not be thick nor thin. Place it on the ground near the patient; then place lion skins over its head and have the patient stand along the length of the staff. Then extend his arm on the opposite side, and stretch out his body on that side with strength because the joint returns to its place quickly."
"And if reduction of it is difficult because of all the causes that we have mentioned, then use this treatment: take a staff whose length is two spans and width four digits, and make its thickness thin at the tendon in this way:"
"And place lion skins over the round head of it for fear that the staff should slip and hurt the patient."
"And place it near the tendon of the patient's arm, and extend his hand or forearm over the staff up to its insertions. Then tie the staff with bandages on the elbow, forearm, and end of the hand."
"And then place the arm on a step of stairs according to its width, and extend the hand at its insertions while the other side is suspended because the joint enters soon."
"And when the reduction is completed in whatever way is possible for you, then place near the tendon a bandage of wool of equal quantity; then place a plaster prepared with powder of barley groats and albumen of egg over all the muscle as it is turned up, and then bind it with moderate tension; and wrap it around the plaster, join his hand to its neck, let it rest, and do not move his hand for seven days."
"And the patient's diet should be restricted so that the member is strengthened because it is easier to heal when it is lighter."
"And then gradually increase his diet after seven or eight days and have him move the limb. And if it remains firm and not softened, then it is healed."
"But if the joint has been dislocated many times because of humidity that occurred in it or for some other cause, then it is necessary to administer a cautery with three incisions according to what is said above in the chapter on cauteries."
"And if this is done and after seven days the bandage is removed but the joint is not firm, and the plaster and tension are reapplied several times but it remains not firm nor can he raise his arm above its insertions, then know that the nerves of it which are at the head of the muscle have been injured or stretched or softened. And know that the joint will never again be set in its proper place."
"For dislocation of that which occurs at the knee and the malleolus or the posterior insertions, reduction is performed with pressure and extension using the hands until it returns."
"And apply another bandage to it and treat it until it heals."
"And if heaviness in the member and slowness of its motion occur after healing, then the patient should take baths many times until that heaviness is alleviated and it returns to its original nature."
"Chapter 27."
"On the treatment of dislocation of the hip joint."
The hip joint is dislocated with difficulty and returns similarly; that one is dislocated in all directions, more so in front than behind, and the dislocation of it is not hidden to you when it is centered on its socket or when touched according to some figure, and when you reduce the dislocated hip into place, that is clearly declared to you, for the joint is concave and cannot bend the leg nor touch itself with that muscle.
You should reduce the dislocation immediately before an abscess forms, for if it comes to that, reduction becomes difficult and the bone will not heal completely. And especially when it is displaced backwards, since among all kinds of dislocations this one is the worst and most painful, often resulting in death.
And the reduction of it, when that one is possible to reduce, is thus: let his hand be extended with two hands, and his arm abducted, and the physician's hands be upon the hip joint and outside of it, and he should push the joint into place with the ulnar sides of his hands together, or with the edge of his palm towards him until it returns to its position.
But if the dislocation is displaced forwards, then return it thus: by bending the hand on his hand until it strikes the hip joint with the edge of his palm.
And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then apply forcible extension and considerable force.
And let two assistants extend the arm and hold it firmly in that position with two hands, so that it is not moved during extension.
Also, let the arm be rotated externally throughout the whole movement, because there is often a doubled fold of skin or bandage wrapped around his hand.
"And when the physician touches the joint with their hand, they anoint it with some oil so that this may ease those causes which aid in the lubrication of the joint with facility; and then they push the joint with violent impulse until it returns."
"And then the reduction of that swelling which has been placed upon that area where there is stiffness and inflammation with albuminous matter, and has been treated with a descending bandage, and the arm suspended from a collar, should be allowed to remain for some days."
"And then it should be released; and if the joint is formed in its proper place, at that time you should release the bandage from it and leave it alone."
"And if you find the joint not strong, then you repeat the application of the plaster and bandage, leaving it for some days until it is healed; then release it."
"But if it happens that there is gravity upon the reduction of the joint, and its position is in motion, then you should administer humidification with baths and gentle friction and pressure until it is alleviated; or if the joint is painful at rest, this is a matter of fat movement. Then it should be bandaged and left on the bone day and night." "And then remove that and place him in bed; and when he gets up, you should rub the joint with gentle friction and again apply it painful at rest, this is a matter of fat movement, one time, and the second time, and the third time." "with intermittent baths until it becomes limber."
"And if you wish to do so, place upon that moist and scratched cowhide fold with edge and press it on him; do this several times until it becomes moist and reduces its position."
"Chapter XXVIII"
"Regarding the treatment of dislocation of the elbow joint, which is between the arm and hand."
"Occasionally the hand dislocation occurs, and its reduction is easy; however, it's different for other joints. Yet, speed in reducing it is necessary at the moment of dislocation, before the location becomes inflamed or an inflammation develops."
"The reduction of the dislocation is done by placing the joint of the patient's hand on a table and extending their hand. The doctor then places their hand or palm over the prominence of the joint and presses it until it returns to its proper position."
"But if the palm is already facing towards the belly of the hand, then during extension and reduction, the patient should place the back of their hand on a table. And if the dislocation is previous to the back of the hand, then the position of the patient's hand should be intrincely on the table, so that the doctor's hand can cover that prominence of the joint."
"And if it returns quickly, that's good. But if not, then you should strengthen the hand gently and allow the swelling to subside before letting go; and don't repeat this too often, because otherwise you may cause damage and won't be able to achieve reduction after several days have passed."
"But if the joint moves according to its tortuosity and there is no apparent cause noticed by the patient except that their hand is weakened and cannot be strengthened, then you should know that nerves are compressed or torn. And then it's not necessary to reduce it at the moment; but rather cauterize around the location of the injury and later confer about some cause."
"So when the dislocation has been reduced, then pause on that splint which we have recommended, and let it be for about 7 days. And afterwards remove the splint, let go and exercise the hand."
"But if the movement of the hand is still restricted and there is some discomfort, then apply cold water compresses and gentle friction several times until it feels better."
"Chapter XXIX."
"Regarding the treatment of dislocation of these (joints)."
"At times these are displaced in every part."
"And when one of the aforementioned fingers is dislocated on its dorsal or ventral side, immediately grasp the finger and reduce the dislocation with your hands until it returns."
"And then support the head of the finger and suspend that which is above the part where it has been dislocated for two days."
"And then suspend that [finger] and extend it until it is properly positioned within its day."
"And when it is not yet better, bandage that [finger] following this account, and do not cease to loosen it during the day and exercise with motion, and bind it at night. And do this for several days until it is straight."
"And do the same if it is dislocated on the ventral side of the hand, and apply that part and perform your first operation until it is healed."
"And similarly do this when other parts are dislocated."
"Chapter XXX"
"On the treatment of dislocation of the vertebrae of the back."
"When it happens that some of the vertebrae of the back or neck are completely dislocated and several vertebrae have been removed from their places, there is usually no cure for this, because death quickly follows upon such an injury."
"And this is indicated by the fact that the evacuation of the disease is involuntary and cannot be retained. And often some members are softened on one side or both sides of the legs or arms, or one of them; or one vertebra has been removed from its place, because many times it is removed and many times the motion of those is made in four directions."
"Therefore, that already dislocated from the posterior parts is called 'gelbozitat' [ankylosing spondylitis]."
"But the treatment of it is that you should then consider whether the ankylosing spondylitis occurred in childhood. For if it did, there is no cure for it nor can it be healed completely."
"But if it happens by chance or by percussion or in similar ways, the Ancients already spoke at length about the methods of treatment for these, from which one gains greater profit; but I have briefly summarized those from which little excuse is made for its brevity due to my proximity to the intention of my explanation, with which this has been explained and formed using various instruments. And I will show it and explain it."
"And only those are cured which occur properly in the back, as I have mentioned."
"And it is that the disease extends over its surface near to the wall and is extended away from it using a moist cloth so that the foot of it is not rubbed."
"And properly place a straight stick on the ground at one end of the fold around the head of it and another stick at the other end of the fold."
"And the minister should hold onto the stick without it being fastened in a socket. And another minister should hold onto the other one according to this form."
"And properly wrap around the head of the disease and tie it with linen strips firmly. And extend one end of the strip to the stick that is in front of its head, and tie it onto it. And properly stretch out the other strip over its hips on both sides of it, and down its thighs. And properly adjust all the strips and tie them onto the other stick that is in front of its feet."
"And properly each minister should extend the strip to where the stick is placed and they are not removed from their places in which they have been put, but nevertheless they are not fastened as we said."
"And the physician places his palms on the spine with strength so that it returns, or he places one table upon it and properly adjusts himself onto the table so that it returns."
"But if it does not return with this form, then take a table whose width or length is about three braças and dig into the wall near where the disease is located a hole in which one end of the table will fit." "And properly place the middle of the table onto the spine and the physician places his feet on the other end. And he stretches strongly until the spine is shortened and returns to its proper place."
"And if you wish, open the hole that is turned with the hand; and it is that you lie on the ground in front of the head of the disease at the end of the two sticks, each of which is one braça long. And place one stick at the end of each hip, and make sure that there is a palm's length between each stick. And each stick should have a hole through which water can turn, and each should be firmly planted in the ground so that it does not move."
"And put another round stick into this hole, and let it rotate in the two holes of the two sticks."
"And at one end of it there is a hole in which the stick is formed, whose length is one palm with what is turned. And the other two sticks have the same."
"And properly stretch the strips that have been tightened around the foot of the disease onto the hole that is in front of its head. And stretch the strips that have been tightened around its hips onto the hole that is in front of its feet."
"And properly place a minister by each hole who will turn the hole with his hand. And the physician equalizes the spine as we have said."
"And now that the spine has returned and the area is covered, it is necessary to place a plaster with album of egg whites and also cotton; then place this plaster on a wooden board whose width is about three fingers or roughly equal, and its length should be as much as the area affected by swelling, and specifically over the site of the spinal cord."
"And then apply with firmness the plaster that we have described, using it to draw out the harmful subtle humors until they are expelled and the patient is healed."
"And if there remains some swelling at the end of the treatment, then healing medicines that soften and cleanse should be applied using the table method for an extended period, as we have recommended; and a lead plate has already been applied to that location."
"And sometimes swelling occurs at the lower end of the spine in the back, which is caused by that dislocation. It is that bone which has already begun to decay, so there should not be any pressure applied to it with this medicine, for otherwise it could cause death."
**Chapter XXXXI.**
Of the treatment of a dislocated hip.
"Know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle do not intend to cause dislocation alone, and it does not happen as those other joints with slight movement and concavity."
"And the hip joint can be dislocated in four different ways: it can dislocate inwardly, outwardly, anteriorly, or posteriorly."
"And most often it is dislocated inwardly, and less so anteriorly or posteriorly."
"And the sign of dislocation of the hip joint inwardly is that when you press the healthy thigh bone against the unhealthy one, it appears longer and its head more prominent than on the healthy side. The patient cannot bend their leg towards the outside, and if you try to do so, a crackling sound results, which indicates cauterization with heat."
"And the sign of dislocation occurring outwardly is that its symptoms are opposite to those of this dislocation."
"And the sign of dislocation occurring anteriorly is that the thigh bone extends fully but does not bend without pain in the groin. The patient cannot bring the leg forward and the urine becomes retained while defecation is accompanied by noise. The patient walks with a limp on the heel."
"And the sign of dislocation occurring posteriorly is that the hip joint does not extend and cannot bend forward. The thigh bone appears shorter than the other side, the buttock becomes weakened, and this is where the problem lies."
"But the reduction of this dislocation is that you should consider, first and foremost, whether the dislocation is chronic and ancient. If it has already solidified in its current position, then you should administer reduction according to its arrangement and leave it be, as this will not involve complete healing. In such cases, no traction is necessary."
"But in the case of recent dislocation, which is one of the four kinds of dislocation, you should strive to return the joint to its original position by extending it inwardly and outwardly, as well as leftward and rightward. For with gentle pressure it returns into place and requires no further treatment."
"But if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare a strong traction and extend the thigh bone as far as possible from the hip joint, either with weights or with a pulley attached above the groin. Another assistant should extend the patient's arm above their head so that their hands are positioned behind their shoulders. Then, using a bandage tied around the foot, you should pull sharply upward while another assistant holds the end of the bandage."
"And such traction should be extended either from the inner thigh to the angle of the hip bone or from the outer thigh to the buttock."
"And all of this traction should be done at once, with the patient lying on their back and elevated slightly off the ground, so that they remain suspended."
"This method of traction is common to all four types (of dislocation)."
"And therefore, if the dislocation returns with what we have said, it is well. But if not, then each type of dislocation requires its own specific treatment."
"In the specific reduction of this dislocation, when it occurs at the inner side of the hip joint, the patient should be placed in a supine position on their side. Then, wrap bandages around the root of the thighbone where it meets the head of the femur and extend them upward from the angle of the hip bone to the uppermost point of the greater trochanter."
"And another assistant should firmly grasp the legs of the patient and press against the large end of the thighbone, extending it forcefully outwardly until it returns to its proper place."
"This type has a lighter and easier treatment than the others by which this limb is reduced."
"But if the limb does not yield to this type of reduction and remains dislocated, then both legs should be suspended simultaneously using strong but light traction, with bandages around both ankles and both groins."
"And the length of each bandage should be about four digits [approximately 18 cm], and the dislocated thigh bone should be extended two digits more than the other."
"And the patient should be suspended from the top of a post and held there while lying on their back. The distance between the ground and the foot of the dislocated limb should be about two spans [approximately 45 cm]."
"And then order a strong young man to push down on the head of the thighbone, while another young man holds onto him. The latter should press down forcefully on the limb, causing the joint to return to its proper place with speed."
"But in the specific reduction of this dislocation, when it occurs at the outer side of the hip joint, the patient should lie on their stomach as previously recommended. Then wrap bandages firmly around the dislocated thighbone and its foot."
"And then two posts should be placed, one at the foot of the limb and the other at its head. Another post should be placed in the middle of the bed, with wet cloths wrapped around it to prevent injury from the post being pressed between the thighs during traction toward the outer side."
"And then each assistant should extend their part, and the physician should guide the reduction according to the art."
"But when the dislocation is at the front of the hip joint, then the dislocated thighbone should be gently extended. According to this method, the physician places the palm of their right hand on the hip bone and presses down with their left hand while extending the leg outward toward the buttock."
"But when the dislocation is at the back of the hip joint, then the limb should not be extended toward the outer side and it should be elevated off the ground. It should be placed on a hard surface, like when setting the arm in place for a dislocated shoulder, as we have previously mentioned about reducing that dislocation with two arms; this is done while lying face down, with bandages extended according to what we have said, which will cause little harm."
"And compression should be administered with a board placed over the area where the joint is dislocated."
"So when the reduction is complete, as it should be – and the sign of successful reduction is not hidden from you, which is that you extend both thighs of the patient, and when you move those joints and the patient extends their leg but does not complain of pain, then you know that the limb has returned to its proper place – then apply two splints and press firmly with bandages so that the hip joint is not dislocated on any side; keep the patient at rest for three or four days."
"And then remove the bandages and splints, and compare one thigh with the other."
"Now, if you move those joints firmly, then you will know that the dislocation is already fixed, and at that point allow the patient to go."
"But if you notice any signs of instability, then return and apply splints again, extend the limb according to your initial traction method, and keep it at rest for three days."
"And next, untie that one, and let them rest in bed for several days until they are strengthened."
"Chapter XXXII."
"About the treatment of dislocation of the jaw."
"The jaw can become dislocated in three ways: it is dislocated outward at the front part, inward at the back part, and outward more than inward. It does not get dislocated forward."
"And the sign of jaw dislocation is that when you tell the patient to open their mouth, they cannot do so."
"And the treatment for all types of dislocation is as follows: first, make the patient lie on their right side, so that they can open their mouth if possible. Then, press your left hand against the patient's face and place your foot between your hands. Next, bring your palms together over the patient's jawbone and push firmly until you feel it return to its proper position. Another assistant should hold the patient's foot during this process."
"The sign of successful reduction is that the patient can open their mouth easily and effortlessly."
"And then apply a bandage to the jaw and hold it in place with a splint. Then fasten this with a bandage for three or four days, after which you can remove the bandage."
"And do not allow the patient to leave their bed for some days until they are healed and comfortable."
"But if the dislocation cannot be reduced, then you should apply traction with bandages as described in the treatment of hip dislocation."
Chapter XXXIII
On the treatment of ankle dislocation
The talus sometimes gets dislocated by a slight injury and sometimes by a complete dislocation. The dislocation may occur on the medial or lateral side.
And the sign of talar dislocation is that the ankle swells on the side towards which it has dislocated.
But the treatment for talar dislocation is easy reduction: simply extend the foot with ease and gently dorsiflex it until it returns to its normal position.
But when the talus is completely dislocated, you must make the patient lie on their right side and have a strong and able assistant press firmly on the posterior part of the ankle from behind.
Then place your right hand above the prominence and your left hand below it on the side of the heel.
Then pull the foot towards you with your right hand and twice with your left hand, then extend it with your left hand. Then push the head of the talus back into place using your right thumb.
Do this twice as described above.
Then push the head of the talus back into place on the third attempt and you will have reduced it to the ankle joint.
Therefore if it returns on the first or second attempt using this method, that is good. But if sometimes the foot remains inverted, then repeat the operation until it returns.
But if you are unable to reduce the talus using the method described above, then have the patient lie on their back on the ground and place a stone under the heel bone. Then wrap a cloth around it so that the patient does not slip away from you.
Then the assistant holds their hands on the ankle bones and another assistant extends the foot with his hands or using bandages. Then extend each assistant's hand against extension of his part to ensure that the talus bone is not pulled towards the outside during extension.
Then the physician gently reduces the dislocation using his hands and another assistant holds the healthy ankle bone on the medial side as the reduction occurs easily.
Then once the dislocation has been reduced and you have confirmed its reduction, apply a plaster cast and wrap it tightly. Then bind the foot with bandages to the calf to maintain its position.
You must be careful and protect the nerves that lie behind the talus so that the bandages do not become too tight and cause injury to those nerves.
Then leave the patient for two or three days. If the bandages need tightening, then tighten them again.
Then remove the plaster cast on the third or fourth day and prohibit walking for forty days. But if it is necessary to walk during this period, there is a risk that the dislocation may recur and become worse without proper treatment.
But if an abscess forms at the dislocation site, then you should treat it according to the methods described earlier in this book for treatment and poultices until it has healed.
Chapter XXXIV.
Of the treatment of dislocations of the toes.
The dislocation should be gently reduced with little extension without force. It is easy to do and not difficult.
"If the dislocation is in certain joints of the toes, then you should place the patient's foot on an equal level with the ground or on a table, and they should remain thus as if they were walking."
"Then stand on the foot, place your hand on top of what is protruding from the joints, and gently press that foot with force until it returns to its original position, ensuring that the joint is repositioned correctly without appearing prominent."
"Then place the patient's foot on a table that supports the entire leg, with two pillars beneath it. Then stretch the leg gently and firmly for three days; afterwards, allow the patient to rest from walking for several more days until they have recovered and their condition has improved."
Chapter XXXV
"On the different types of dislocation that occur with fracture or with one another simultaneously."
"If any of these causes occur and you endeavor to treat it and restore the limb, death may often result."
"But therefore one should not presume to undertake its treatment unless it is someone who is skilled in the art, experienced, merciful and compassionate, slow, cautious, not hasty or presumptuous; and who initially uses medications that only cauterize wounds, leaving the condition to divine judgment, but also trusting in that which promises salvation from destruction, with alleviation of the illness, and showing some sign of hope." "And therefore, as soon as possible, make every effort to reduce it at the beginning of the cause, before an abscess forms."
"And if the limb returns as desired, then immediately administer regimen that will prevent the formation of an abscess and treat the inflammation with whatever is suitable for it from drying agents."
"If dislocation occurs with fracture and the bones are separated, then you should proceed as stated for simple cases of that which has been previously discussed regarding those locations."
"And guard and avoid, according to your ability, entering into the paths of fear as much as my advice has preceded. For this is better for you towards your Creator, more lasting for your glory, and more beneficial for your true body in your time." "So ends the words of Albucasis, may God bless them." "Amen."
